Chapter 114 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, approved March 27, 2007, amended Ch. 114, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 114 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
Charter reference— Civil service generally, § 3-501 et seq.; department of personnel and human resources, app. IV, §§ 1(i), 34 et seq. 
Cross reference— City council staff, § 2-151 et seq.; mayor, § 2-176 et seq.; executive branch offices, § 2-231 et seq.; municipal clerk, § 2-266 et seq.; chief financial officer, § 2-341 et seq.; department of personnel and human resources, § 2-441 et seq.; officers and employees, § 2-781 et seq.; employee benefits, § 2-841 et seq.; department of fire, § 78-26 et seq.; department of police, § 98-26 et seq.; correctional services, § 98-136 et seq. 
Related laws reference— Pensions, ch. 6. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 114-1. - Personnel records. 
(a)  With respect to both the unclassified and classified service, a record of all appointments and personnel actions shall be maintained by the commissioner of human resources, and such shall include current pertinent information as to the employee's name, address, social security number, date of employment, classification to which appointed, starting salary, salary advancements, date of separation and any other information deemed necessary by the department of human resources. 
(b)  When available, the commissioner shall, on a timely basis, furnish to departments such information as requested and as may be necessary for the departments to comply with local, state, regional and federal reporting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-2. - Standards of conduct prescribed; penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any employee offering for election to the office of mayor, president of the city council or member of the city council shall resign from the employee's position with the city, and such resignation shall be effective as of the date upon which such person files with the office of the municipal clerk, her/his "Declaration of Intention to Accept Campaign Contributions" as prescribed by the state ethics commission, or as of the date upon which such person files with the office of the municipal clerk, her/his "Notice of Candidacy and Affidavit", and pays the required qualifying fee, or files a pauper's affidavit in lieu thereof, as prescribed by O.C.G.A. Sec. 21-2-132, or, 
If a write-in candidate, the date upon which such person files with the office of the municipal clerk, her/his "Notice of Intent of Write-In Candidacy", as prescribed by O.C.G.A. Sec. 21-2-133, whichever first occurs. 
(b)  If an employee of the city offers for an elective office, other than those indicated in subsection (a) of this section, and the employee desires a leave of absence or, in the opinion of the department head, the campaign for the office will conflict with the employee's duties or work hours, the employee shall take a leave of absence as provided by section 114-422. 
(c)  No employee shall offer for an elective office without having first filed a written notification, with such employee's department head, of the employee's intent to file as a candidate for elective office. Such notification shall state the office the employee intends to seek, the governmental jurisdiction of the office, the dates of filing for candidacy and the date of the election. 
(d)  Should such employee be elected to an office which the department head determines interferes with or affects the employee's duties or hours of city employment, a separation shall be required at a time to be determined by the department head. 
(e)  No employee, official or person shall knowingly solicit any assessments, contributions or services for any political party or candidate from any employee of the city. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall affect the right of the employee to hold membership or office in or support a political party and to vote as the employee chooses. 
(g)  For the purposes of this section only, a public elected official of the city shall not be considered an employee except for subsection (e) of this section. However, if any member or officer of a commission, council or board created by the city or appointed or confirmed by an elected official or officials of the city, and is not then currently serving as an elected official of the city, or the chair or officer of any neighborhood planning unit or an elected neighborhood planning unit committee member, offers for election to the office of mayor, president of the city council or member of the city council, such member, officer or chair shall resign from such position with any such commission, council or board, or with the neighborhood planning unit. Such resignation shall be effective as of the date upon which such person files with the office of the municipal clerk, her/his "Declaration of Intention to Accept Campaign Contributions" as prescribed by the State Ethics Commission, or as of the date upon which such person files with the office of the municipal clerk, her/his "Notice of Candidacy and Affidavit", and pays the required qualifying fee, or files a pauper's affidavit in lieu thereof, as prescribed by O.C.G.A. Sec. 21-2-132, or, if a write-in candidate, the date upon which such person files with the office of the municipal clerk, her/his "Notice of Intent of Write-In Candidacy," as prescribed by O.C.G.A. Sec. 21-2-133, whichever first occurs. 
(h)  No person shall in any manner prevent or attempt to prevent the impartial execution of this chapter or policies or rules promulgated under this chapter. 
(i)  No person shall, directly or indirectly, give, render, pay, offer, solicit or accept any money, service or valuable consideration for any appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion or any advantage in any position with the city. 
(j)  No person shall defeat, deceive or obstruct any person in such person's right of application, eligibility, certification or appointment under this chapter or furnish to any person any special or secret information for the purpose of affecting the rights or prospects of any person with respect to employment in the classified service. 
(k)  Employees of the city shall be subject to the following rules and regulations concerning political activity: 
(1)  No officer or employee shall use official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of any election or the nomination for any office. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict the right of an employee to express privately the employee's opinions on all political subjects and candidates, to maintain political neutrality and to attend political meetings after working hours. 
(3)  All employees shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Federal Hatch Political Activities Act as amended by the Federal Election Campaign Act Amendments of 1974, and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
(l)  Any person who shall violate subsection (h), (i) or (j) of this section shall, for the period of five years, be ineligible for appointment to or employment in a position with the city, and any officer or employee who shall violate any such subsection shall be dismissed from any office or position held by such officer or employee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2009-50(09-O-1311), § 1, 9-8-09) 
Secs. 114-3—114-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMPENSATION, PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS AND CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 114-26. - Paymaster designated, duties. 
(a)  The chief financial officer is designated as paymaster of the city. 
(b)  The duties of paymaster shall be to keep a record of the entire payroll of the city, pay all salaries to city employees and perform such other duties as may be prescribed. Payrolls and time sheets of all departments shall be prepared by the departments, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-27. - Withholding tax; federal and state taxes. 
(a)  The chief financial officer is directed to make the proper deductions from the wages or salaries of employees in accordance with the income tax laws enacted by the United States. It shall be the duty and responsibility of each department to furnish the chief financial officer a signed withholding exemption certificate, in such form and containing such information as the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury by regulations prescribed, on each employee in the department and on each person subsequently employed. For a change of status, the employee, through the department head, is required to furnish the chief financial officer a new certificate not later than ten days after such change occurs. Failure to comply with this subsection shall subject the head of any department or any employee to removal from office by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The chief financial officer is directed to make the proper deductions from the wages and salaries of employees in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 7, art. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 48-7-100 et seq.), as amended. It shall be the duty and responsibility of each department head to furnish the chief financial officer with a signed withholding exemption certificate, in such form and containing such information as the state revenue commissioner prescribes, on each employee in the department and on each person subsequently employed. For change of status, the employee, through the department head, is required to furnish the chief financial officer a new certificate not later than ten days after such change occurs. Failure to comply with this subsection shall subject the head of any department or any employee to removal from office by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-28. - Deduction of labor organization dues from salaries. 
(a)  The chief financial officer is authorized and directed to deduct from the salary or wages of employees, who are members of an appropriate community of interest as determined by the commissioner of the department of human resources, a specified sum of money as stated on the dues authorization card signed by each employee representing the monthly dues of the organization to which the employee belongs and such specified sum of money as may, from time to time, subsequently be certified by the financial secretary of the organization in accordance with the organization's bylaws. Each enrollment dues authorization card having a specified sum of money stated thereon which is in an amount less than that which is certified by the financial secretary shall remain valid for organizational certification so long as no withdrawal card has been filed with the commissioner of human resources. Enrollment dues authorization cards of employees becoming members of the organization shall be certified by the commissioner of human resources between the first and 15th days of the month subsequent to such employee becoming a member, by the president or secretary of the organization. No deduction shall be made until a written dues authorization card signed by the employee shall have been delivered to the commissioner of human resources. No such written dues authorization card shall be valid which has not been dated and which is not received by the commissioner of human resources within 60 calendar days after the date it was signed by the employee. All cards received by the commissioner of human resources shall be retained by the city. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provision of 114-28(a), the following rules are applicable: 
(1)  Any employee who maintains membership in an employee organization as of October 27, 2010, shall be allowed dues deduction. Any employee who falls within this provision who subsequently voluntarily withdraws the dues authorization card is prohibited from further dues deduction pursuant to this rule and is limited to dues authorization for the community of interest as defined in 114-28(d); 
(A)  Any pending application for membership in an employee organization as defined by 114-28(d), submitted from January 1, 2010 through June 15, 2010, but not processed through the commissioner of human resources shall be processed for dues deduction for employee organizations as defined in 114-28(d); 
(B)  Any pending application for membership in an employee organization which was submitted from June 16, 2010 through October 27, 2010, but not processed through the commissioner of human resources shall be processed for dues deduction. 
(2)  Any application for membership in an employee organization as defined by 114-28(c) received by an employee organization after October 27, 2010 and submitted to the commissioner of human resources shall be processed for dues deduction for employee organizations as defined in section 114-28(d). 
(c)  The commissioner of human resources shall, after deducting the cost to the city to implement such deduction of dues, remit the balance previously so collected to the secretary or president of the employee organization, together with a list of names of those employees from whom the dues were collected on the last business day of each month. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, the term "employee organization" means the following organizations previously recognized by the council and approved by the mayor by ordinance or by resolution: 
(1)  The International Brotherhood of Police Officers, representing sworn personnel within the department of police at the rank of police lieutenant and below; 
(2)  The International Association of Fire Fighters, representing sworn personnel within the department of fire at the rank of fire captain or below; 
(3)  The American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, representing non-sworn personnel employed at or below pay grade 18 with the exception of those personnel working in the classifications specifically reserved and/or enumerated by the commissioner of human resources for the Professional Association of City Employees as identified in Exhibit A of the 2005 Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Atlanta and the Professional Association of City Employees. When new positions are created, the commissioner of human resources shall confer with both communities of interests to determine where such positions are located. The final decision rests with the commissioner of human resources; and 
(4)  The Professional Association of City Employees, representing non-sworn personnel employed at or above pay grade 19 up to and including pay grade 30 and those personnel working in classifications specifically reserved and/or enumerated by the commissioner of human resources for the Professional Association of City Employees as identified in Exhibit A of the 2005 Memorandum of Understanding between the City of Atlanta and the Professional Association of City Employees. When new positions are created, the commissioner of human resources shall confer with both communities of interests to determine where such positions are located. The final decision rests with the commissioner of human resources. 
Should any city employee who signed a valid enrollment dues authorization card wish to withdraw or terminate the deduction of dues from such employee's wages or salary, such employee may do so in the months of January or July of each year by submitting in writing to the office of the commissioner of human resources a statement to that effect. 
(e)  The deduction of dues authorized in this section is conditioned upon the fact that any organization representing any employee or group of employees, any shop steward or any official of an organization or any of its members, individually or collectively, will not strike and will not approve or take part in any strike, sit-down, slow-down or any interference with the operation of the city by picketing, patrolling, demonstrating or any stoppage of work or other similar activities. Further, the deduction of dues is conditioned upon there being no campaigning or soliciting of membership on city property during working hours. Upon the occurrence of any of such actions or activities and upon a written determination by the mayor or the mayor's designee that such actions or activities are occurring, the deduction of dues from the salary or wages of the employees belonging to any such organization shall be automatically terminated by the commissioner of human resources, and recognition of that employee's organization shall be terminated. 
(f)  The dues deduction of an employee shall not be made if the salary or wages of an employee at any pay period, after making all deductions required by law and previously authorized by the employee, should not equal the amount of such dues. Thereafter, such deductions shall commence, non-retroactive, upon there remaining after such deductions an amount of such employee's salary or wages equal to such dues. The dues deduction of an employee shall terminate when, for suspension, sickness or any leave of absence, such employee should receive in any dues deduction pay period an amount of money less than such employee's normal and regular salary. Such dues deduction shall thereafter commence, non-retroactive, upon such employee receiving in any dues deduction pay period such employee's normal and regular wages or salary. 
(g)  Any other employee organization not specified in paragraph (d) may petition to become a recognized organization under this section by providing a showing of interest by employees in any community of interest as defined in paragraph (d) that demonstrates that the organization has the support of 50 percent plus one of the employees within that community of interest. Such a petition shall be presented to the commissioner of human resources only during the first quarter of the calendar year for certification by the commissioner of human resources. Support of employees shall be demonstrated by signed and dated authorization cards as defined in paragraph (a). Should the commissioner of human resources verify the showing of interest, the organization submitting the showing of interest, upon approval by council, will become the recognized employee organization for the employees in the community of interest for which representation is sought at the beginning of the third quarter of the calendar year in which the showing of interest is submitted. At such time, any existing employee organization previously recognized for employees in the community of interest will no longer be recognized and authorization cards for the former employee organization will become null and void. No other petition for certification for the same community of interest will be accepted for a period of four years after the date of certification under this paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), §§ 5, 7, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 2010-62(10-O-1757), § 1, 11-10-10) 
Sec. 114-29. - Authority to deduct from salaries of employees to cover pledge to the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc. 
Subject to the policies, terms and conditions provided for in division 2 of this article, the chief financial officer is hereby authorized to deduct from the salaries or wages of each city employee such sums as may be authorized by such employee to cover a pledge made to the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc., and the chief financial officer is further authorized to pay such sums so deducted over to the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc.; provided, however, that such authority is expressly conditioned upon adherence by the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc., with the policies, terms and conditions set forth in division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-30—114-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ANNUAL COMBINED CAMPAIGN FOR CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS 

Sec. 114-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fundraising federation or federation means a local or statewide fundraising federation with offices in the state and disbursing funds to ten or more organizations providing health or human welfare services. Eligible fundraising federations shall be placed on a list of such organizations certified by the friendship club as being eligible to receive contributions from city employees through payroll deduction in accordance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-37. - Creation; objectives. 
Beginning in March, 1995, and continuing in September, 1996, and each September thereafter, a single combined campaign for charitable contributions from city employees ("combined campaign") will be initiated by the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc. ("friendship club"). The combined campaign is a once-a-year drive allowing employees to give charitable contributions conveniently through payroll deduction to the friendship club, designating charitable organizations of their choice. The combined campaign guarantees maximum opportunity for fairness in the distribution of the donor's contributions and reinforces the donor's perception that needs in the community are being supported financially through a unified appeal. Specifically the combined campaign objectives will be to: 
(1)  Provide the best opportunity for city employees to contribute to the organizations of their choice. 
(2)  Create a fair and equitable opportunity for all approved organizations to solicit and receive support from employees, through the friendship club. 
(3)  Assure a means of access to city employees, through the friendship club, that will assist in maximizing employee participation and giving. 
(4)  Provide an effective campaign that encourages employees to make a generous contribution based upon free choice. 
(5)  Provide each employee with an appropriate pledge form and campaign brochure that will be simple and easy to use and will offer information on the campaign and all the participating organizations. 
(6)  Maintain the friendship club as the direct payroll deduction for employees, with the option of designating eligible organizations to which each employee wishes to make a contribution. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-38. - Eligibility requirements of fundraising federations. 
To be eligible to receive payroll deduction pursuant to this division, a federation and its member organizations and all friendship club fund recipients (except the Atlanta Employees Fund) must: 
(1)  Be recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as a 501©(3) nonprofit organization; 
(2)  Have an IRS Form 990 and an audited financial statement if annual income exceeds $100,000.00; 
(3)  Have administrative and fundraising expenses that do not exceed 25 percent of total support and revenue, unless the organization can demonstrate that its actual expenses are reasonable under all the circumstances in its case; 
(4)  Be registered under the Georgia Charitable Solicitation Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; 
(5)  Be incorporated; 
(6)  Provide services or funding that impacts health or human welfare on a local or statewide basis; 
(7)  Present a proposal addressing funding priorities previously established in writing by the board of directors of the friendship club, which proposal must be approved by the board; 
(8)  Be in compliance with all federal, state and local laws and ordinances; and 
(9)  All recipients of payroll deduction funds under this division have a nondiscrimination policy consistent with the Charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-39. - Opportunity of fundraising federation to make presentation to board to demonstrate eligibility. 
At any time prior to January 16, 1995, and prior to April 30, 1996, and April 30 of each year thereafter, any fundraising federation which is invited to do so in writing by a city employee shall have an opportunity to make a presentation to the board of the friendship club, demonstrating its eligibility based on the criteria specified in section 114-38, to have its name added to a list of organizations eligible for solicitation of funds in the annual combined campaign, to be held beginning in March, 1995, and September of the following years. Such list of eligible organizations, which shall be renewed annually based on the criteria set forth in this division, shall be circulated to city employees at least once a year at a time to be determined by the friendship club board and shall be available to city employees at other times upon their request. Receipt of any funds from the combined campaign is contingent on a federation receiving a minimum of ten designations from city employees each year. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-40. - Providing written documentation of eligibility. 
A federation applying for participation in the city combined campaign must seek its eligibility by submitting written documentation for the criteria outlined in section 114-38 to the friendship club by November 30, 1995, and April 30 of each year thereafter. A federation need only submit one application on behalf of all its member groups each year but must include a signed, written statement certifying that its constituent organizations meet all of the eligibility requirements. An oral presentation shall also be made to the board of directors of the friendship club if required by the board. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-41. - Review of application by board. 
The friendship club board shall review the applications based on the criteria outlined in section 114-38 and notify each federation in writing of the action taken on its application by January 30, 1995, and by June 15 of each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-42. - Determination of eligibility; notification; right to appeal. 
The friendship club shall have the right to request any documentation needed from an applicant federation to certify its eligibility. If an applicant federation is deemed ineligible, the friendship club shall so notify the applicant federation and shall include in its notification reason for denial. Federations wishing to appeal a decision may, within 14 days from denial, submit to the board of directors of the friendship club a written appeal for eligibility reconsideration. The friendship club board shall have 14 days from receipt of an appeal letter to respond to the applicant federation. If a federation's appeal is denied, the federation may, within 20 days, appeal in writing to the city council, which may overrule the friendship club's denial by a majority vote of members present and voting, if the council determines that the applicant federation meets all of the criteria specified in section 114-38. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-43. - Duties of board of directors. 
The board of the friendship club shall oversee the organization of the annual combined campaign. The administrative and organized aspects of the combined campaign shall include the following responsibilities at a minimum: 
(1)  Plan the combined campaign and provide clerical and administrative support. 
(2)  Recommend and approve a written campaign budget. 
(3)  Coordinate the production and distribution of all campaign materials and supplies. 
a.  Campaign materials shall include, but not be limited to, pledge cards, brochures, posters, and training materials. Participating federations shall be provided opportunity for input on all campaign promotional materials. 
b.  The logos of each participating federation will appear on all campaign materials. 
c.  The brochure will offer a detailed explanation of the combined campaign and will: 
1.  Provide a brief description of each of the federations and an approximately 25-word description of each member agency/organization participating in the combined campaign. 
2.  Define the friendship club and distinguish it from the federations. 
d.  The pledge card will provide an option to each city employee to pledge generally to the friendship club or to pledge to the friendship club and include a designation that such pledge will be passed on by the friendship club to an eligible fundraising federation. The pledge card shall also include a statement that administrative expenses are shared pro rata among the participating federations. 
(4)  Develop and provide campaign training and promotions. Prior to the commencement of the campaign, an orientation meeting shall be scheduled for those city employees acting as departmental coordinators and solicitors for the campaign. Each department or agency will have at least one coordinator responsible for all payroll deduction or direct funding solicitations. 
(5)  Reform the following financial duties: 
a.  Manage all campaign finances of cash and check contributions, payroll deduction, and distribution of undesignated and designated contributions. 
b.  Act as the central point for all campaign pledges. 
c.  Process all appropriate disbursements of campaign receipts in coordination with the city department of finance. 
1.  Initial disbursement to federations will be distributed by April 15 of each year. 
2.  All cash contributions will be included in the first payment. 
3.  Quarterly remittance will thereafter be made on a pro rata share of actual collections. 
d.  Maintain the financial records regarding campaign receipts, deposits, distributions and expenses. 
e.  Prepare and distribute campaign reports in accordance with schedules and requirements as mutually agreed upon. 
(6)  Provide appropriate recognition to campaign contributors and workers. 
(7)  Perform post-campaign evaluations in cooperation with departmental coordinators and make appropriate recommendations for subsequent years. 
(8)  Other duties as required. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-44. - Administrative costs. 
(a)  The costs of the campaign and all other administrative costs will be shared by each participating federation pro rata with the friendship club measured by the proportion of total receipts from the combined campaign to total receipts by each participating federation, and such pro rata share of such costs may be deducted by the friendship club prior to distributing funds due to such federations pursuant to this division. 
(b)  Any campaign administrative costs which are incurred by any participating federation will be the sole responsibility of such federation. 
(c)  All costs of the campaign, including but not limited to materials, production and printing, pledge processing and employee time must be documented and accounted for in writing by the friendship club. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-45. - Authority of board to retain independent contractor and hire staff personnel; reimbursement. 
The board of the friendship club may retain an independent contractor or hire staff personnel sufficient to accomplish and comply with all of the policies, terms and conditions set forth in this division, and to perform such other duties as may be required by the board or by the council during the time leading up to and including the March 1995 combined campaign only. The total cost of such tasks shall not exceed $50,000.00, and such costs shall be paid by the chief financial officer from an appropriate account. The friendship club shall reimburse the city for all payments made by the city pursuant to this section out of the proceeds of the payroll deductions made on behalf of the friendship club in 1995 and, if applicable, each year thereafter, and out of the pro rata cost deductions made by the friendship club pursuant to section 114-44(a) in 1995, and, if applicable, each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-46. - Compliance. 
Within 60 days of the adoption and approval of this division, the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc., a private nonprofit corporation, shall agree in writing to comply with all of the policies, terms and conditions of this division and shall amend its charter and bylaws so as to provide one member of its board from each and every department (to include offices thereof) of the city government, including without limitation the office of the mayor and the city council, each such member to be elected by a majority of the employees in each such department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-47. - Agreement to comply with state law. 
Notwithstanding that the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc., may not be a public office or agency within the meaning of the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., or the Georgia Open Meetings Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq., or otherwise be subject to such acts, within 60 days of the adoption and approval of this division, the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc., shall agree in writing to voluntarily comply and abide by all of the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act and the Georgia Open Meetings Act, as they now exist or as they may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-48. - Employee's ability to serve on board without forfeiting leave. 
Any city employee who is elected to the board of the Atlanta City Employees' Friendship Club, Inc., shall be afforded the opportunity by such employee's respective department to serve in such capacity without forfeiting any annual leave, sick leave or other leave, and such service shall be considered for all purposes as regular employee service. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-49, 114-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY 

Sec. 114-51. - Statement of policy. 
It is the policy of the mayor and city council to provide equal employment opportunity in city government for all qualified persons; to prohibit discrimination in employment because of race, color, religion, age, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, veteran's status or national origin; and to promote the full realization of equal employment opportunity through a positive, continuing program in each department and agency of the city government. The policy of equal opportunity applies to every aspect of city employment, policy and practice. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2013-24(13-O-1183), § 5-A, 7-16-13) 
Sec. 114-52. - Equal employment opportunity program for city departments and agencies. 
(a)  Duties of heads of departments and agencies. The head of each executive department and agency shall establish and maintain a positive program of equal employment opportunity for all employees and applicants for employment. 
(b)  Duties of mayor. The mayor, upon the advice and guidance of the women's advisory council, civil service board and other individuals, groups or organizations as may be of assistance in realizing the objectives of this article, shall facilitate, supervise, monitor and evaluate achievement of a model program for equal employment opportunity in city government, including but not limited to the following objectives: 
(1)  Review job qualifications, specifications and descriptions to ensure that the requirements do not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, veteran's status or national origin and are a factual reflection of the needs of each job classification in city government. 
(2)  Review current in-service training programs to assess their effectiveness in meeting the needs of incumbent employees. 
(3)  Design training and education programs to focus on upgrading incumbent personnel and to afford women and other minority employees the opportunity to develop new and improved skills. 
(4)  Hold special meetings with supervisory personnel at all levels in each city department and agency to explain the intent of the EEO policy in this article and each individual's responsibility for its implementation. 
(5)  Inform local recruiting sources, at least annually, of the EEO policy of the city in this article and request them to describe their ability to recruit actively and make referrals of women and other minorities for all positions. 
(6)  Communicate to employees the existence of the city's EEO policy and program and how they can avail themselves of its benefits. 
(c)  Report. The mayor shall, annually, at the last council meeting in December of each year, submit to the council a written report on the implementation of the program for equal employment opportunity in city government. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2013-24(13-O-1183), § 5-B, 7-16-13) 
Sec. 114-53. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms have the following meanings: 
(1)  "Applicant" means any person considered or who requests to be considered for employment by the City of Atlanta. 
(2)  "City agency" means any office, department, agency, board or commission of the City of Atlanta. 
(3)  "Employee" means all persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, any member of owner's family, partner, associate, agent, manager, or representative, and any and all other persons engaged or employed in said business. 
(4)  "Employment" means any occupation, vocation, job, work for pay or employment, including temporary or seasonal work, contracted work, contingent work and work through the services of a temporary or other employment agency. "Employment" shall not, for the purposes of this chapter, include membership in any law enforcement agency. 
(5)  "Conviction" means any sentence arising from a verdict or plea of guilty or nolo contendere, including a sentence of incarceration, a suspended sentence, a sentence of probation or a sentence of unconditional discharge. 
(6)  "Inquiry" means any direct or indirect conduct intended to gather information, using any mode of communication. 
(7)  "Interview" means any direct contact by the employer with the applicant, whether in person or by telephone, to discuss the employment being sought or the applicant's qualifications. 
( Ord. No. 2014-44(14-O-1399), § 3, 10-15-14 ) 
Sec. 114-54. - Ban-the-box. 
In connection with printed and/or on-line employment application forms of the city, it shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for them to contain a "box" or inquiry regarding an applicant's prior criminal history. 
( Ord. No. 2014-44(14-O-1399), § 3, 10-15-14 ) 
Sec. 114-55. - Unlawful discriminatory practice—Ex-offenders. 
To prohibit unfair discrimination against persons previously convicted of one or more criminal offenses: 
(a)  In connection with the licensing or employment of any person, it shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for the city to make any inquiry regarding or to require any person to disclose or reveal any criminal conviction(s) during the application process. The application process shall begin when the applicant inquires about the employment being sought and shall end when an employer has accepted an employment application. 
(b)  It shall further be an unlawful discriminatory practice for the city to make any inquiry regarding, or to require any person to disclose or reveal any criminal convictions against such person before and during the second interview. 
(c)  Prior to an applicant being selected for hire with the city, a background check and drug test is required for consideration of employment. 
( Ord. No. 2014-44(14-O-1399), § 3, 10-15-14 ) 
Sec. 114-56. - Adverse employment decision—-Ex-offenders. 
Once the applicant has been deemed qualified for the position for which he/she applied, the city may then inquire into the applicant's criminal history. If the city makes an adverse employment decision, including, but not limited to, the refusal, rescission, or revocation of a conditional offer of employment, or termination of employment, after the criminal history inquiry is conducted, the city shall within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30 days: 
(a)  Notify the applicant of the adverse employment decision; and 
(b)  Provide the applicant with a photocopy of the results of the criminal inquiry, indicating the particular conviction(s) that relate(s) to the position's responsibilities. 
( Ord. No. 2014-44(14-O-1399), § 3, 10-15-14 ) 
Sec. 114-57. - Dissemination of criminal history. 
Any information obtained by the city that pertains to an applicant's criminal history: 
(a)  Shall remain confidential; 
(b)  Shall only be shared with individuals that have a need to know the contents for the purpose of evaluating candidates or employees in a manner consistent with this section, except as dictated by law; 
(c)  Shall not be used, distributed, or disseminated by the city for any use other than those permitted under this policy; and 
(d)  Shall not be used, distributed, or disseminated by the city to any other entity or individual, except as dictated by state or federal law. 
( Ord. No. 2014-44(14-O-1399), § 3, 10-15-14 ) 
Sec. 114-58. - Exemptions. 
The city hiring for positions where certain convictions or violations are a bar to employment in that position under state or federal law, including but not limited to positions that involve work with children and positions in law enforcement, shall not be constrained from asking questions about those convictions or violations. 
( Ord. No. 2014-44(14-O-1399), § 3, 10-15-14 ) 
Secs. 114-59—114-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CIVIL SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 114-76. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative leave means a paid leave of absence pending an investigation authorized by the appointing authority with concurrence of the commissioner of human resources. 
Annual increase means a yearly progression from the minimum toward the maximum of the salary range and may be awarded subject to availability of funds and employee performance at a level of effective or better. The value of such annual increase shall be approved by the council every fiscal year. 
Appointing authority means the officer, commission, board or body having the power of appointment, employment or election to or removal from subordinate positions in any office, department, commission, board or institution; or any person or group of persons having the power by virtue of the constitution, statute or lawfully delegated authority to make appointments or employment to the positions in the city employment service. For the purpose of taking any disciplinary action or of filing any charges against any person in the classified service, the designation "appointing authority" includes any acting department head or other person designated by the proper authority to be in charge of any department in the absence, for any cause, of the regular appointing authority or department head. 
Appointing rule means the selection for employment of an individual from a referral list certified to the appointing authority by the commissioner of human resources. 
Board means the civil service board of the city. 
Bonus means a supplemental or additional amount of money added to an employee's pay for exceptional performance related to set guidelines resulting in a greater benefit to taxpayers. 
Certify, certification means the act of the commissioner of human resources in supplying an appointing authority with the names of applicants who are eligible for appointment to the class and position for which certification is requested in the classified service. 
Classification (Class) means: 
(1)  A position or group of positions which have similar duties and responsibilities, require similar qualifications, can be designated by a single title indicative of the kind and nature of work and for which the same schedule of pay can be applied with equity; or 
(2)  A group of positions sufficiently similar as to duties performed; scope of discretion and responsibility; minimum requirements of training, experience or skill; and such other characteristics that the same title and the same range of compensation may be applied to each position in the group. 
Classification (class) specification means a written document, which generally describes a class and includes a general statement of duties, competencies, knowledge, skills, and abilities, as well as the qualifications and guidelines for entrance into the kind of work described. 
Classification (class) title means the official title used for all personnel and payroll processes. Working titles may be used for other purposes. 
Classified position means a position in the classified service. 
Classified service/unclassified service means position in the civil service as provided for in the Civil Service Code, Section 114-84. 
Commissioner means the commissioner of human resources. 
Continuous service means employment in the civil service which is uninterrupted. Time lost due to leaves of absence without pay, suspension or layoff shall not be considered as continuous service, except as provided in this article. Time lost under authorized paid leaves of absence shall be considered as continuous service. 
Demotion means a change of employment to a position in a class which has a lower maximum salary limit than the class from which the assignment was made. 
Eligible means a person who meets requirements for a position and whose name is on an employment eligible list. 
Eligible list means a certified list of the names of persons with respect to classes of employment for which such persons have competed and are qualified to be appointed. 
Employee means any person holding a position or employment with the city. 
Examinations means methods used to determine eligibility of applicants for employment. Examinations may include, but shall not be limited to, job-related written, oral, physical or performance tests; rating of training and experience; or any combination of these. 
Filled out-of-class means an employee assigned to a classification title and job code different from the classification title and job code of the authorized position. An incumbent may only be assigned out-of-class at a pay grade equal to or lower than the pay grade of the authorized position. 
Grade change means the reassignment of a class to a different salary grade upon approval by ordinance. 
Incumbent means the person occupying a position. 
Layoff means a separation of an employee from the employee's position which has been made necessary by lack of work or funds or for other reasons not related to fault, delinquency or misconduct on the part of the employee. 
Level means the degree of responsibility, training, experience and ability required to fill specific positions in a series. 
Minimum qualifications means the established requirements of education and experience, knowledge and skill needed to perform the duties and responsibilities of a position as established in the class specifications. 
Overtime means time worked in excess of scheduled work periods as defined by the Fair Labor Standard Act (FLSA). 
Part-time employee means an individual hired on a continuing basis, but who is scheduled to work less than the normal period for the position, or an individual hired on a continuing basis who is scheduled to work only a part of a workweek and to share the position with another individual hired for the same position to work the remaining part of the week. 
Pay and class plan means the schedule of rates of pay assigned to each class title, the grouping of classes into appropriate categories and the assignment of special pay rules, approved by ordinance. 
Pay grade means the range of pay assigned to a classification. 
Performance evaluation means a periodic report prepared by the appointing authority relative to the work related conduct and performance of each employee. 
Position means a group of current duties and responsibilities requiring the full-time employment of one person, the part-time employment of one person or the part-time employment of two or more persons. 
Position of trust means authorized positions that require the incumbent or new hire who work with children, seniors, money or other financial transactions, public safety, or sensitive information of others. 
Probationary employee means any employee appointed from an eligible list to a position in the classified service and who has not completed the six-month probationary period in a given class for appointment. 
Promotion means a change of employment from a position of one class to a position of another class which has a higher maximum salary rate. 
Promotional examination means an examination or a group of examinations for a certain class, admission to which is limited to regular employees in the classified service. 
Promotional list means a list of persons who have been found qualified by a promotional examination for appointment to a particular class. 
Provisional employee means an employee filling a position in the classified service without competition, pending the establishment of an eligible list. Provisional employees must be certified as meeting the established minimum qualifications for the position by the commissioner of human resources. 
Reclassification means the reassignment of a position to a different class upon approval by ordinance. 
Regular employee means a benefit earning employee who has been appointed to a permanent position in the civil service in accordance with this article and, if required, has satisfactorily completed a probationary period. 
Reemployment means the reappointment of a person who was employed with the city, but voluntarily separated regular full- or part-time employment within three years. 
Regular position means a full-time or part-time position which is adopted by ordinance. 
Salary adjustment means an increase in salary within the same pay grade, based on additional duties or responsibilities and other qualifying factors. 
Series means the designation of a number of classes related to each other in terms of ascending or descending difficulties and responsibilities of work within the same occupational field. 
Special pay rule means a salary adjustment applied to designated classifications as compensation for shift differential (D), education (E), pilot on a flight crew (F), flight observer on a flight crew (O) and other qualifying factors. 
Temporary employee means an employee appointed for a special project or other work of a temporary or transitory nature, and meets the minimum qualifications. 
Transfer means a change by an employee from one position in a class to another position of the same class or to another class involving the performance of similar duties and requiring essentially the same basic qualifications and responsibilities and having the same schedule of pay. 
Vacancy means a position duly created for which funds have been appropriated and which is unoccupied. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2019-14(18-O-1470), § 2, 2-12-19 ) 
Sec. 114-77. - General purpose. 
The general purpose of this article is to establish a system of sound personnel administration for the city that provides for the recruitment, selection, development and retention of an effective work force of capable, diligent and honest career employees. This system shall include policies for employee hiring and advancement, training, career development and safety, position classification and salary administration, effective utilization of personnel and employee performance evaluation, employee relations and the disposition of employee grievances, discipline, discharge and related activities. It shall be the purpose of this article to establish a system in which all personnel matters shall be determined solely on the basis of merit and qualifications, without regard to race, color, sex, national origin, political affiliation, religion, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2013-24(13-O-1183), § 5-C, 7-16-13) 
Sec. 114-78. - Applicability of article. 
This article shall apply to all positions in the classified civil service of the city and to all other positions of employment with the city where so indicated and where the context requires such interpretation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-79. - Civil service board. 
(a)  There shall be a civil service board, which shall be the official protector of the civil service system. The civil service board shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council and shall hold office for a term of three years. These officers shall be compensated, by the case and not by the day, at a pay rate established by the human resources commissioner, not to exceed two cases per day per hearing officer. 
(b)  The Mayor, with the consent of council, shall be authorized to appoint up to three (3) ad hoc hearing officers who shall have the same power to conduct hearings and make final determinations and dispositions on appeals of adverse actions, and shall be compensated, by case and not by day, at the same rate as appointed civil service board members. 
(c)  Prior to commencement of service on the board and at least annually thereafter, each member will receive and attend training with the purpose of enhancing the board member's ability and consistency in performing the member's duties. Such training shall include applicable law and ordinances, procedural conduct of hearings, resolution of employment disputes, evidence and such other topics as may be deemed advisable. 
(d)  The civil service board shall be provided with administrative support by the city. Such staff shall be responsible to the civil service board and report to the administrative officer of the board. 
(e)  The board shall conduct its business in the manner provided in Appendix III and shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Provide advice and counsel to the mayor, the council, the commissioner of human resources, concerning the development, implementation and improvement of the civil service system. 
(2)  Hold hearings when requested by an employee or an appointing authority on final demotions, suspensions, dismissals or other such adverse actions with reference to the classified service and have power to make final determinations and dispositions in such matters. Hearings may also be held for sworn officers who hold the position of lieutenant and any rank below that of lieutenant in of the department of police and sworn officers who hold the rank of captain and any rank below that of captain in the department of fire when such a hearing is requested. No officer or employee of the department of police or department of fire who is in a probationary status of initial employment with the department shall be entitled to a hearing. 
(3)  Hold name clearing hearings for unclassified employees with retained rights who are subject to an adverse action. Such hearings shall follow usual board procedures, but shall only be held for the purpose of protecting the reputation of the employee. The board may not reverse or modify the adverse action but may submit recommendation to chief operating officer. 
(4)  Keep minutes of its meetings and such other record as it may deem necessary. 
(5)  Make investigations pertaining to personnel and administration requested by the mayor or the council or on its own motion. 
(6)  Establish guidelines for hearing any matters referred thereto by the officials responsible for personnel administration, employees and employee organizations or appointing authorities. 
(7)  Receive recommendations from the department of human resources and communicate to the mayor its official position with respect thereto, as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2010-34(10-O-0952), § 3, 6-30-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 114-80. - Administrative officer of civil service board. 
The commissioner of human resources, shall serve as administrative officer of the civil service board, and shall be responsible for planning the general administration of the civil service system and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-81. - Personnel problem or action not covered by article. 
If any personnel problem or personnel action which is not specifically covered by this article occurs, the mayor or the mayor's designee shall be authorized to resolve such problem or action through the application of this article and in keeping with its intent and the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-82. - Administration and enforcement. 
The commissioner of human resources shall administer and enforce this article, and shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article and the Charter for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-83. - Cooperation with other civil service systems. 
In the interest of proper and efficient personnel administration, the facilitation of civil service employment mobility and the maximum utilization of available personnel, the department of human resources shall, where applicable, participate in cooperative, interjurisdictional recruiting, examining, certifying and training. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-84. - Unclassified and classified service. 
(a)  The civil service system shall be divided into the unclassified service and classified service. 
(b)  The unclassified service shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Officers elected by the people and persons appointed to fill vacancies in such elective offices. 
(2)  Officers and employees specifically exempted by law. 
(3)  Members of boards, councils or special commissions appointed by the mayor for special purposes; members of boards, councils or commissions created by the council pursuant to section 3-401 of the Charter; and employees of such boards, councils and commissions, unless the council shall provide otherwise for such employees. 
(4)  All assistants and employees in the department of law. 
(5)  Any employee in the mayor's/executive offices unless said employee holds a classified status as of March 1, 1998. 
(6)  Election officials. 
(7)  Heads of departments appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council, assistants reporting to such department heads, and heads of offices and agencies hired by the appointing authority. 
(8)  Sworn employees in the departments of police and fire. 
(9)  Employees of the judicial agencies and the offices of the internal auditor and ethics officer. 
(10)  All employees of the office of municipal clerk, the offices of councilmembers, the office of the council president, and office of council staff, including but not limited to personnel in the office of research and policy analysis, office of communications and all other administrative support employees reporting to the director of council staff. 
(11)  Any classified employee who accepts an unclassified position 
(12)  Any unclassified employee with retained rights who accepts an unclassified position. 
(13)  Any position funded by grant or other temporary funds. 
(c)  All positions in the classified service at pay grade 19 and above which are, or become, vacant on or after February 13, 1998, shall be transferred to the unclassified service. Any position in the classified service at pay grade 19 and above which is filled by a temporary employee shall be transferred to the unclassified service. 
(d)  The classified service shall include all other public officers and employees in the employment service. All appointments, employments, removals, promotions, transfers, layoffs, reinstatements, suspensions and changes in grade or title in the classified service shall be made and permitted only as prescribed by law or under this article and not otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2013-41(13-O-1217), § 1, 9-12-13 ; Ord. No. 2013-41(13-O-1217), § 1, 9-12-13 ) 
Sec. 114-85. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  Civil service rules and regulations shall be proposed by the mayor and reviewed by the civil service board for the operation of the civil service system which shall provide for the following: 
(1)  The establishment of eligible registers for appointment and promotion; 
(2)  The certification, appointment and promotion of eligibles; 
(3)  A period of probation for appointment or promotion to be made permanent; 
(4)  Layoffs because of lack of funds or work or changes in duties or organization and the reemployment of persons who resign in good standing or are laid off without fault or delinquency on their part; 
(5)  The discharge, demotion or suspension of regular employees for cause and hearings and appeals in connection therewith; and 
(6)  Programs of employee training and development and safety and such other studies and programs as will be conducive to an efficient and successful operation of the civil service system. 
(b)  Such rules and regulations shall have the force and effect of law at such time as they are adopted by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-86. - Extension of classified status. 
(a)  This section shall constitute an orderly procedure for extending classified status to regular unclassified employees. 
(b)  In order to acquire the protection, rights and privileges, as provided within the classified service, an unclassified employee transferred to a position in the classified service must be certified. Such status shall be obtained by such employee in the following manner: 
(1)  An employee with 90 days or more of service, prior to classified service coverage, must be recommended for retention by the appointing authority on the basis that such employee has satisfactorily performed the duties of the position for a period of not less than 90 days prior to the effective date of the classified service coverage and must either possess the minimum qualifications of the position occupied or pass the appropriate qualifying examination for the position occupied. 
(2)  An employee with less than 90 days of service prior to classified service coverage must compete for the position presently occupied by such employee through an appropriate examination on an open-competitive basis. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-87. - Pay and classification plan. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, there shall be maintained at all times a formal system for classifying positions and compensating employees in the City of Atlanta Civil Service System known as the pay and classification plan. 
(b)  The pay and classification plan shall contain a listing of classifications and the salary structure. Each class of positions shall be assigned to an appropriate pay grade and may be eligible for special pay. 
(c)  Any amendment to the pay plan by changing a range of the pay grades or by moving a class of positions from one pay grade to another and any amendments to the position classification plan, including the reclassification, creation, abolishment or salary adjustment of a position(s) shall be accompanied by a written statement justifying the reason and need for the proposed action and approved by ordinance. 
(d)  All payrolls or other compensation for officers and employees in the classified service shall be checked periodically by the commissioner at such time as the commissioner deems appropriate for the proper administration of this article. 
(e)  No employee within the classified or unclassified service shall be placed on the payroll of the city until the employee has been properly certified by the commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2008-69(08-O-1455), § 1, 8-18-08) 
Secs. 114-88—114-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLASSIFICATION PLAN 

Sec. 114-101. - Objective and use. 
(a)  The classification plan shall constitute a systematic arrangement and inventory of positions in the civil service whereby positions shall be grouped into classes indicative of the range of duties, responsibilities and level of work performed. The plan shall be utilized in order to provide a systematic salary structure which shall be commensurate with the duties of the positions established while being consistent with the fiscal integrity of the city. The classification plan shall be based on job analysis and maintained on a current basis. 
(b)  Changes to the classification plan proposed in conjunction with and as a part of the mayors proposed annual budget shall be submitted to council for consideration at the same time that the proposed annual budget is submitted. 
(c)  In addition to the legislation, identified in Subsection (b), a copy of an organization chart for the city department(s) or unit(s) for which the changes are being proposed shall be included as an "Exhibit" to the legislation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2010-38(10-O-1241), § 2, 7-15-10) 
Sec. 114-102. - Contents. 
The classification plan in civil service shall consist of the following elements: 
(1)  A grouping of positions into classes so that each position in a class shall require basically the same training, competencies, experience and/or education and be of relative value deserving of the same salary range. 
(2)  A class title which shall be indicative of the work of the class and any special pay rules which may apply. Such title shall be used for administrative purposes in connection with payroll, budget and other financial and personnel forms and records. No person shall be appointed or promoted to any position in the civil service unless such position possesses a class title in the pay and classification plan. 
(3)  A written specification for each classification which shall contain a statement describing the nature of the work; the essential functions of the class; examples of typical tasks found in the class; requirements of the class with respect to the minimum necessary knowledge, skills, training, abilities and experience; and any special qualifications and competencies necessary for entrance into the class. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-103. - Administration of plan. 
The commissioner of human resources shall have the primary responsibility for the administration and maintenance of the classification plan in civil service. The commissioner of human resources may request assistance from other officials and may delegate authority to staff members of department of human resources in carry out the responsibility. The commissioner of human resources shall periodically review the classification of positions by utilizing job analysis and as needed, recommend to the Chief Operating Officer appropriate amendments to the classification plan, such as new classes, the revisions of existing classes, the removal of existing classes from the plan that are no longer required, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2008-69(08-O-1455), § 1, 8-18-08) 
Sec. 114-104. - Allocation of position; creation of classes. 
Under the civil service classification plan, the commissioner of human resources, after consulting with the department head involved, shall recommend the assignment of a position to one of the classes in the classification plan. If a suitable class does not exist, the commissioner of human resources shall recommend the establishment of a new class and, after the adoption of the new class, shall recommend the assignment of the position to such classification. The establishment of a new position shall not be completed until the commissioner of human resources has approved the classification specification covering the duties, responsibilities and competencies of the proposed position. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-105. - Allocation reviews. 
(a)  If a department head or an employee has reason to believe that any position in such department head's department has been improperly allocated, such department head or employee may request in writing that the commissioner of human resources review the allocation of the position. 
(b)  The Commissioner of human resources shall review such position by having a position classification questionnaire completed by- the incumbent, by the supervisor of the position of by the department head. A field study or onsite job audit shall also be made if deemed appropriate. The Commissioner of human resources shall, after considering all of the information obtained, recommend the questioned position be placed in another class or remain in its present class. Recommended changes shall be reviewed by the department of finance for budgetary and financial implications and the recommendations shall be made to the Committee on Finance of the Council for approval. Changes requiring an increase in budget allocation must be adopted by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2008-69(08-O-1455), § 1, 8-18-08) 
Sec. 114-106. - Reclassification of positions. 
(a)  Established positions in the civil service may be changed from one class to another where the following conditions are found to exist: 
(1)  Significant changes have occurred in the actual duties and responsibilities. 
(2)  Such changes in duties and responsibilities are of a permanent nature. 
(3)  There are new or added elements in the job, rather than changes in the performance of the individual. 
(b)  Reclassifications shall not be effected where the following conditions are found to exist: 
(1)  The added duties and responsibilities are minor in nature and would be a logical function of the class. 
(2)  The added duties and responsibilities are to be performed for a temporary period only. 
(3)  The primary purpose of the reclassification would be to raise the employee's salary. 
(c)  All such reclassifications shall be forwarded to the committee on finance of the Council for budgetary and financial implications. Reclassification requests should be accompanied by a written statement justifying the reason and need for the proposed action and approved by ordinance. If the action results in an increase in budget, approval is required by ordinance. 
(d)  If reclassification of a position should result in the creation of a position in a class possessing a higher grade than that of the original classification, such change of position shall be considered a promotion. The promotional vacancy shall be filled as provided in this article, and the incumbent shall be given the opportunity to compete for the position. Should the incumbent fail the competitive, promotional examination or for some other valid reason not be promoted to fill the vacancy, the commissioner of human resources, with the approval of the employee's department head, may allow the employee to remain in the original position until such employee can, after passing an appropriate examination, be transferred to the same or another class of employment in the same or another department in which a vacancy shall exist. If no such vacancy should exist or if such transfer cannot for good reason be effected, the commissioner of human resources, with the approval of the employee's department head in accordance with this article, may lay off such incumbent or invoke a non-disciplinary demotion to a lower existing vacancy. No examination shall be required if the demotion is made to a lower related classification. 
(e)  If reclassification of a position should result in the creation of a position in another class possessing the same pay grade as that of the original classification, the position, if vacant, shall be filled as provided in this article. Should there be an incumbent in the position, the incumbent employee shall receive a corresponding change in title without examination, provided that the reclassified position is in the same line and character of work and involves the same basic duties, responsibilities and skills. The incumbent employee of the position so reclassified, shall maintain the same pay grade and salary. Otherwise, the incumbent must pass an appropriate noncompetitive examination in order to continue employment in the reclassified position. If the incumbent employee fails to qualify for the reclassified position or for some other valid reason is not appointed to fill the vacancy, such employee receive a non-disciplinary demotion, as provided for in section 114-128. 
(f)  If reclassification of a position should result in the creation of a position of a lower class and pay, the incumbent of the position being reclassified shall be notified, and every effort shall be made to transfer the employee to another classified position, which would support the incumbent's classification and level and for which the incumbent would qualify. If such transfer or reassignment cannot be effected, the incumbent shall receive a non-disciplinary demotion, as provided for in section 114-128. 
(g)  In all cases where a layoff or reclassification downward occurs as a result of the reclassification of a position, the name of the employee affected by the layoff or demotion shall be entered on a priority placement register. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2008-69(08-O-1455), § 1, 8-18-08) 
Sec. 114-107. - Maintenance of plan. 
(a)  Under this division, to fill a vacancy, a position description shall be completed by the applicable department head and shall be submitted to the commissioner of human resources for a review of the allocation of the position. The commissioner of human resources may waive such requirement upon determination that no material changes have occurred. 
(b)  Each time a department or office of the department is permanently or substantially reorganized, the department head shall submit to the commissioner of human resources new class specifications for all affected positions and accompanying organizational chart. 
(c)  The commissioner of human resources may require department heads and office directors or other employees to submit position descriptions on a periodic basis or at any time the commissioner of human resources shall have reason to believe there has been a change in the duties and responsibilities of one or more positions. 
(d)  Upon a new class being established, a class specification shall be written and incorporated in the existing classification plan. The class title shall be added to the schematic list of titles. Any class which may be abolished shall be deleted from the classification plan by removing the class title from the schematic list of titles. 
(e)  Once during every year the commissioner of human resources shall conduct a general review of the classification plan. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-108. - Interpretation of class specifications. 
Class specifications are descriptive and not necessarily inclusive of all duties performed. The use of a particular description with respect to duties, qualifications or other factors shall not be held to exclude others of similar kind or quality. Such specifications are intended to indicate the kinds of positions which shall be allocated to the classes established. In a series of classes, such as the police classes, the specifications for all classes should be reviewed as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-109. - Official copy of plan. 
The commissioner of human resources and the municipal clerk shall maintain an official copy of the civil service classification plan. An official copy shall contain a schematic list of class titles with class codes, the salary schedules and all amendments thereto. A copy of the official plan shall be made available for inspection by the public during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-110—114-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PAY PLAN 

Sec. 114-120. - Compensation committee. 
There shall be an administrative board known as the compensation committee comprised of the chief operating officer, chief financial officer, commissioner of human resources, president of council (or designee) and one member of council selected by the body. The committee shall review and act on requests for "above-entry" hiring authorizations as provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04(10-O-0225), § 1, 2-23-10; Ord. No. 2012-05(12-O-0212), § 1, 2-29-12) 
Sec. 114-121. - Compensation philosophy. 
The City of Atlanta shall establish and maintain a total rewards system, including wages, salaries, benefits, bonus and incentives to attract, retain, develop and value high quality employees at all levels of city government. Such compensation system shall include a pay plan that is published and is directly related to the classification plan. Said compensation system shall support the city's strategies, objectives, and shall be within fiscal limits of the city budget. The compensation program shall include the following principles: 
(a)  Compensation shall be applied in balance with fairness and equitable treatment of all employees regardless of race, age, gender, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity, and shall be in accordance with equal employment opportunity (EEO) regulations. 
(b)  Pay plans shall be as competitive as practicable with equity between internal and external peers in like job families, and shall reflect the specific labor markets from which the jobs compete for top talent. 
(c)  Minimum pay shall be set at a minimum wage to assure that regular employees will have the opportunity to earn an annual salary consistent with a minimum wage of $13.00 per hour beginning July 1, 2017. Beginning July 1, 2018, minimum pay shall be increased at a minimum wage that regular employees shall earn an annual salary consistent with a minimum wage of $14.00 per hour. Beginning July 1, 2019, minimum pay shall be increased at a minimum wage that regular employees shall earn an annual salary consistent with a minimum wage of $15.00 per hour. All pay plans may be adjusted for cost-of-living changes, as determined by the CPI-U-Atlanta, unless specifically waived or modified by council ordinance. The council will prepare and adopt specific standards under which the council will waive the 100 percent COLA as determined by CPI-U-Atlanta. 
(d)  Pay plans shall be as simple as practical to assure understanding by employees and candidates. 
(e)  Every five years, or more frequently when so determined, the commissioner of human resources shall assess the need to conduct a market study of benchmark positions to maintain a competitive posture; and shall propose a plan of action, if needed, to bring any positions or classifications into competitive alignment. 
(f)  Pay and incentives shall be based on performance, and no employee shall be guaranteed compensation just for adding another year to organizational service. 
(g)  Performance bonuses are discretionary and will only be paid in accordance with established specific guidelines that are set in advance of the intended payment. The criteria under which employees are eligible to receive a bonus; and the specific method in which employees will be selected to be awarded a bonus shall be included in the guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2013-24(13-O-1183), § 5-D, 7-16-13; Ord. No. 2017-31(16-O-1719), § 1, 6-23-17 ; Ord. No. 2019-14(18-O-1470), § 3, 2-12-19 ) 
Sec. 114-122. - Composition. 
The pay plan shall set forth the salaries or wages of all classes within the classification plan including minimum, midpoint, and maximum salaries. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-123. - Adoption and amendment of the pay plan. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall establish by ordinance a pay plan for all classes of positions. This plan shall consist of a series of pay grades with minimum, midpoint and maximum salaries and may be amended by ordinance, subject to the limitations contained in the charter relating to the period during which salary or wage increases may be granted. 
(b)  The commissioner of human resources shall recommend to the mayor and council the assignment of each class to a salary grade, consistent with the classification plan. 
(c)  Amendment to the pay plan by changing a grade or grades or by moving a class from one salary grade to another shall be recommended by the commissioner of human resources and approved by ordinance. The mayor and council may amend the plan notwithstanding the recommendations of the commissioner. Until the adoption of a new plan as required by this section, amendments or changes to the pay plans now in effect shall be accomplished in the manner prescribed above. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-124. - Application. 
All persons employed by the city shall be paid the salaries or wages as established by the pay plan for the specific job classifications to which the employee is assigned. This may not be classification from which the position is allocated. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-125. - New appointments and starting rates. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter set forth, and except as may be otherwise provided in these rules and regulations, every person who shall be appointed or elected to any position of regular or part-time employment shall be employed at a salary or wage equal to the minimum amount set forth for the particular classification. Funding for positions must be within the existing budget allocations of the department employing the individual, or otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(b)  Any exception to the foregoing shall be requested by the appointing authority and approved as set forth below. 
(1)  Starting salaries of positions at a salary grade 22 and above may be approved by the department head, for new hires up to midpoint of the assigned pay grade, provided that prior budget funding is allocated. 
(2)  Departmental starting salary requests above the midpoint of the assigned pay shall be submitted to the commissioner of human resources for referral to the compensation committee for consideration as stipulated in section 114-120 of Atlanta City Code. 
(3)  The mayor shall have authority to hire executive officers, department heads, deputies and equivalent up to the maximum of the assigned pay grade provided that prior budget funding is allocated. 
(4)  Mayoral starting salary requests for executive officers, department heads, deputies and equivalent above the maximum of the assigned pay grade shall be referred to the compensation committee for consideration as stipulated in section 114-120 of the Atlanta City Code. 
(5)  The president of city council and city council shall have the authority to hire their respective agency heads up to the maximum of the assigned pay grade provided that prior budget funding is allocated. 
(6)  Should the mayor, President of Atlanta City Council governing board of the city desire to hire an appointee above the midpoint of the assigned pay grade, an appropriate request should be forwarded to the compensation committee as stipulated in section 114-120 of the Atlanta City Code. 
(7)  The president of the city council and city council starting salary requests for their respective agency heads above the midpoint of the assigned pay grade shall be referred to the full council in the form of an ordinance for consideration and approval. 
(8)  The governing boards of the city including the city internal auditor, ethics officer and citizens' review board shall have the authority to hire up to the midpoint of the assigned pay grade provided that prior budget funding is allocated. 
(9)  Starting salary requests from governing boards of the city above the midpoint of the assigned pay grade shall be referred to the commissioner of human resources for submission to the compensation committee for consideration as stipulated in section 114-120 of the Atlanta City Code. 
(10)  All starting salary requests from the midpoint and above the assigned pay grade must be accompanied by a written explanation giving justification for the request submitted to the compensation committee for its approval. 
(11)  Approved action by the compensation committee shall be reported to the city council within five business days. Report should include; 1) a copy of the justification, 2) certification from the finance department that funded has been budgeted and is available for the above entry hiring request and 3) subject position(s) classification title, salary range (including highlighted minimum mid-grade and maximum steps), above entry salary requested and the percentage and numerical difference of the increase above the minimum and mid-point of the salary range. 
(c)  Any person who shall be appointed to a position of police officer, firefighter or corrections officer shall be employed at a salary or wage equal to the minimum amount set forth for the particular classification, except a newly appointed police officer, firefighter or corrections officer with prior experience as a police officer, firefighter or corrections officer with another nonmilitary governmental entity may be eligible for additional pay for each year of experience as a police officer, firefighter or corrections officer, up to five years of experience. Eligibility under this section shall be conditioned on experience with a governmental entity with equivalent employment standards and practices as the department of police, fire, or corrections. This determination shall be made by the chief of the respective department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2008-69(08-O-1455), § 1, 8-18-08; Ord. No. 2010-04(10-O-0225), § 2, 2-23-10; Ord. No. 2012-05(12-O-0212), § 2, 2-29-12) 
Sec. 114-126. - Annual increases. 
(a)  Each regular employee may receive a salary increase, which shall be based upon performance, and paid once annually for all employees on an effective date authorized by the chief financial officer in conjunction with the commissioner of human resources. To receive such an increase, an employee must attain an evaluation rating of effective or better. If such employee receives a rating of "needs improvement", such employee shall become ineligible for the annual increase and shall remain ineligible for the period in which the "needs improvement" remains. An employee who earns an "effective" performance rating at the end of the improvement period shall be eligible for the annual increase, which shall not be retroactive for the period of "needs improvement" rating. Any employee who receives "unacceptable" rating shall be ineligible for the annual increase until after the next evaluation period, provided an effective performance rating is received. 
(b)  Newly hired employees may be eligible for a partial salary increase equal to half the value of the effective level if they meet all of the following three conditions by the end of the annual evaluation period: 1) completion of 6 months paid service, 2) successful completion of probation, if subject to a probationary period, and 3) achievement of effective or higher performance evaluation rating. Thereafter, once an employee completes each calendar year of paid service and receives an effective or better rating, such employee may receive a salary increase on the authorized effective date until the employee advances to the maximum salary of the assigned pay grade. Authorized leave with pay shall be credited toward such service. If all or any portion of the annual increase will result in said employee exceeding the maximum of the pay grade, the portion of the increase which exceeds the maximum pay grade may be paid to the employee as a lump sum, one time payment and will not increase the employee's base salary. 
(c)  Employees may receive an increase in pay based on changes in duties or responsibilities and other qualifying factors which shall not exceed ten percent of their current salary in a given 12-month period. 
(d)  No salary increase shall be awarded to an eligible employee in any year until after the annual operating budget, containing funds for such increases, is adopted by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-127. - Increase in compensation. 
(a)  Upon promotion. Upon an employee being promoted to a position in a higher class, such employee's salary or wage shall be increased no less than five percent of the current salary or the minimum of the new grade, whichever is greater, or one step if applicable. If such increase exceeds the maximum of the new grade, the employee shall receive the maximum salary of the new grade. No new salary shall exceed the maximum of the new salary grade. Upon promotion, a new probationary period shall commence for employees subject to a probationary period. 
(b)  Non-disciplinary demotion. Upon an employee's demotion to a position in a lower class for non-disciplinary purposes, the employee shall be compensated in the lower grade at the same salary, or, when applicable, the step that is closest to but not more than the former salary, provided that the employee has been in the position for one year. In the event that such salary does not exist, the employee shall be compensated at a salary or step if applicable, closest to but more than the employee's current salary. If the employee's salary is above the maximum of the pay grade for the lower class, then the employee will receive the maximum salary of the lower grade. An employee demoted to a previously held grade or lower, shall not have a salary reduction below the highest pay rate earned in a lower grade. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2007-46(07-O-1617), § 1, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 114-128. - Compensation on demotion. 
(a)  Disciplinary demotion. Upon an employee's demotion to a position in a lower class for disciplinary purposes, the employee shall be compensated in the lower grade at the same percentage of midpoint in the current grade applied to the lower grade or step if applicable. In no case shall the salary of the lower grade exceed the maximum. An employee demoted to a lower or previously held grade, shall not have a salary reduction below the highest pay rate earned in a lower grade. 
(b)  Non-disciplinary demotion. Upon an employee's demotion to a position in a lower class for non-disciplinary purposes, the employee shall be compensated in the lower grade at the same salary, provided that the employee has been in the position for one year. In the event that such salary does not exist, the employee shall be compensated at a salary closest to but more than the employee's current salary. If the employee's salary is above the maximum of the pay grade for the lower class, then the employee will receive the maximum salary of the lower grade. An employee demoted to a previously held grade or lower, shall not have a salary reduction below the highest pay rate earned in a lower grade. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-129. - Compensation on reclassification. 
(a)  Reclassification upward. An employee in a position that is reclassified to a class in a higher grade shall be compensated as prescribed in section 114-127, compensation upon promotion. 
(b)  Reclassification downward. Upon an employee's position being reclassified to a class in a lower pay grade, such employee shall be compensated in accordance with section 114-128(b), non-disciplinary demotion and shall be eligible to receive salary increases up to the maximum salary of the lower grade. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-130. - Compensation upon reemployment. 
A former employee reemployed under the Civil Service Code, Section 114-363, reemployment, to a position in the civil service may be credited with all former service, for purposes of establishing the employee's starting salary, seniority, and annual (vacation) leave accrual rate, at the recommendation of the appointing authority, and approval of the commissioner of human resources. The appointing authority may compensate a reemployed employee in the same classification or grade at the salary at time of separation, or higher if authorization is provided. If reemployed in a classification higher than that held at separation, the salary is established by the appointing authority, within the authorized level. If reemployed in a lower classification, compensation may be at the salary last held prior to separation provided it does not exceed the maximum of the lower grade. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-131. - Compensation for part-time employment. 
Upon the employment of a person on a part-time basis, such person shall receive a salary or wage based upon the time actually employed as related to the regular work period for salary or wage purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-132. - Transfers. 
Upon an employee's transfer to another department while retaining the same job classification, such transfer shall not change or affect the salary or wage being received by the employee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-133. - Overtime. 
(a)  The head of the finance department shall pay employees for overtime work in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) and other applicable rules and regulation. 
(b)  Employees within each department who normally perform the same type of work shall receive equal opportunity for overtime work. 
(c)  The chief financial officer shall provide a report of all overtime paid on a monthly basis to the finance/executive committee. The report shall include the number of overtime hours worked and amount of overtime paid by every city department for each month during the current fiscal year and for the same month in the two prior fiscal years. In addition, the report shall list any employee receiving more than 40 hours per month in overtime from the departments of aviation, corrections, fire rescue, parks, police, public works, and watershed management. A final report of all overtime paid during the current fiscal year shall be provided as part of the department of finance's fiscal condition of the city presentation to begin the annual departmental budget briefings. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2018-38(18-O-1373), § 1, 9-13-18 ) 
Sec. 114-134. - Compensation for temporary work at a higher classification. 
An employee shall not receive an increase in salary or wages upon being required to work in a higher position on a temporary, incidental, or emergency basis, for a period of time of 30 work days or less. Upon an employee being required to perform the duties of a higher position for a period of time in excess of 30 work days, such employee shall be given an emergency appointment to the higher position and shall receive the appropriate salary or wages of the higher classification. At the conclusion of such assignment, the wages or salary of the employee shall revert to that which such employee was receiving prior to the employee performing the duties in the higher classification. 
The service of an employee in a higher classification, as above provided, shall not affect the eligibility of the employee for normal increases. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-135. - Pay periods. 
All employees of the city shall be paid by check or direct deposit on a regular pay period basis, as adopted by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-136. - Compensation upon grade change for a classification. 
(a)  Upon the salary grade for a given class being increased to a higher grade, each employee in the class shall be compensated as set forth in section 114-127, increase in compensation upon promotion. 
(b)  Upon the salary grade for a given class being decreased to a lower grade, each employee in the class shall be compensated as set forth in section 114-128(b), compensation on demotion, non-disciplinary demotion. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-137. - Compensation upon reduction in force. 
Upon an employee's reassignment to a position in a lower pay grade as a result of a reduction in force, such employee shall be compensated in accordance with section 114-128(b), compensation on non-disciplinary demotion. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-138. - Payment of relocation expenses. 
A department head may request authorization to pay a newly hired executive or managerial employee's relocation expenses associated with a move from another state, in an amount not to exceed ten percent of the maximum salary authorized for the position. The chief operation officer, the chief financial officer and the commissioner of human resources must approve such relocation expense reimbursement. Relocation expenses as provided herein shall only be paid to newly hired persons who establish domicile within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-139. - Retention bonus. 
Sworn police officers are eligible for a $3,000.00 retention incentive payment on their fifth anniversary as a sworn police officer with the city. Officers who have attained five or more years of service prior to the effective date of this subsection [March 27, 2007] shall not be eligible to receive this payment. 
(1)  Officers who apply for the retention incentive payment must be in good standing, have a current "satisfactory", "effective" or higher evaluation and must execute an agreement to remain with the city's police department for an additional three years. 
(2)  An officer who has received a retention incentive payment and voluntarily or involuntarily leaves the employment of the police department prior to completion of three years following such agreement shall be responsible for repayment as outlined below: 
a.  Leaves within the first year after the date of the agreement; repay $3,000.00 
b.  Leaves after the first year but prior to the end of the second year after the date of the agreement; repay $2,000.00 
c.  Leaves after the second year but prior to the end of the third year after the date of the agreement; repay $1,000.00 
(3)  Should the officer fail or refuse to remit the payment as set forth in "(2)" above, such funds may be withheld or deducted from the officer's pension refund as provided in section 6-222(s) of the Related Laws section of the Charter and Code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-140. - Bilingual incentive pay. 
Employees in the classifications listed in subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) below may be eligible to receive bilingual incentive pay upon passing an authorized and approved Spanish proficiency exam. The commissioner of human resources, or designee, shall be responsible for the authorization and approval of the Spanish Proficiency assessment. Employees certified as proficient in Spanish must retest biennially to maintain the incentive pay. If an employee does not pass the biennial assessment, the employee shall return to the salary held prior to being certified as proficient in Spanish; and such employee shall not lose any other merit pay, COLAs or any increase realized during the bilingual certification period. The percentage of increase shall be calculated or determined as follows: 
(a)  Sworn public safety personnel in the Atlanta Police Department may receive a two percent increase in salary for the ranks of P1. to P6. 
(b)  Sworn public safety personnel in Atlanta Fire and Rescue Department may receive a two percent increase in salary for the ranks of F12; F14; F17; F21 and F24. 
(c)  Sworn public safety personnel in the department of corrections may receive a two percent increase in salary for the ranks of PS12; PS14; PS17; and PS21. 
(d)  Employees in the classifications of 911 operator; communications dispatcher; communications dispatcher, senior; communications dispatcher supervisors and E911 shift managers may receive a two percent increase in salary. 
The bilingual incentive pay shall terminate if the employee leaves the authorized classifications listed in subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d). 
(Ord. No. 2013-13(13-O-0643), § 1, 5-15-13; Ord. No. 2015-46(15-O-1384), §§ 1, 2, 9-30-15 ) 
Sec. 114-141. - Compensation upon recognized special certification. 
(1)  Upon obtaining a recognized specialized certification, a sworn member of police or fire shall be entitled to receive a salary increase of three percent. The chief of police, the chief of fire and the chief of corrections shall have discretion to determine which specialized certifications are recognized for each respective department. The chief of police and the chief of fire will submit a list of all professional certifications that will have a pay implication to the commissioner of human resources for approval at the beginning of each fiscal year. 
(2)  Upon obtaining a promotion to a higher rank, a sworn member of police or fire shall be entitled to receive a salary increase of at least five percent, with a maximum of ten percent. 
( Ord. No. 2015-28(15-O-1196), § 1, 6-24-15 ) 
Sec. 114-142. - Longevity incentive bonus. 
(1)  A longevity bonus is an incentive used to recognize and reward long-term service of employees to the city. All eligible employees of the city shall be eligible for an annual lump sum longevity bonus the month after their anniversary month of employment. 
(2)  Employees that have been employed with the city for less than ten years shall not be eligible for any longevity payment. Any person that is reemployed with the city shall surrender any eligibility as it relates to a longevity bonus, and their length of service shall commence with the date of rehire. 
(3)  The pay rate provided to employees shall read as follows: 

 
( Ord. No. 2015-25(15-O-1195), § 1, 5-27-15 ) 
Sec. 114-143. - Performance bonus. 
(a)  The mayor, city council, and president of council are granted the authority to pay their respective employees an annual performance bonus as follows: 
(1)  The payment of bonuses shall be paid from any excess funds in the operating budget allocated to that department and shall be prospective. 
(2)  The mayor or designee, council members, and council president shall establish specific guidelines and eligibility criteria to govern the award of bonuses to their respective employees that is based upon a defined benefit to the public for which the bonuses may be awarded. Once the guidelines are established, the mayor or designee, each council member, and the council president shall have the discretion to determine the actual awarding of bonuses and shall disseminate such guidelines to their respective employees in advance of the time frame that any yearly performance or compensation review for such employees takes place. 
a.  The guidelines should include, but are not limited to, the following: (1) the criteria under which employees are eligible to receive a bonus; and (2) the specific method in which employees will be selected to be awarded a bonus. 
b.  With respect to the employees of the executive branch, performance bonuses may only be awarded to regular full-time city employees. 
(3)  No bonus may be awarded to an employee for merely satisfactorily performing the assigned duties that are expected in return for the employee's regular salary. Rather, bonuses may be awarded for exceptional or exemplary service rendered by an employee for service that is outside of and in addition to the normal duties and responsibilities of his or her position. 
(4)  The performance bonus shall not be considered in determining an employee's rate of pay or award of overtime. 
(5)  No employee may receive more than one performance bonus per year, and no employee may receive a performance bonus payment in a gross amount above ten percent of the employee's annual base salary. Such performance bonuses shall be paid in accordance with normal payroll practices, including appropriate payroll deductions. 
(6)  Prior to the award of performance bonuses in a specific department, the chief financial officer shall certify that sufficient funds are available for that department. 
(7)  The chief financial officer shall prepare an annual report of all bonus payments. 
(8)  This performance bonus shall not be considered in computing an employee's pension entitlement. 
(9)  This section is intended to govern the payment of performance bonuses and shall not impact other bonuses otherwise expressly authorized. 
( Ord. No. 2019-14(18-O-1470), § 1, 2-12-19 ) 
Secs. 114-144—114-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CERTIFICATION OF PAYROLLS 

Sec. 114-151. - Payroll changes. 
No payroll change in the civil service shall take effect until appropriate documentation and approval is received by commissioner of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-152. - Review of payrolls. 
(a)  The commissioner of human resources shall be supplied with the necessary payroll data and any other information necessary in order to examine names, salaries, dates of appointment, etc., so as to enable the commissioner of human resources to determine that each employee on a given payroll has been properly appointed and that all actions listed have been taken in accordance with this article. 
(b)  The chief financial officer shall strike from the payroll the name of any person upon detection of an irregularity with respect to such person and shall notify the disbursing officer and the department head involved. 
(c)  After the chief financial officer has examined a given payroll, corrected irregularities and determined that all employees contained thereon have been appointed in accordance with this article, the payroll data shall be transmitted to the department of finance. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-153. - Recovery of salaries improperly paid. 
Any person, officer or employee not appointed in accordance with this article or with pertinent ordinances of the city and who shall receive the payment of salary shall be liable to the city for the repayment of such amounts received. The salary of any employee which has been incorrectly computed shall be recomputed to the correct amount, and any overpayment from such incorrect computation shall be repaid by the employee over a period of time determined by the chief financial officer and any underpayment from such incorrect computation shall be paid to such employee on the next regular pay period following such correct computation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-154—114-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AND NONDISCRIMINATION 

Sec. 114-166. - Policy. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the city to guarantee equal opportunity to all applicants and to all employees. Discrimination against any person in recruitment, examination, appointment, training, promotion, retention, discipline or any other aspect of personnel administration because of political or religious opinions or affiliations or because of race, color, religion, age, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, or other nonmerit factors shall be prohibited. Discrimination on the basis of age, sex or disability shall be prohibited, except where specific age, sex or physical requirements constitute a bona fide occupational qualification necessary to proper and efficient administration. 
(b)  The personnel operations, this article and other civil service rules and regulations shall be administered in such manner as to comply fully with title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended the Equal Opportunity Act of 1972 and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967. 
(c)  All city departments, agencies and offices shall make reasonable accommodations to facilitate the gainful employment of otherwise qualified persons with disabilities pursuant to federal statutes, and other city regulations. 
(d)  It shall further be the policy of the city, when disabled applicants are available for employment, to review the vacant positions in conjunction with the department of human resources to determine the feasibility of restructuring those jobs to accommodate disabled job prospects. Persons with authority to hire shall be responsible for providing reasonable accommodations to employ the disabled, including job altering, if necessary, reassigning duties and responsibilities and making physical modifications to facilities, equipment and the job station. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2013-24(13-O-1183), § 5-E, 7-16-13) 
Sec. 114-167. - Publicity. 
The city personnel policy shall make available information about job opportunities and a continuing program shall be conducted to make the equal employment practices of the city well known. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-168. - Affirmative action. 
Equal employment opportunity shall be ensured through affirmative action initiatives. The diversity manager shall be responsible for overall administration of affirmative action initiatives and shall report to the commissioner of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-169. - Appeals based on alleged discrimination. 
Any applicant or employee alleging discrimination in any personnel action shall have the right to consult with the equal employment opportunity coordinator of such employee's department or of the applicant's proposed department and with the diversity manager. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-170—114-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RECRUITMENT AND JOB APPLICATIONS 

Sec. 114-181. - Recruitment. 
(a)  Recruitment of candidates for positions in the civil service shall be carried out through appropriate media on a timely basis so as to ensure that all segments of the public have the opportunity to apply and be considered for such positions. 
(b)  Announcements of vacant positions and vacancy lists may be provided to media outlets, including those known to reach minority groups, with a request for publicity based on public service. Vacancy lists and announcements may also be furnished to the state employment services. 
(c)  Applicants shall be recruited on the basis of the training and experience requirements as set forth in the class specifications. 
(d)  All publicity shall indicate that the city is an equal opportunity employer. 
(e)  Individuals shall be recruited from a geographic area as wide as is necessary to ensure obtaining the best qualified candidates for the various types of positions. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-182. - Announcement of vacant positions. 
(a)  All vacancies in the classified service not being filled by transfer or reemployment shall be publicized by posting announcements in the department of human resources, on official department bulletin boards and in other places and by such other means as the commissioner of human resources may deem advisable. Such announcements shall specify the following: 
(1)  Class title and salary of the position to be filled; 
(2)  Qualification requirements; 
(3)  Manner of making application; 
(4)  Opening and closing date for receipt of application; 
(5)  Notice of written or oral examinations if required for the positions; and 
(6)  Such other pertinent information as the commissioner of human resources may determine. 
(b)  When there is an urgent need for eligible candidates and past experience or knowledge of labor market conditions indicates a probable scarcity of eligible candidates, applicants may be examined and certified as received, provided that all qualified persons applying have the opportunity for consideration for appointment. Notice of continuous announcements shall be posted on the appropriate bulletin boards and advertised periodically. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-183. - Filing application. 
(a)  All applications for positions in the civil service shall be made in a standard format prescribed by the commissioner of human resources and within the time limit established in the announcement. Such format may detail training, experience and other pertinent information. As a result of a single application, a candidate may be considered for all classes of positions for which such candidate is qualified. 
(b)  All applicants shall attest to the truth of all statements contained in the application form. 
(c)  No individual shall be denied the right of filing an application for employment in the city civil service. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-184. - Employment requirements. 
(a)  All persons hired into positions in the civil service shall meet the minimum qualification requirements as listed in the classification specification or otherwise determined by the commissioner of human resources. Such requirements may include but shall not be limited to the following factors: experience, education and physical condition where physical requirements constitute a bona fide occupational qualification. 
(b)  For education to be considered, accreditation must be recognized by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, American Council on Education or other governmental accrediting agency. 
(c)  Applicants appointed to sworn public safety positions shall be required, as a condition of employment, to sign a wavier that allows criminal background checks every two years without reasonable suspicion. 
(d)  For positions of trust a criminal background check and credit history may be required. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-185. - Fingerprinting and physical examination required of prospective officers and employees. 
No person shall be eligible to become an officer or employee of the city, other than a temporary employee, until such person has, if requested by the city, submitted to fingerprinting and has been examined as to physical fitness. This section, however, shall not apply to elected officials and members of various boards and commissions. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-186. - Rejection of applications. 
(a)  The commissioner of human resources may reject any application or applicant for the civil service, upon determining that any one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The application was not received on or before the closing date established for receiving applications. 
(2)  The application was incomplete or not filed in the prescribed format. 
(3)  The applicant did not possess one or more of the requirements as specified in the public announcement. 
(4)  The applicant is physically or mentally unfit to perform the required duties of the positions to which the applicant seeks employment. 
(5)  The applicant tested positive for illegal substances or otherwise demonstrates excessive current use of alcohol. 
(6)  The applicant has made a false statement of a material fact, perpetrated a fraud or attempted to deceive in the application of the applicant or in attempting to secure appointment. 
(7)  The applicant was previously employed by the city and was dismissed for cause, resigned not in good standing, resigned while under investigation for city, state or federal law violations, or is not otherwise eligible for reemployment by the city. 
(8)  The applicant failed to meet the hiring criteria of applicable employment laws, other such regulations. 
(b)  Whenever an application or an applicant is rejected, notice of such rejection and the reason therefore shall be, upon request, furnished to the applicant by the commissioner of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-187. - Postponement or cancellation of examinations. 
Any examination may be postponed or canceled at the direction of the commissioner of human resources. Notification of the postponement or cancellation and the reasons for the action shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-188. - Preemployment inquiries. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Arrest records means records of arrest for a crime not followed by a conviction. 
Conviction means a conviction for a felony or two or more misdemeanors for which a jail sentence may be imposed. 
Crime means a felony or two or more misdemeanors for which a jail sentence may be imposed. 
Criminal records means records of a conviction for a felony or two or more misdemeanors for which a jail sentence may be imposed. 
Employment history means a chronological listing of work history that is verifiable and shall include employer, dates of employment, job title, duties and responsibilities. 
Job related and job relatedness mean that relationship which reasonably can be inferred to exist between a specific crime and a particular job because of: 
(1)  The nature and seriousness of the crime for which the individual was convicted; 
(2)  The relationship of the crime to the ability, capacity and fitness reasonably required to perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of the job; 
(3)  The increased opportunity which such a job will afford for commission of the same or similar criminal behavior; 
(4)  The age of the applicant at the commission of the crime, along with the length of time between conviction and job application; and 
(5)  Recent employment records and other evidence of rehabilitation. 
(b)  A fingerprint record may be required of applicants for the civil service in order to determine whether an applicant possesses a criminal record. 
(c)  Past arrest records shall not constitute the sole basis for a refusal to employ an applicant. 
(d)  Criminal records of conviction may be used as a basis for refusal to employ where there exists a manifest job relatedness between a crime and a position sought. 
(e)  Applicants for the employment within the departments of police, fire and corrections shall be excluded from subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(f)  The commissioner of human resources may reject any application or applicant where such applicant has been convicted of a crime which is job related to the position of employment sought. Applicants having been convicted of other crimes will be considered on an individual basis, taking into consideration the position involved, the crime for which convicted and evidence of rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-189. - Physical examinations. 
(a)  Any prospective employee for the civil service shall be required to undergo a physical examination, which shall include a test for illegal drugs, by an examining physician to be approved by the commissioner of human resources. Temporary employees may be required to undergo such physical examination at the discretion of the appointing authority. 
(b)  Prospective employees hired in a temporary position shall be required to undergo a test for illegal drugs by an examining physician to be approved by the commissioner of human resources. If the initial results are positive, a second test, using other test procedures with a higher incidence of reliability, will be conducted. A test result will not be considered positive for the purposes of this section unless both types of tests result in positive readings for drug use. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-190. - Supervision of or by family member (nepotism). 
No person shall be employed in a position in the civil service in which such person directly supervises or is directly supervised by a member of such person's immediate family. The term "immediate family" includes father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, spouse, in-laws or domestic partner. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-191—114-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - EXAMINATIONS 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 114-201. - Policy. 
Selection for entrance to the classified service through open competition shall be the policy of the city. The selection process will maximize reliability, objectivity and validity through a practical assessment of applicant attributes necessary for successful job performance and career development. To facilitate employment of disadvantaged and disabled persons in aide or similar positions, competition may be limited to such individuals. Appointments to the classified service shall be made on the basis of merit by selection from among the highest available eligibles on appropriate registers. When, in the best interest of the city, it is determined to fill a position by promotion, consideration will be given to the eligible regular employees in the department or in the classified service, and the selection will be based upon demonstrated capacity, quality and length of service. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-202. - Open competitive examinations. 
Open competitive examinations for initial appointments to the classified service shall be prepared and conducted by or under the direction of the commissioner of human resources. Examinations may be assembled or unassembled and may include but shall not be limited to rating of training and experience; written, oral, physical or performance tests; or any combination of these, as determined by the commissioner of human resources after consultation with the department head. The examination process may take into consideration such factors as education, experience, knowledge, skill or any other qualifications which are job related and may be applied equitably and which in the judgment of the commissioner of human resources after consultation with the department head may enter into the determination of relative fitness of applicants. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-203. - Rating system 
Civil service applicants who meet the announced minimum and/or an acceptable score on a job related skills test are deemed qualified. If the applicants have outstanding training and experience, they are assigned to the highest category. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-204. - Fraudulent conduct or false statements by applicant. 
Fraudulent conduct or false statements by an applicant or by others with such applicant's knowledge in any application or examination shall be cause for the exclusion of such applicant from an examination, for the removal of such applicant's name from all eligible registers or for the discharge from the service after certification of such applicant. Applicants or employees coming under any of such categories or employees who have resigned while not in good standing with their department or employees under suspension shall be disqualified from taking any further examination. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-205. - Restriction of participation in the evaluation process. 
No employee of the department of human resources may directly participate in the rating of an examination of a relative, either by blood or marriage, of a roommate or of anyone in the employee's household. Such participation in the rating of such an individual shall constitute grounds for dismissal of that employee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-206. - Method of rating. 
(a)  Under this division, appropriate scientific techniques and procedures, based on merit principles, shall be used in rating the results of examinations and in determining the relative ratings of the competitors. Applications shall be rated and grouped accordingly: highly qualified and qualified. The rating criteria shall be developed by the department of human resources in consultation with the requesting department. The examination shall represent a proper balance between the specialized knowledge of the position requirements possessed by the requesting department and the specialized knowledge of regulatory requirements and testing methods possessed by the department of human resources. 
(b)  For all examinations, whether by written test or by evaluation of training and experience or by both, the minimum performance or requirements, by which eligibility is achieved, shall be established by the department of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-207. - Veteran's preference. 
(a)  Any veteran who has served on active duty as a member of the armed forces of the United States for a period of more than 180 days, not counting service under an initial period of active duty for training under the six months reserve or National Guard program, any portion of which service occurred during a period of armed conflict in which any branch of the armed forces of the United States engaged, whether under United States command or otherwise, and who was honorably discharged there from shall, upon submitting documentary proof of such discharge, be entitled to have added to such person's minimum qualifying score on an open competitive examination veteran's preference points, noncumulative, as set forth in this section. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "armed conflict" includes any military intervention beyond the limits of the United States as well as any confrontation of the armed forces of the United States with foreign nationals in which actual hostilities erupt. 
(c)  The rank order of such veteran among other eligibles shall be determined on the basis of their augmented rating. Such preference shall be allowed on entrance examinations and in reinstatement, reemployment or retention, but shall not be allowed on promotional examinations. Points shall be allowed as follows: 
(1)  Such veteran shall be entitled to have five points added to the earned rating of such veteran. 
(2)  Such veteran who has at least ten percent service-connected disability, as rated and certified by the Veterans' Administration, shall be entitled to have ten points added to the earned rating of such veteran. 
(3)  The unmarried spouse of any deceased veteran shall be entitled to have ten points added to the earned ratings of such unmarried spouse. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-208. - Inspection of papers. 
(a)  Under this division, any applicant, during a period of 30 days subsequent to the establishment of the eligible list, shall be permitted to make one inspection of such applicant's examination papers and other pertinent documents. Such examination papers shall not be subject to inspection by the general public. A manifest error in rating a test or in test procedure shall be corrected if called to the attention of the commissioner of human resources within the inspection period. Such corrections shall not invalidate any appointment previously made from such a list. 
(b)  The applicant, when making the inspection as provided in subsection (a) of this section, shall make such inspection at the department of human resources during regular business hours and under conditions to ensure that the applicant has no opportunity to make any changes on the examination or answer sheets, that no opportunity is afforded to copy any test material or answers and that there is no exposure of the examination material beyond that which normally would occur when the examination was administered to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-209. - Review or appeal of ratings. 
(a)  Policy. Original examination ratings by the department of human resources shall be subject to review or appeal upon an examinee presenting in writing to the commissioner of human resources sufficient facts to justify the contention that the examinee's examination was incorrectly rated. 
(b)  Basis of review or appeal. The examinee, desiring such review or appeal, shall indicate generally the manner in which the original decision was improper, the factors which were not credited or not given proper credit and any other pertinent information which would support the review or appeal and which would enable a reevaluation of the rating. 
(c)  Review process. 
(1)  Review of a rating shall not be made by the person making the original rating decision. The commissioner of human resources shall also review the rating prior to notifying the examinee of the decision by the department of human resources concerning the review. 
(2)  Requests for review of eligible ratings may be made at any time during the life of the register (list of eligibles). Request for review of ineligible ratings shall be made within six months from the date of registration or ineligibility. 
(3)  Should the review reveal that the original rating was correct, the applicant shall be informed in writing that such rating has been reviewed and that the rating remains unchanged. 
(4)  Examinees, requesting review of the results of examinations other than written examinations, may have explained to them the reasons why various blocks of their experience have been considered not to qualify or why they were assigned a specific rating. 
(5)  If, after review by the commissioner of human resources, an examinee remains dissatisfied with the assigned rating, such examinee may appeal in writing to the civil service board within 30 days of the date of the review by the commissioner of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-210. - Confidentiality of examination material. 
Under this division, all application, examination and test material shall be regarded as privileged and confidential and shall not be available for public inspection. Such material shall be made available to the civil service board when pertinent in a hearing on appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-211. - Retention of examination records. 
Under this division, all examination records shall be retained for a period of two years or for the length of time required by federal, state or city regulations, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-212. - Promotional examinations. 
(a)  Promotions in the civil service may be made on a competitive, limited competitive or noncompetitive basis. 
(b)  Promotions may be made when qualified eligibles are available and when it is determined that it is in the best interest of the city to fill vacancies by internal promotions. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as prohibiting the filling of any position by open competition. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-213—114-225. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Police, Fire and Corrections Promotions 

Sec. 114-226. - Short title. 
This subdivision shall be known and may be cited as the Police, Fire and Corrections Promotional Rules and Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-227. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appointing authority means, for all positions in the department of police, the police chief; for all positions in the department of fire, the fire chief; and for all positions in the department of corrections, the corrections chief. 
Appointing rule means the selection for promotion of an individual from among a group with the highest possible rating for the rank. 
Atlanta Police Leadership Institute means a program of the Atlanta Police Department focused on developing an Atlanta Police Department sworn employee's leadership skills through the provision of advanced law enforcement leadership training and employee development opportunities throughout a sworn employee's progression through the ranks of the Atlanta Police Department. 
Commissioner means the commissioner of human resources. 
Discretionary ranks means ranks to which appointments are not controlled by this subdivision and to which appointments can be made at the discretion of the police chief, fire chief and corrections chief, respectively. 
Eligible means a sworn employee who meets requirements for a rank and whose name is on an eligible list. 
Eligible list means a list of the names of employees who have competed for a rank of employment and are qualified to be appointed, listed in order according to the results of the examination process. 
Examination means selection procedures used to determine the relative qualifications of applicants for promotion. 
Minimum qualifications means the requirements established in the rank specification for experience and demonstration of the necessary proficiencies in a lower rank in order to compete for promotion. 
Probationary employee means an employee who has been appointed to a rank from an eligible list but has not successfully completed a 12-month probationary period in the rank. 
Probationary period means a period of 12 months following a promotional appointment during which the appointing authority, in consultation with designated subordinate commanders, determines whether or not the probationary employee has the requisite knowledge, skills and abilities necessary to perform the work behaviors of the rank at an acceptable level. The probationary period is considered a noncompetitive part of the examination for the rank. 
Rank means a group of positions which have similar duties and responsibilities, require similar qualifications, can be designated by a single title indicative of the level of responsibility of the positions and for which the same schedule of pay is applicable. 
Rank specification means a written document based upon an applicable job analysis which shall include but not be limited to descriptions of the responsibilities and work of the rank; a description of the critical work behaviors of the rank and the knowledge, skills and abilities necessary for the performance of such work behaviors; and the minimum qualifications necessary in order to compete for the rank. 
Status means the condition of a sworn member who has acquired a right to a rank in the manner established by this subdivision and by the overall provision of the labor relations ordinances and this article, which condition is retained by a probationary employee in such employee's lower rank unless the probationary period for the new rank is completed successfully and status in the new rank is gained. Sworn employees who fail their probationary period shall be returned to a position in their rank in which they have continued to have status during the probationary evaluation portion of the examination. 
Sworn member means an employee in the department of police or department of fire, as established by the definition of the unclassified service contained in section 114-84, or an employee in the department of corrections who is certified as a detention officer by the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Council (POST) and occupies a designated sworn position. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2015-19(15-O-1172), § 3, 5-27-15 ) 
Sec. 114-228. - Purpose. 
This subdivision sets forth the rules and procedures to be followed in making promotional decisions within the departments of police, fire, and corrections. The rules and procedures are designed to establish a promotional system for the departments that provides for the selection of superior officers based solely upon merit and fitness for promotion, as ascertained by job related and valid selection procedures developed in accordance with the governing legal guidelines and appropriate professional standards. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-229. - Applicability. 
This subdivision shall apply to promotions to the supervisory and mid-management ranks of sergeant and lieutenant in the department of police, lieutenant and captain in the department of fire, and lieutenant in the department of corrections. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2010-34(10-O-0952), § 4, 6-30-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 2011-09(11-O-0316), § 2, 3-30-11) 
Sec. 114-230. - Status of present sworn members. 
(a)  Sworn members in the nondiscretionary ranks of police officer, sergeant, lieutenant and captain in the department of police and firefighter, lieutenant and captain in the department of fire, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this subdivision derives [March 27, 2007] and sworn members in the nondiscretionary ranks of corrections officer, lieutenant and captain in the department of corrections on the amended date of the ordinance from which this subdivision derives [June 15, 1999] shall be given status in the nondiscretionary rank they hold as of that date. Sworn members of the department holding discretionary ranks on the effective date of the ordinance from which this subdivision derives, or the amended date as applicable, shall be given status in the non-discretionary rank they held at the time they were appointed to their first discretionary rank. 
(b)  Effective July 1, 2010, the rank of police captain was reclassified as a discretionary rank. 
(c)  Effective January 20, 2011, the rank of corrections captain was reclassified as a discretionary rank. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2010-34(10-O-0952), § 5, 6-30-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 2011-09(11-O-0316), § 3, 3-30-11) 
Sec. 114-231. - Amendments. 
Amendments to this subdivision may be recommended to the council by the commissioner of human resources, police chief, fire chief or corrections chief or initiated by the council. In determining these recommendations, hearings may be held, at which time both proponents and opponents of proposed amendments can be heard. Notice of any hearing shall be posted by the police chief, fire chief, and corrections chief at least two weeks in advance of such hearing at all permanent installations of the department of police, department of fire, and department of corrections in such a manner as to ensure that notice is readily accessible to everyone in the respective departments. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-232. - Creation of the rank specification. 
The commissioner of human resources, in conjunction with the appointing authority, shall create a separate document for each rank covered by this subdivision. The document shall be known as the rank specification and shall be approved by the respective appointing authority. A rank specification shall not be inconsistent with the written class specification developed by the commissioner of human resources in compliance with division 2 of this article; however, the rank specification shall go beyond the written class specification in defining the work behaviors of the rank and the knowledge, skills and abilities required to perform those work behaviors as may be required in the development of the content of valid examinations, in that the written class specification is primarily a classification and pay document, while the rank specification is primarily an examination document. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-233. - Amendments to the rank specification. 
Under this subdivision, prior to the announcement of an examination process for a rank, the commissioner of human resources, in conjunction with the appointing authority, shall thoroughly review the rank specification and make any amendments to the rank specification deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-234. - Examination announcement. 
The commissioner of human resources, in conjunction with the applicable appointing authority under this subdivision, will determine all eligible candidates for each examination. The commissioner shall give notice of each examination at least 120 days in advance of the date of administering the first competitive part of the examination. The appointing authority shall post a notice thereof in all permanent facilities of the applicable department. The announcement shall state the rank for which the examination is being held, the official announcement posting date, the last date and manner for making application for admission to the examination, the examination parts to be used in the competition and the weights for each part, the study lists and any other information considered pertinent and useful. The rank specification in effect at the time an examination procedure is announced shall be provided to all eligible candidates along with the examination announcement. A copy of the current rank specification shall also be posted with the announcement in each permanent facility of the applicable departments. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-235. - Filing of applications. 
All sworn members who wish to apply for a promotional examination under this subdivision must file a written application on the form prescribed by the commissioner of human resources within 30 days of the date the announcement is officially posted. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-236. - Minimum qualifications to compete. 
(a)  The rank specifications defined in section 114-227 shall designate the lower rank from which promotions can be made, provided that: 
(1)  To be eligible to compete for the rank of fire lieutenant, an applicant must have had at least five years' continuous service as a sworn member with the fire department immediately prior to the date of administering the first competitive part of the examination. To be eligible to compete for the rank of corrections lieutenant, an applicant must have had at least five years' continuous service as a sworn member with the corrections department immediately prior to the date of administering the first competitive part of the examination. To be eligible to compete for the rank of police sergeant, an applicant must have had at least five years' continuous service as a sworn member with the department of police immediately prior to the date of administering the first competitive part of the examination. 
(2)  To be eligible to compete for all nondiscretionary ranks above police sergeant, fire lieutenant, the sworn member must have had at least two years' continuous service in the appropriate city department, immediately prior to the date of administering the first competitive part of the examination, in a lower rank from which promotions can be made, as set forth in the rank specifications. 
(b)  The years of continuous service needed to be eligible to compete can be achieved by service either in the nondiscretionary ranks, as set forth in the rank specification or in a discretionary rank, as long as the total service equals or exceeds the requisite minimum number of years to compete and the time in the discretionary rank is being served immediately prior to the date of administering the first competitive part of the examination. 
(c)  A sworn member holding a discretionary rank who wishes to compete in an examination shall be eligible to take an examination only for the next highest rank above the nondiscretionary rank in which such sworn member holds status. 
(d)  In addition to the requirements contained in this section, a sworn member of the department of police holding either a discretionary or non-discretionary rank, who wishes to compete in an examination, must successfully complete the Atlanta Police Leadership Institute's leadership development program prior to the application period for an examination process. It shall be the duty of the police chief to issue administrative regulations governing the Atlanta Police Leadership Institute. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2007-46(07-O-1617), § 2 8-28-07; Ord. No. 2011-09(11-O-0316), § 4, 3-30-11; Ord. No. 2011-23(11-O-0939), § 2, 6-29-11; Ord. No. 2011-36(11-O-1141), § 1, 8-24-11; Ord. No. 2012-07(12-O-0279), § 1, 3-14-12; Ord. No. 2015-19(15-O-1172), § 4, 5-27-15 ) 
Sec. 114-237. - Disqualification from examination process. 
The commissioner of human resources shall disqualify a sworn member from an examination process under this subdivision when the commissioner has determined that: 
(1)  The application was not filed within the period specified by the examination announcement; 
(2)  The sworn member lacks the required length of continuous service at a lower rank necessary to be eligible to compete; 
(3)  The sworn member, after sufficient and proper notification, did not properly appear at the time and place designated for each part of the examination; 
(4)  The sworn member has been suspended five or more days, whether consecutive or not, for violation of the rules and regulations of the department of police, fire, or corrections within 24 months of the last date for filing applications, and all administrative appeals relating to such suspension have been adjudicated. Should the commissioner of human resources disqualify a sworn member, written notification of the reasons for that action shall be given to the sworn member by the commissioner no later than 30 days before the first competitive part is scheduled or five days before the next competitive part is scheduled in the case of disqualification under subsection (3) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-238. - Examinations. 
All promotions to ranks covered by this subdivision shall be made in accordance with the relative merit and fitness of the sworn members competing. Merit and fitness shall be ascertained by competitive examinations. All examinations and examination parts shall be fair, impartial and developed in accordance with professional standards and legal guidelines and shall relate to those matters which will test fairly the relative capacities and fitness of the sworn members to discharge efficiently the duties of the rank to be filled. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-239. - Concealment of identity. 
The identity of every sworn member taking a written test under this subdivision shall be concealed by the use of a numbered identification system. The identity of any candidate shall not be revealed until all written test papers have been scored and the minimum passing score set in accordance with this subdivision. Any sworn member whose written test paper bears the member's name or any other identifying mark or any sworn member who reveals an identification number to the appointing authority or to any employee of the department of police, fire or corrections shall be disqualified from further competition and shall be so notified. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-240. - Rating of examination parts. 
Under this subdivision, appropriate scientific techniques, developed in accordance with professional testing standards, shall be used in rating the results of all examination parts and interpreting the relative ratings of the competitors. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-241. - Minimum passing score. 
Under this subdivision, in order for the name of a sworn member to appear on an eligible list, the sworn member must pass each part of the examination. Each sworn member who fails to attain the minimum passing score on any part of the examination shall be considered to have failed the examination and shall not be eligible to compete in any further part of the examination or to attain a rank on the eligible list. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-242. - Determining minimum passing score. 
A professional in test development shall determine the minimum passing score on any written multiple-choice test used as part of an examination under this subdivision. The determination will be based on appropriate scientific and professional procedures and will be reported to the commissioner of human resources. The commissioner of human resources, in conjunction with the appropriate appointing authority, shall approve the minimum passing score and shall do so before the identity of any competitor is known. The minimum passing score on formal, structured, oral interviews or other separately scored assessment exercises shall be defined by the rating scale used. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-243. - Weights of examination parts. 
If the examination process under this subdivision has more than one competitive part, the official announcement shall state the weight to be assigned to each part. The weights shall be stated as percentages and the total weight of all parts of an examination process shall equal 100 percent. Every candidate passing all parts of the examination process shall have the final score computed in accordance with these weights and in accordance with appropriate scientific procedures so that the stated weights are accurately reflected. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-244. - Rank order on the eligible list. 
The order of names of passing candidates on the eligible list shall be determined by the final examination score computed as set forth in section 114-241. Final examination scores will be rounded off to three decimal points. If, thereafter, a tie still exists it will remain unbroken. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-245. - Notification of results. 
A sworn member who competes in any part of an examination under this subdivision shall be given written notice of the results of each part of the entire examination. The notice shall include the sworn member's score for each part, and, if the member passes, the member's rank on the eligible list shall be given after the eligible list is established. Sworn members who fail an examination part shall be notified of that fact, along with their score, before the next examination part is administered. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-246. - Eligible list. 
The fire, police and corrections chiefs shall maintain an active eligible list for all ranks covered by this subdivision. Each list shall contain the names of those candidates who passed the entire examination process and each candidate's final examination score and rank on the eligible list. Eligible lists become effective on the date approved by the commissioner of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-247. - Duration of eligible list. 
Eligible lists, unless earlier exhausted, shall be in effect for 24 months from the date the list was approved by the commissioner of human resources in accordance with section 114-246. Eligible lists shall not be extended beyond their expiration date, and all vacancies existing on the expiration date shall be filled from the eligible list; however, section 114-249(b) shall still apply. A new examination announcement, as provided for in section 114-234, will be published as determined by the commissioner of human resources 180 days before the expiration of a list or after a list is exhausted, which ever shall be earlier. When a new examination announcement has not been published following the expiration of a list, a written notice explaining the reasons for such failure to publish a new announcement shall be given to all sworn members of the affected department, the mayor and the appropriate legislative oversight committee within 30 days after a list has expired. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2011-36(11-O-1141), § 2, 8-24-11) 
Sec. 114-248. - Review of examination paper. 
(a)  A sworn member who competes in a written multiple-choice test, as provided by this subdivision, shall have the right to review a photocopy of the member's answer sheet, along with a copy of the written test booklet and a copy of the correct answer to each written test question. The review shall be held under the direct supervision of a professional in test development used by the commissioner of human resources to administer the written test, and it shall be held as soon as practicable after the written test administration date; but, in any case, it shall occur within no more than 30 days after the written test has been administered. 
(b)  Sworn members will be allowed to appeal to the test developer, in writing, any answer to a written test question other than the one specified as being the correct answer. The professional developing the test shall consider all such appeals and, if it is deemed justified, make such necessary corrections to the scoring key before reporting the final written test scores to the commissioner of human resources. The testing professional shall be required to document the reasons for recommending any changes to the original scoring key as well as the reasons for rejecting any appeal submitted by a sworn member. 
(c)  The commissioner of human resources may approve or disapprove the recommendations of the testing professional. If the action of the commissioner of human resources requires that the answer sheets be rescored, such rescoring will be done for all candidates by the professional test developer and reported back to the commissioner of human resources before the identity of any candidate is made known to anyone. The commissioner of human resources shall notify all candidates of both the professional test developer's decisions regarding all appeals and the determination of the commissioner of human resources. 
(d)  Because of the need to use written tests which have been professionally developed and validated in accordance with both professional standards and legal guidelines, all sworn members reviewing test papers are expressly forbidden from taking any test material, review material or any written notes from the review room. To the extent practicable, reference material used in developing the written test will be made available to members during the review period. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-249. - Appointing rule. 
(a)  Upon completion of a register, the commissioner of human resources shall provide the fire chief, police chief and corrections chief with a copy. 
The fire chief, police chief and corrections chief shall certify the names of the five members who stand highest on the eligible list. The names of all members who, after seniority (based on date of employment as corrections officer, firefighter or police officer) is applied, still remain in an unbroken tie with the five highest members certified shall also be certified. If more than one vacancy exists, the commissioner of human resources shall certify one additional sworn member for each additional vacancy, including all members in unbroken ties with the last additional member to be certified. Each respective chief may appoint any of the certified members as the chief deems to be in the best interest of the affected department. 
(b)  When the number of names remaining on an eligible list is less than five, the chief of the affected department may decline to make an appointment and may request that a new examination procedure be administered. At such time, the eligible list shall be considered exhausted in accordance with section 114-247, notwithstanding the fact that there are still vacancies in existence. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-250. - Removal from eligible list. 
(a)  The fire, corrections and police chiefs shall remove the name of a sworn member from an eligible list under this subdivision due to any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Receipt of a written request from the sworn member. 
(2)  Refusal to accept a promotional appointment. 
(3)  Termination of the sworn member's employment with the applicable department. 
(4)  Suspension of five or more days, whether it is consecutive or not, for a violation of the rules and regulations of the applicable department. 
(5)  The discovery, after the eligible list has been established, that the sworn member would have been rejected under other sections of this subdivision had the information so discovered been known before the eligible list was promulgated. 
(6)  Failure to complete the probationary period, as provided in section 114-251. 
(b)  Whenever a sworn member's name is removed from an eligible list, written notice of such action and the reason for that action shall be given to the sworn member by the fire, corrections and police chiefs within five days of the date the action is taken. 
(c)  Removal from eligible lists established under this subdivision is not appealable through the civil service board under section 14-502. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-251. - Probationary period. 
(a)  Every promoted sworn member shall serve a 12-month probationary period to be regarded as an integral noncompetitive part of the examination process under this subdivision. 
(b)  Sworn members filling discretionary ranks at the time of their promotion to a nondiscretionary rank in accordance with this subdivision shall have the time successfully served in the discretionary rank count toward the required 12-month probationary period, provided such service was immediately prior to promotion to the nondiscretionary rank. Time successfully served in the discretionary rank after the date of promotion to the nondiscretionary rank shall also be credited as part of the 12-month probationary period required to attain status in the nondiscretionary rank. 
(c)  The probationary period shall be utilized for closely observing how well a probationary employee performs the work and responsibility of the higher level rank and for securing the most accurate judgments as to whether or not the probationary employee's performance meets required work standards at the higher level rank. It shall be the duty of the chiefs of the respective departments to issue administrative regulations governing the probationary evaluation process. 
(d)  Prior to the completion of the 12-month probationary period, the chief of the department shall decide whether or not the probationary employee will receive status in the higher rank. If the probationary employee is deemed to have passed the probationary period and is to be given status in the rank, the employee shall be notified of such decision no later than 15 days before the expiration of the 12-month probationary period. 
(e)  At any time during the probationary period, the chief of the applicable department may remove a promoted sworn member whose performance does not meet the required work standards and return that member to the rank in which the member has retained status. In such event, the chief of the department shall notify the member in writing that the probationary evaluation part of the examination has been failed and the reason for such failure. Such notification shall be given at least 15 days in advance of the date the action is to be official and not later than 15 days before the 12-month probationary period is to expire. Thereafter, the name of a sworn member who failed the probationary evaluation part of the examination shall be removed from the eligible list. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-252. - Administration. 
The commissioner of human resources, in conjunction with the police chief, fire chief and corrections chief, shall be responsible for the administration of this subdivision. Issues that arise that are not specifically addressed by the rules and regulations will be resolved by the commissioner of human resources in conjunction with the fire chief, police chief and corrections chief in a matter consistent with the intent of this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-253—114-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - CERTIFICATION AND APPOINTMENT 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Secs. 114-266—114-275. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Eligible Lists 

Sec. 114-276. - Statement of policy. 
Vacancies in the classified service shall normally be filled from eligible lists resulting from open competitive examinations, unless the department head should determine that such vacancies should be filled by transfer, promotion, demotion, reassignment or through any other authorized and established noncompetitive process. Decisions not to use open competitive examinations shall be approved by the commissioner of human resources, except that if the department head and commissioner of human resources disagree, the mayor shall make the final decision. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-277. - Establishment of lists. 
(a)  The commissioner of human resources shall establish and maintain eligible lists for the various classes of positions as may be necessary to meet the needs of the classified service. 
(b)  Each list shall contain the names of those eligibles who have been determined to be qualified through the examination process. 
(c)  Names of eligibles shall be placed on eligible lists in the order of their adjectival rating. The names of eligibles with veteran's preference shall be entered in accordance with their respective augmented ratings, if appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-278. - Types of lists and durations. 
The commissioner of human resources shall maintain the following eligible lists: 
(1)  Open competitive. A listing of persons in rating order as a result of an open-competitive examination process to be used in making an appointment to the civil service. Persons separated in good standing and eligible for reemployment may request placement on the current open competitive list for which they qualify. The duration of the list shall be for a period of six months, and may be up to an additional six months. 
(2)  Promotional. A listing of persons in rating order as a result of a citywide competitive examination or a departmental competitive examination (limited competition). The duration of the list shall be for a period of six months, and may be up to an additional six months. 
(3)  Reduction-in-force (RIF). A listing of persons who have been separated from the classified service in good standing as a result of a reduction in force. The duration of the list shall be two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-279. - Methods of filling vacancies. 
(a)  The appointing authority, in consultation with the commissioner of human resources, may elect to fill any vacancy under the appointing authority's jurisdiction by any one of the following methods: 
(1)  Promotion. 
(2)  Reemployment. 
(3)  Open competition. 
(4)  Transfer. 
(5)  Demotion. 
(b)  The appointing authority may elect to make a temporary appointment only when the work is of a temporary duration of less than six months or when the commissioner of human resources indicates that no register of eligibles is available. Unless the appointing authority requests otherwise, the commissioner shall certify qualified eligibles on a RIF list; promotional list; or open competitive list. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-280. - Availability of eligibles. 
An eligible shall notify the commissioner of human resources in writing of any change of address or other change affecting availability for employment under this article. Whenever an eligible, either by application or by submitting a written statement, restricts the conditions under which such eligible will be available for employment, the name of such eligible may be withheld from all certification which does not meet the conditions specified. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-281. - Removal of name from lists. 
Names may be removed from eligible lists under this division by the commissioner of human resources for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  At the written request of the eligible. 
(2)  The refusal of an offer of appointment under conditions previously listed by the eligible as acceptable. 
(3)  Appointment through certification from such lists to fill a regular position. 
(4)  Appointment through certification from the eligible list for another class at the same or higher compensation. In such case, at the request of the appointee, the appointee's name may be continued on any or all lists, other than the one from which the appointment was made, for the remainder of the period of eligibility on such lists. 
(5)  The failure to report for an interview or to respond, within the time specified in the notice, to any inquiry of the commissioner of human resources or department head. 
(6)  Notice by postal authorities of the inability to locate an eligible at the last known address of such eligible. 
(7)  The death of eligible. 
(8)  The discovery, upon review of eligibility that the eligible would be subject to rejection under other sections of this article. 
(9)  Dismissal for cause from the civil service. 
(10)  The separation from the services of the city, other than by layoff, of an eligible whose name is on a promotional list. 
(11)  The discovery that the eligible has willfully provided erroneous information, withheld information, evaded questions or otherwise misrepresented the qualifications of the eligible in order to qualify for appointment and/or promotion. 
(12)  Any cause or condition specified in this article for the rejection of an application. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-282. - Restoration of names to eligible lists. 
Upon any person's name being removed from an eligible list, such person shall immediately be notified in writing, addressed to such person's last known address. Such person may, at any time during the life of that eligible list, make written request to the commissioner of human resources for restoration to such list. The request shall set forth the reasons for the conduct or conditions resulting in the removal of the name from the list and the reasons advanced for restoration of the name. The commissioner of human resources, after determining whether or not such reasons are justifiable, may order the restoration of such name or refuse such request and shall notify such person of the action taken. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-283—114-295. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Certification 

Sec. 114-296. - Request for certification. 
All requisitions for the filling of vacancies in the classified service shall be made on forms designated by the commissioner of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-297. - Number of names to be certified. 
Upon receipt of a requisition, the commissioner of human resources shall certify a sufficient number of names rated highest on the appropriate eligible register that will allow the appointing authority a reasonable choice of applicants, as determined by the commissioner of human resources, to fill the vacancy. If more than one vacancy is to be filled, additional names will be certified for the additional vacancies. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-298. - Incomplete certification. 
If there are too few persons in the highest rated groups to allow the appointing authority a reasonable choice of eligibles, as determined by the commissioner of human resources, additional names from lower rated groups may be certified and given equal consideration by the appointing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-299. - Establishment of the new register. 
When the commissioner of human resources determines that the number of names on an eligible register is too few to allow a reasonable choice for appointing authorities, at the discretion of the commissioner, a new register may be established. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-300. - Selective certification. 
If a particular position to be filled requires some very specific skill or training, upon request by the appointing authority, the commissioner of human resources may restrict referrals to those eligibles who possess the specific skill or training. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-301—114-310. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Appointment 

Sec. 114-311. - Certification of eligibles. 
Upon receipt of a referral list certified by the commissioner of human resources, the appointing authority may select from among any of the eligibles on the certified list. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-312. - Types of appointments. 
(a)  Original appointments (probationary). The original employment of a person to fill a position in the classified service on a regular or part-time basis, as a result of selection from an appropriate list of eligibles, shall constitute a probationary appointment. 
(b)  Regular appointment. A probationary employee shall receive a regular appointment and shall acquire regular status within the classified service upon satisfactory completion of the probationary period. 
(c)  Temporary appointment. Temporary appointments may be made for special projects or for other work of a temporary or transitory nature. 
(1)  Such appointments shall be made from qualified applicants on eligible lists who indicate their willingness to accept temporary employment. The acceptance of such appointment by an eligible shall not affect the standing of such eligible on the list for permanent appointment. 
(2)  If certification from lists is impracticable because of the nonavailability of employees for temporary work, the commissioner of human resources may authorize the applicable appointing authority to select a qualified person of such authority's choice. 
(d)  Emergency appointment. When, because of an emergency involving the serious impairment of the public business of the city, it is impossible to fill a position in the competitive service by the normal procedure, the appointing authority, subject to the approval of the commissioner of human resources, may appoint any qualified person to such position. Such appointment shall continue only during such emergency or until an acceptable eligible list is established and a qualified applicant is selected therefrom. 
(e)  Part-time appointment. In a part-time appointment, the employee works on a continuing basis but devotes less than the normal time specified for that of a regular appointment in the affected class. 
(1)  The announcing of vacancies and the procedures for filling continuing part-time positions shall be the same as for full-time positions. 
(2)  Appointment shall be made from qualified applicants on eligible lists who indicate their willingness to accept part-time employment. 
(3)  Part-time employees in continuing positions shall receive sick, annual or other types of leave and holidays prorated on the basis of the time worked as related to the normal designated work period for the affected class. 
(f)  Provisional appointment. Whenever an urgent reason exists for filling a regular position in a class for which appropriate lists are not then available, the commissioner of human resources may authorize the vacancy to be filled by the means of a provisional appointment. 
(1)  Any candidate for provisional appointment must meet all of the requirements as established for the position being filled. 
(2)  An appropriate eligible list for the position shall be established at the earliest possible date, and the person serving on the provisional appointment shall be given an opportunity to compete. 
(3)  A provisional employee appointed to a regular position shall have the length of time served in a provisional status considered as a part of the required probationary period. 
(g)  Specially funded appointment. A specially funded appointment shall be in the unclassified services and shall be applicable with respect to positions funded on a time-limited basis from sources such as bonds, or federal or state sources. Such positions shall remain in existence only during the duration of such funds and may receive the benefits and privileges available to other unclassified employees. Candidates for appointment must meet the requirements as established for the position being filled. Upon the appointment to specially funded positions, employees shall be advised that the tenure of their services is based on the duration of the special funds and shall, prior to accepting appointment, execute a written acknowledgment of such which shall be filed with the commissioner of human resources. 
(h)  Military leave appointments. Whenever a position vacancy exists because of the fact that the regular occupant is on an authorized military leave of absence, such vacancy may be filled by certification from an eligible register. Such an appointee may be eligible for all benefits and privileges available to other employees; but, acquire no rights to the position. All provisions pertaining to classified and unclassified services apply. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-313. - Elimination of eligibles. 
Under this division, the appointing authority may eliminate from consideration the following eligibles: 
(1)  Any eligible who declines an appointment, fails to reply to the appointment or when an inquiry concerning availability of an eligible is returned undelivered. 
(2)  Any eligible who has been separated for cause or resigned while suspended from city employment. 
(3)  Any eligible against whom the appointing authority has submitted objections which have been sustained by the commissioner of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-314. - Objections to eligibles. 
(a)  When an objection has been made to an eligible, the commissioner of human resources shall apply the following principles: 
(1)  The objection shall be sustained when it is determined that the eligible is disqualified for some or all of the positions to be filled from that eligible list, including the particular job to be filled. 
(2)  The objection shall be sustained, even though a sufficient basis for general disqualification of the applicant has not been presented, provided that a sufficient basis has been submitted to support the conclusion that the applicant is not fit for the particular vacancy. 
(b)  Objections will be sustained upon its being shown that the applicant is disqualified because of any one of the following general grounds for disqualification: 
(1)  Medical disqualification because of physical or mental unfitness for the position, as determined by licensed medical authority. 
(2)  Dismissal from employment for delinquency or misconduct. 
(3)  Intentional false statements, deception or fraud in the examination or appointment. 
(4)  Addiction to or habitual use of narcotics, other drugs and/or alcohol, as determined by licensed medical authority. 
(5)  Any legal or other disqualification which makes the applicant unfit for city service. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-315. - Sworn police and fire exception. 
In the departments of police and fire, the mayor or the mayor's designee shall be the appointing authority and shall have the power and authority to recruit, employ and hire and shall have all other powers as a department head in the civil service and the appointing authority as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-316—114-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - PROBATIONARY PERIOD OF EMPLOYMENT 

Sec. 114-326. - Policy and objectives. 
All appointments to regular fulltime or part-time positions in the classified service shall be subject to the satisfactory completion of a six month probationary period. Such probationary period shall constitute an integral part of the selection process and shall be utilized for closely observing the employee's work, for securing the most effective adjustment of a new or promoted employee to the position, for rejecting any employee whose performance or conduct is not satisfactory and for affording the employee an opportunity to determine if such employee wishes to make a career in the service of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-327. - Extension of time. 
The commissioner of human resources shall extend the probationary period for up to an additional six months upon the request of the applicable department head, provided such request is made prior to the expiration of the original probationary period. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-328. - Promotional appointments. 
(a)  If an employee is removed during the probationary period following a promotion, for failure to perform satisfactorily the duties of the higher position, such employee may be returned to the position held prior to the promotion or to a similar position. Should an appropriate vacancy not exist, the employee may be allowed to remain in the position out of class until there is a vacancy in an existing position in the lower class. A probationary promotional appointment shall not affect an employee's earned regular status and rights in the classified service which have been acquired in another position. 
(b)  Promotions of employees covered by this division shall be made only according to merit and fitness and must be attained by competitive examinations, regardless of the number of applicants seeking promotion. Such examinations shall be administered by the department of human resources. All promotions in the classified service, except those under section 114-251, shall be for a probationary period of six months. During the probationary period, the person so promoted may be demoted by the appointing authority to the position the person formerly held, without a hearing. Any person so demoted shall be credited with any pay adjustments that the person would have earned in the position formerly held by such person had such person not been promoted. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-329. - Position changes and transfers. 
If a demotion, reassignment or transfer of an employee in the classified service occurs before such employee has completed the probationary period, the remainder of such probationary period shall be served in the new position, and such employee shall not be required to serve a new probationary period in the new position. A written report of such demotion, reassignment or transfer must be filed by the applicable appointing authority with the commissioner of human resources within three work days after the effective date of such action. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-330. - Reemployment. 
Upon reemployment in a position in the classified service, an employee shall not be required to serve a new probationary period when such employee has completed, within the previous 12-months, a probationary period in the same class for which reemployment is being effected. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-331. - Dismissal during probationary period. 
(a)  Any employee, during the probationary period, may be removed or dismissed, without the right of appeal to the civil service board, for the following reasons: 
(1)  Such employee is unable or unwilling to satisfactorily perform the duties of the position or the lack of dependability of such employee does not merit continuance with the service, as determined by the appointing authority. 
(2)  Such employee has committed an offense which would constitute cause for disciplinary action under this article. 
(3)  The appointment of such employee was secured through fraud or fraudulent acts. 
(b)  Upon removal or dismissal, as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the appointing authority shall notify the commissioner of human resources and the employee in writing enumerating the reasons for the removal or dismissal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-332. - Probationary period reports. 
Prior to the end of the six-month probationary period, a written performance evaluation shall be conducted on the probationary employee if such employee is demoted or separated for unsatisfactory performance. The performance evaluation shall be signed by the appointing authority and submitted to the commissioner of human resources. If the commissioner of human resources is not notified prior to the expiration date of the probationary period, such employee shall acquire regular status in the position. 
Secs. 114-333—114-345. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - PROMOTIONS 

Sec. 114-346. - Policy. 
Vacancies in positions above the entry level in the civil service may be filled by promotion from lower classes or by recruitment of candidates, other than existing employees of the city, through appropriate competitive examination. A combination of both methods of filling vacancies may be used. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-347. - Political or partisan endorsement prohibited. 
No consideration shall be given to political or partisan endorsement for promotions to positions in the civil service; only merit and fitness shall be considered. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-348. - Types of promotions. 
The following shall constitute the types of promotions within the classified service: 
(1)  Noncompetitive promotions. Competitive procedures need not apply in the following instances: 
a.  A trainee appointee is moved into the class upon completion of an officially approved training program, provided the trainee was originally selected through competitive procedures. 
b.  A position is upgraded without significant changes in duties and responsibilities, the occurrence of a classification error or as a result of a change in the pay plan. 
c.  The promotion results from an employee's position being reclassified with the incumbent to a higher level due to significant changes in the actual duties and responsibilities. 
(2)  Competitive promotions. Competitive promotions shall be limited to a particular department upon request of the appointing authority. Competitive promotions of employees in the classified service shall be made in accordance with the following procedures: 
a.  Promotional announcements shall be sent to all departments or the particular department, as appropriate, and shall be posted on employee bulletin boards where appropriate and shall be posted on the official employee bulletin board in the department of human resources. 
b.  Each promotional announcement shall provide for a minimum period of seven calendar days between the date of the announcement and the date the application is to be filed with the department of human resources. The employee shall be responsible for ensuring receipt of such employee's application by the department of human resources prior to the filing deadline established in the announcement. 
c.  Promotional announcements shall include the following: 
1.  Official class title; 
2.  Salary range; 
3.  General description of the position; 
4.  Minimum entrance requirements; 
5.  Examination procedure; 
6.  Promotional potential, if the position is a formal trainee or career ladder position with defined promotion potential; 
7.  Filing deadline; 
8.  Announcement date. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-349. - Certification and selection. 
(a)  The commissioner of human resources shall certify a sufficient number of names ranking highest on the appropriate promotional register that will allow the appointing authority a reasonable choice of applicants to fill the vacancy. 
(b)  The appointing authority shall make the selection from the group of employees certified in accordance with this article. 
(c)  All selected employees promoted to a "position of trust" will be required to pass a criminal background check as a condition to such promotion(s). If such background check reveals criminal convictions related to the essential job duties, the promotion shall be rescinded and the employee may remain in the current position held. This provision does not apply to sworn public safety employees transferring within zones. A credit check shall be conducted if such promotion warrants such action based on job relatedness. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-350. - Release of promoted employees. 
Upon an employee's promotion to a position in another department, such employee shall be released by such department within a reasonable period of time which shall not normally exceed two weeks. At the discretion of the appointing authority involved, such period of release may be extended for emergency or hardship. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-351—114-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - TRANSFERS, DEMOTIONS AND REEMPLOYMENT 

Sec. 114-361. - Transfers. 
(a)  Generally. A regular employee may be transferred to meet the needs of the civil service or may be transferred, upon request and acceptance, to a position in the same class or in a different class having the same entrance salary. A transfer may require the employee to move from one department to another or within a department. When an employee is transferred to a "position of trust," a criminal background check is administered as a condition to transfer. A credit check shall be conducted if such transfer warrants such action based on job relatedness. 
(b)  Intradepartmental transfers. The appropriate department head may, at any time, reassign an employee of the department in the civil service from one position to another in the same class or another class within the same pay range within the same department. 
(c)  Interdepartmental transfers. A transfer of an employee from one department to another shall have the approval of the commissioner of human resources and the two concerned department heads. Requests for such transfer shall establish that the employee meets the qualification requirements of the class to which the transfer is proposed. 
(d)  Salary range after transfer. An employee who is transferred shall continue to receive the same rate of pay, except as otherwise provided. 
(e)  Transfer of physically incapacitated employee. If an employee becomes physically incapacitated to the extent that such employee is unable to perform the duties of the employee's position, the commissioner of human resources may, with the consent of such employee and the appointing authority, transfer the employee to another position in the same pay range, the duties of which such employee can perform despite the physical incapacity. 
(f)  Use of intradepartmental or interdepartmental transfer for retaliation. Notwithstanding the foregoing subparagraphs, no employee shall be subject to intradepartmental or interdepartmental transfer in retaliation or response to engaging in a protected activity such as reporting fraud, waste or abuse in city government. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-362. - Demotions. 
(a)  Involuntary demotions. An appointing authority may demote, for just cause, an employee under such authority's jurisdiction from a position in one class to a position in a lower class, provided that the employee involved and the commissioner of human resources have been notified in writing of such contemplated action. Pay shall be calculated consistent with section 114-128. 
(b)  Voluntary demotions. Subject to the approval of the applicable appointing authority and the commissioner of human resources and upon the request of an employee, such an employee may be demoted to a vacant position in a lower class. The determination of whether or not the employee is qualified to perform the duties and responsibilities of the position in the lower class shall be made by the commissioner of human resources. Pay shall be calculated consistent with section 114-128. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-363. - Reemployment. 
(a)  Generally. Any regular employee, who is separated from the city in good standing and with a satisfactory performance evaluation may be eligible for reemployment for a period of three years following the date of separation. Such former employee may be reemployed in the class previously held, or in any class for which they are deemed eligible under the civil service system, provided a vacant position exists. 
(b)  Certification of eligibles to fill vacancy. When a vacancy exists which the appointing authority has decided to fill by reemployment, the commissioner of human resources shall certify to the appointing authority that the applicant is eligible for reemployment and meets the requirements for the position. 
(c)  Credit for former service. A former employee reemployed under this section may be credited for pay purposes with all former service in the class in which such employee is reemployed and service in any higher class, and shall be compensated in accordance with section 114-130. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-364—114-375. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - SEPARATIONS 

Sec. 114-376. - Types. 
Separations and/or terminations from positions in the civil service shall be designated as one of the following types: 
(1)  Resignation means the voluntary action of an employee to separate from the position held. 
(2)  Termination means the act of ending an employment relationship with an employee or not for cause. 
(3)  Layoff or reduction in force means the termination of an employment relationship due to budgetary or financial reasons, or in the event an office or department reorganization. 
(4)  Not fit-for-duty means termination of an employee from the civil service as a result of a fitness-for-duty examination by a licensed physician certifying the employee is unable to perform the essential functions of the position. 
(5)  Dismissal means discharge or separation of an employee from the civil service for cause. 
(6)  Retirement means the voluntary election of an employee to separate from the civil service and receive a distribution from a retirement fund. 
(7)  Death means separation of an employee from the civil service shall be effective as of the date of death of the employee. 
(8)  Private contract management, privatization, managed competition, or outsourcing of city services means termination of an employment relationship due to the city's decision to utilize an alternative source to manage a business function or operation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-377. - Resignation. 
An employee shall submit written notice of resignation at least 14 days in advance of the date of resignation to the department head. Immediately upon receipt of such notice of resignation, the department head shall forward the notice to the commissioner of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-378. - Termination. 
An employee may be terminated from the service of the city for reasons other than causes set forth in section 114-528. Such reasons may include, but are not limited to lack of funding, grant expiration, completion of an employment contract, organizational restructuring, loss of a required license, or elimination of job functions. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-379. - Layoff or reduction in force 
(a)  This section shall apply to regular employees within the classified service. 
(b)  A reduction in force (RIF) occurs when an agency is obliged to demote, separate or furlough one or more employees because of lack of work, shortage of funds, reorganization, changes in service priorities or technology, or budgetary concerns requiring adjustments to the workforce based on skill set needs and appropriate staffing levels. The cause of reduction in force may come from legislative action or from decisions of the head of the agency or some official who has been authorized to make such decisions. 
(c)  Reduction in force may not be used for the purpose of dismissing or demoting regular status employees whose job performance is not acceptable. The progressive discipline process and adverse action procedures, as set forth in City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances 114-526 et seq., should be applied when performance problems arise. A RIF shall not be used for the purpose of altering the racial or sexual composition of a department or classification. 
(d)  If a RIF is solely based on shortage of funds or budgetary concerns, the mayor should consider using other means prior to initiating a RIF, such as hiring freezes, reduction through attrition, furloughs without pay, reduced workweeks, reassignments or other methods to lessen the negative impact of such an action. 
(e)  It shall be the responsibility of the commissioner of human resources, upon recommendation of the appointing authority, to define the area within which the mechanics of the RIF are to apply. This area shall normally be city wide, department wide, or officewide. A more expanded or restricted area may be established when it is determined to be more practical. 
(f)  The appointing authority, with the power to appoint and remove subordinate employees as defined in City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances section 114-76, based on specific procedures established by the commissioner of human resources, will be responsible for developing a departmental RIF plan in keeping with this section. This departmental plan must be approved by the commissioner of human resources prior to implementation. 
(g)  Determination of the positions/employees to be included in a RIF shall be made in a manner that maximizes services provided while maintaining the efficient use of available public funds. Accordingly, RIF determinations shall be based upon a totality of factors including but not limited to employee job performance history, business needs of the city or the affected department, feasibility of consolidating duties from one or more positions into a single position, elimination of unnecessary or redundant services, and identification of new service priorities. The appointing authority and commissioner of human resources shall apply their best business judgment in implementing a RIF so that the resulting workforce is an appropriate size and composition to address current operational needs and to promote the public interest in the effective management of city government. 
(h)  All individuals within each affected class will compete for the remaining positions in that class based on retention points. Individuals not selected to be retained in the remaining positions will be placed in a RIF pool in priority order based on retention points. Retention points will be determined pursuant to city administrative policies and procedures, and seniority and performance evaluations will be the deciding factors. 
(i)  The commissioner of human resources, at least 14 calendar days prior to the date of separation or demotion, shall notify in writing any regular employees scheduled to be demoted or laid off. 
(j)  Employees in the classified service shall have the right to appeal to the civil service board a failure to follow procedure in the administration of the RIF, but shall not have the right to appeal the reason for this reduction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No.2016-31(16-O-1375) , § 1, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 114-380. - Fitness-for-duty. 
The head of the department, with the approval of the commissioner of human resources, shall have the right to direct any employee within such department to be examined by a physician or psychologist to be designated by the city. Upon the discovery of a physical disability or psychological condition of any kind which impairs the employee's ability to perform his/her essential job functions or which makes the employee's continuance on the job a direct threat to the safety of self or others, the following action shall be taken: 
(1)  If there is a dispute as to a physical disability of such person to be restored to such person's position with the city, the question of physical qualifications shall be submitted to arbitration. To constitute the board of arbitration, the city shall select one physician or surgeon, the person claiming employment shall select one physician or surgeon and the two so selected shall select a third. The report of such board shall be final and conclusive upon the question presented and shall not be subject to appeal to the civil service board. Reasonable expenses of such board and compensation of the members thereof shall be paid by the city. 
(2)  Should the board of arbitration determine that the physical disability is a correctable one, the employee shall be allowed a specified period of time, as determined by the board of arbitration, in which to have such disability corrected. Such time in which to correct the disability shall be charged to the sick leave of such employee until exhausted, then to the annual leave of such employee until exhausted and then to leave without pay. Should the employee fail to take steps to have the physical disability corrected within the specified time, such employee shall be subject to disciplinary action or layoff. 
(3)  The Commissioner of Human Resources along with the Chief Psychologist for the City of Atlanta will compile an independent and diverse panel of up to ten licensed mental health professionals to conduct the psychological fitness for duty examinations. An employee subject to a fitness for duty for a psychological condition shall not be entitled to a second opinion from a licensed psychologist, however they will be entitled to submit medical records from a personal medical professional to be considered in the process. 
(4)  If, in the opinion of the examining physician, the disability cannot be corrected, the department head, with the assistance of the commissioner of human resources, shall take the following action: 
a.  Attempt to place the employee in another position in which the employee can satisfactorily perform the duties of such position. 
b.  Separate the employee from the civil service, if placement cannot be successfully accomplished. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2017-93(17-O-1829), § 1, 12-13-17 ) 
Sec. 114-381. - Dismissal 
(a)  Dismissal from the civil service shall constitute discharge or separation for just cause, which shall include but shall not be limited to delinquency, misconduct, inefficiency in performance or inability to perform assigned duties, insubordination or willful violation of this Code or the provisions of any city ordinance or of any rule or regulation of the city and any department thereof. 
(b)  As to offenses for which progressive discipline is applicable, a classified employee shall not be dismissed until progressive steps of discipline have been taken, without positive results therefrom, and until the employee to be discharged has been presented in writing with specifically stated reasons for such discharge. A copy of the document stating such reasons shall be filed by the department head with the commissioner of human resources prior to the effective date of such action. Any employee so discharged shall have the right to appeal such action to the civil service board according to the appeal process outlined in article VI, division 2 of this chapter and shall have the right to be represented before such board by any individual of such employee's choice. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-382. - Retirement. 
The  retirement of an employee from the civil service shall consist of the voluntary separation of an employee who has met the requirements of age and length of service under the law governing the pension fund of which such employee is a member or the mandatory separation of an employee who has attained the age of mandatory retirement. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Charter reference— Retirement, § 3-506. 
Sec. 114-383. - Death. 
Separation from the civil service shall be effective as of the date of the death of the employee. All compensation, including vacation pay, due to such employee as of the effective date of separation shall be paid to the beneficiary of the employee or the surviving spouse of such employee, as may be determined by law or by the applicable executed documents in the pension folder of such employee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-384. - Separation on account of private contract management or operation, privatization or outsourcing of city services. 
(a)  Separation from the civil service system on account of private contract management, privatization, managed competition, or outsourcing of city services occurs when the city determines by legislative action that it is in the best interest of the city to have city services privately managed, operated, privatized or outsourced and when it is necessary action to terminate and transfer employees within the civil service system to the workforce of a private contractor, agency or entity. 
(b)  Separation of city employees from the civil service system on account of private contract management, privatization, managed competition, or outsourcing of city services shall be effective as of the commencement date of the contract which consummates the terms and conditions for the management, operation, privatization or outsourcing of city services. 
(c)  This section shall apply to all regular employees of the city within the classified service. However, separations pursuant to this Code section may not be appealed to the civil service board. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-385. - Exit interviews. 
(a)  An exit interview shall be utilized in order to provide the city with the reason for the termination by an employee of the employee's service with the city. 
(b)  An exit interview program shall be established by the commissioner of human resources. Where possible, each employee who separates from city service shall be given the opportunity to be interviewed by the commissioner of human resources or designee prior to the time such employee receives final payment for the employee's services. Should such a personal exit interview not be feasible, the commissioner of human resources shall attempt to achieve such interview through the mail. The results of such exit interview shall be maintained by the commissioner of human resources and may be utilized by the applicable department head and the commissioner of human resources, as may be deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-386—114-395. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 

Sec. 114-396. - Objective. 
The commissioner of human resources shall prepare a system for evaluating the work performance of all employees in the civil service. Such employee performance evaluation shall be used primarily to inform employees as to the status of their work performance and as to methods of improving such performance. The performance evaluation shall be used in determining the annual increase. The performance evaluation may also be used as a basis for training, promotion, demotion, transfer or dismissal and for such other purposes as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-397. - Period of evaluation. 
All classified employees shall be evaluated prior to the expiration of a six-month interval following an original appointment or promotion. All classified and unclassified employees shall be evaluated annually and upon separation from service. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-398. - Evaluation. 
Evaluations shall be prepared by the immediate supervisor of each employee and reviewed by the appropriate appointing authority. A supervisory employee who is leaving a position shall be required to submit performance evaluation forms on all of the employees under such supervisor's supervision who have not been evaluated within the previous six-month period. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-399. - Review with employee. 
The evaluator shall discuss each performance evaluation with the employee being evaluated and provide the employee with an official copy. The appointing authority shall establish an internal procedure to review the evaluation of any employee who disagrees with the performance evaluation rating. The appointing authority shall be the final authority in resolving disagreements. In the event the appointing authority and the evaluator are one and the same, the final authority for resolving disagreements rests with the chief operating officer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-400. - Confidentiality. 
Performance evaluations shall be confidential and shall be available only to the employee evaluated, the supervisors in the employee's chain of command, the appointing authority or designee, the commissioner of human resources and to the mayor upon request and when requested under the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. 50-18-70 through 50-18-76. Evaluations of employees of the city council shall be confidential and available to the supervisor of those employees, the commissioner of human resources and to members of the city council. All performance evaluation forms shall be signed by the employee and the immediate supervisor and reviewed by the appointing authority or designee. 
The employee's signature will not be interpreted as an agreement with the evaluation but rather, that the employee has reviewed and discussed the performance evaluation with the immediate supervisor. 
Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit performance evaluations, where relevant, from being used as evidence in civil service board proceedings or in other legal proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-401. - Changes in evaluation. 
If for any reason a department head shall request an alteration of the performance evaluation form after it has been officially submitted to the commissioner of human resources, such request shall be made in writing and shall set forth fully the reasons for the request. The request shall become part of the official performance evaluation. Any changes in evaluation shall be discussed with the employee being evaluated, and such employee shall have the right of review and appeal, the same as with the original evaluation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-402—114-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - ATTENDANCE AND LEAVE 

Sec. 114-411. - Hours of work. 
The hours of work in the civil service shall be determined in accordance with the needs of the city and the convenience of the public. The work schedule for each department shall be established by the department head in conjunction with the commissioner of human resources and approval of the mayor. Unless otherwise specified, the workweek for employees other than those engaged in public safety activities shall normally consist of eight hours during each of five consecutive 24-hour periods, which may begin on any day of the week and at any hour of the day. Such workweek may also consist of eight hours during each of five consecutive 24-hour periods for a position shared by two or more persons, where such work is established by the department head in conjunction with the commissioner of human resources and approved by the mayor. Hours of work for public safety sworn officers may be established consistent with the needs of the department and applicable FLSA standards. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-412. - Lunch period. 
Employees shall be allowed 45 minutes for lunch or any other meal taken during the workday or worknight, except that the respective department heads may at their discretion reduce to 30 minutes the lunch period for personnel who work outside and are not required to report to city hall or other offices daily and shall prescribe appropriate lunch period regulations for employees whose continuous presence on the job is required. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-413. - Attendance. 
Each department head shall be responsible for the attendance of all officers and employees within the department, and the department head shall keep complete attendance records, including annual leave, sick leave, overtime, etc. All employees non-exempt from FLSA must have a regular time-keeping method. Employees exempt from FLSA may do exception time-keeping. All leave shall be authorized in one hour increments, and shall be in compliance with FLSA. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-414. - Holidays. 
(a)  Designation, effect. The following days shall be legal holidays for employees of the city: 
(1)  January 1, New Year's Day. 
(2)  Third Monday in January, Martin Luther King, Jr.'s birthday. 
(3)  Last Monday in May, Memorial Day. 
(4)  July 4, Independence Day. 
(5)  First Monday in September, Labor Day. 
(6)  November 11, Veterans Day. 
(7)  Fourth Thursday in November, Thanksgiving. 
(8)  Day after Thanksgiving. 
(9)  December 25, Christmas Day. 
(b)  Holidays observed. Whenever any holiday shall fall on an employee's first normal weekly off-day, the preceding day will be taken as a holiday. If the designated holiday falls on an employee's regular second weekly off-day, the succeeding day will be taken as a holiday. All employees, except those who shall be necessary in order to carry on essential functions of the government of the city, shall receive a holiday on the days set forth in subsection (a) of this section. Those employees who are required to work on an observed holiday other than the designated holiday shall be given another day off within the calendar year for the holiday not observed. 
(c)  Premium payment for holiday work performed. Employees shall be eligible for compensation for work performed on a holiday only if the employee works on the actual day designated as the holiday in subsection (a) of this section. For purposes of this section the holiday for premium pay purposes is the 24-hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m. and ending at 12:00 midnight of the designated day. Notwithstanding anything in this subsection, no employee may receive more than eight hours at premium pay rate for any one holiday, except for firefighters assigned to a 54-hour week, who may be paid premium pay for a maximum of 12 hours for each designated holiday worked. 
(d)  Necessary workers. The department head shall determine those employees necessary to render service on a designated holiday. These employees who are required to work on a designated holiday as defined in subsection (a) of this section will be compensated as follows: 
(1)  Exempt employees. Exempt employees who do not receive a holiday on any of the holidays named in subsection (a) of this section because of the necessity of their remaining on duty shall receive some other day in lieu of the holiday not received, and such holiday shall be given affected employees within the calendar year of the holiday not observed. 
(2)  Nonexempt employees. All nonexempt employees who do not receive a holiday on any of the holidays named in subsection (a) of this section because of the necessity of their remaining on duty shall be paid at a premium holiday rate equal to their regular rate plus one and one-half times their regular rate of pay for each hour of work for that day. 
(e)  Eligibility requirements. An employee shall be entitled to regular pay on any holiday, provided the employee has worked the regularly scheduled workday immediately before and the regularly scheduled workday immediately after the holiday or is on approved leave with pay on those days. Holidays which shall occur during the time that an employee is on annual or sick leave shall not be charged against such holidays based upon the number of hours that such employees normally work each day. Temporary employees shall not be paid for holidays not worked. 
(f)  Exceptions. Those city employees who are housed in buildings of other governments will observe the holidays of that government. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-415. - Annual leave (vacation). 
Annual leave for an employee may be requested for personal or emergency reasons or for vacation. Temporary employees shall not be eligible for annual leave, and part-time employees shall be entitled to annual leave only in proportion to the number of hours worked as compared to the normal workweek. Annual leave shall be granted only in compliance with the following: 
(1)  The vacation system for all city employees shall be: 

 
The time shall be accrued in equal parts each pay period and shall be cumulative; however, no employee may carry forward from one year to the next any vacation in excess of the maximum vacation carryover determined in accordance with the length of service as specified in this subsection. 
(2)  A request for annual leave shall be submitted to the employee's immediate supervisor on a form approved by the commissioner of human resources. Leave may be taken only after approval by the appropriate department or office head. Such leave shall be scheduled in accordance with the needs of the respective departments and the budgetary limitations governing the employment of additional or temporary help. Annual leave for vacation, insofar as possible, will be granted in accordance with employee preference and departmental seniority. 
(3)  Employees shall not be permitted to exchange annual leave for cash payment except as provided in this subsection. Any officer or employee entitled to annual leave with pay who terminates, is terminated, retires or is laid off, prior to taking vacation time earned, shall be continued on the payroll of the city and shall be presumed to have commenced annual leave on the workday following the last day such officer or employee reported for work. Any such employee, at the employee's election, may receive cash payment in exchange for such unused accrued annual leave. 
(4)  One hour increments shall be the minimum charge for annual leave, and additional annual leave shall be charged in multiples of one hour. 
(5)  Leave shall be used only when earned, and annual leave with pay shall not be allowed in advance of being earned. Should an employee have insufficient leave to cover a period of absence, no advance shall be granted, and such absence shall be without pay. 
(6)  If an officer or employee dies, all compensation, including vacation pay, due to such employee as of the date of death shall be paid to the beneficiary of such employee, the surviving spouse or domestic partner of such employee or to the estate of such employee, as may be determined by law or by the applicable executed documents in the pension records of such employee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-416. - Sick leave. 
(a)  All officers and employees, except uniformed members of the department of fire, who are entitled to earn annual leave shall also be entitled to earn sick leave with full pay to be computed on the basis of one-fourth day for each five days of full-time paid service. Sick leave shall not be granted to temporary employees. 
(b)  Sick leave may be accumulated to an unlimited amount based upon the following stipulations: 
(1)  The base accumulation shall be 30 working days. 
(2)  Any sick leave used shall be from the base 30 days until this amount shall have been exhausted. 
(c)  Accumulation above 30 days shall be handled in the following manner: 
(1)  When an officer or an employee shall have accumulated 30 days of sick leave by the end of the last pay period in November, such officer or employee may be paid in cash each year by December 25 for one-fourth of the accumulated sick leave beyond the 30 days, and the other three-fourths above the 30 days shall be added to the sick leave reserve fund of such officer or employee. 
(2)  No charge will be made against this sick leave reserve fund until the base accumulation of 30 days has been exhausted and until a valid medical certificate has been presented as to the nature of the employee's illness. Any sick leave granted beyond 60 days from the reserve fund must have the approval of the chief financial officer or designee. 
(d)  In emergencies, officers and employees who, because of protracted illness, shall have used all accumulated sick leave and annual leave may be advanced sick leave upon the recommendation of the commissioner of human resources and the approval of the chief financial officer. To ensure the uniformity among the various departments, requests for advanced sick leave shall be addressed by the appropriate department head to the commissioner of human resources, who, upon investigation, shall make recommendation to the chief financial officer. Such advanced sick leave accruing to the credit of the officer or employee shall be charged against annual leave, exclusive of five days per year, accruing to the officer or employee. Should the employment of an officer or employee be terminated before the advanced sick leave has been repaid, there shall be a deduction of one day's pay, based on the rate of pay at the time of termination, for each day of sick leave advanced from the final pay or any other sum due such officer or employee. 
(e)  One-hour shall be the minimum charge for sick leave, and additional sick leave shall be charged in multiples of one hour. 
(f)  To receive sick leave with pay, the employee shall notify such employee's immediate supervisor or department head prior to or within one hour after the time set for the beginning of such employee's daily duties. Failure to so notify the supervisor, office director or department head may result in one day's loss of pay, and an additional day's loss of pay shall result for each succeeding day in which notification is not received. An employee of a department operating on a 24-hour basis must provide such notification within the time limit established by the office director or department head. 
(g)  An officer or employee eligible for sick leave with pay shall be granted such leave by the department head for the following reasons: 
(1)  Personal illness, injury or disability. 
(2)  Consultation or treatment for personal medical, dental or optical conditions. 
(3)  Exposure to a contagious disease which would endanger others. 
(4)  Maternity. 
(5)  Death or illness of a member of an employee's family or of an employee's domestic partner which requires the employee's personal care and attendance. An employee's family is defined as members of the same household related to each other by blood or marriage and living in a bona fide family relationship and who are either: 
a.  Legal dependents of the employee; 
b.  Parent, child, brother, sister, father-in-law and mother-in-law; or 
c.  Another relative who has been in a parent-child relationship to the employee. 
(6)  Death of a member of the employee's family, plus grandparents (both natural and in-laws), grandchildren, brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law. 
(h)  Under the following circumstances, a medical certificate executed by a licensed physician or chiropractor may be required by the employee's office director or department head in order to substantiate a request for sick leave: 
(1)  Any period of absence due to illness consisting of three or more consecutive working days, except that the fire chief shall adopt a policy requiring a doctor or chiropractor certificate in the department of fire. The policy shall be consistent with the intent of this article. 
(2)  Request for sick leave during a period when the employee is on annual leave. 
(3)  The occurrence of frequent or habitual absences from duty, provided the employee has been notified or warned that a certificate would be required. 
(i)  Any employee who is absent from work due to illness for a period of five or more consecutive days shall, prior to being allowed to return to work, obtain a medical certificate executed by a licensed physician or chiropractor. 
(j)  Should an employee utilize sick leave for purposes other than those set forth in this section, such time off shall be without pay. The employee may also be subjected to disciplinary action. 
(k)  An officer or an employee who leaves the service of the city and is reemployed within 90 days, upon compliance with the regulations then in force, shall be credited with all unused and nonpaid sick leave, not to exceed 30 days. 
(l)  Whenever an officer or employee is granted a leave of absence without pay and returns to the service of the city at the conclusion of such leave or has been laid off, upon reinstatement, the officer or employee shall be credited with all sick leave standing to the credit of the officer or employee on the effective date of the beginning of the leave of absence or layoff. No sick leave shall be accrued during a leave of absence without pay or during a layoff. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-417. - Military leave. 
(a)  Short-term military leave. In addition to the rights and benefits provided to employees taking extended military leave as described in section (b) below, regular full-time employees who must be absent from their job for a period of not more than 18 working days each year in order to participate in temporary military duty or training are entitled to receive up to 18 days paid military leave per year. All benefits will continue during an employee's short-term military leave. 
(b)  Extended military leave. Employees directed to participate in extended military duties in the U.S. Armed Forces that exceed 18 working days per year will receive paid military leave for the first 18 days of such military service per year, and shall be paid the difference between the military salary and current city salary for workdays 19 through 25 in any calendar year if such service is in conjunction with, or support of, homeland security or military action against terrorism, and thereafter be placed on an unpaid military leave of absence status for a period up to five years from the initial date of military service, and will be entitled to the rights and benefits described below, subject to the procedures outlined below. 
(c)  Procedure for military leave. 
(1)  The employee will provide the immediate supervisor with notice, (either verbal or written) that the employee will be engaging in military service. The employee should provide such notice as soon as they have knowledge of upcoming military service. 
(2)  An employee on short-term or extended military leave may, at the employee's option, use any or all accrued paid annual leave or compensatory time while absent. 
(3)  When the employee intends to return to work, a notification of reinstatement must be submitted to the applicable department head and to the commissioner of human resources within the application period set forth below. 
(4)  If the employee does not return to work, the supervisor must notify the applicable department head and the commissioner of human resources so that appropriate action may be taken. 
(d)  Benefits. If an employee is absent from work due to military service, benefits will continue as follows: 
(1)  If an employee has military orders for over 31 days, the employee and covered dependents may be offered health insurance coverage as long as the employee pays the required premium. 
(2)  Any group term life/AD&D insurance provided by the city for the employee will be suspended the day the employee becomes active military. Any group term life/AD&D insurance provided by the city for the benefit of dependents will remain in effect as long as the employee pays the required premium. 
(3)  Any group long-term disability insurance provided by the city will be suspended the day the employee becomes active military. 
(4)  No employee shall accrue annual or sick leave while on unpaid military leave of absence status. 
(5)  With respect to the city's retirement plans, upon reemployment, an employee who has taken military leave will be credited for purposes of vesting with the time spent in military service and will be treated as not having incurred a break in service. Immediately upon reinstatement, the employee may, at the employee's election, make any or all employee contributions that the employee would have been eligible to make had the employee's employment not been interrupted by military service. Such contributions must be made within a period that begins with the employee's reinstatement and that is not greater in duration than three times the length of the employee's military service, not to exceed five years. The employee will receive all associated city matches for such contributions. 
(6)  Voluntary supplemental life/AD&D insurance will suspend the day the employee becomes active military. Converting to an individual policy will continue voluntary dependent life insurance coverage. To exercise this conversion option, dependents must submit a written application and the first premium payment within 31 days immediately following the suspension of coverage. 
(e)  Reinstatement. Upon an employee's prompt application for reinstatement (as defined below), an employee will be reinstated to employment in the following manner depending upon the employee's period of military service: 
(1)  For a period of one to 90 days: 
a.  In the position of employment in which the person would have been employed if the continuous employment of such person with the employer had not been interrupted by such service, the duties of which the person is qualified to perform; or 
b.  In the position of employment in which the person was employed on the date of the commencement of the service in the uniformed services, only if the person is not qualified to perform the duties of the position referred to in subparagraph (a) after reasonable efforts by the employer to qualify the person. 
(2)  91 or more days: 
a.  In the position of employment in which the person would have been employed if the continuous employment of such person with the city had not been interrupted by such service, or a position of like seniority, status and pay, the duties of which the person is qualified to perform; or 
b.  In the position of employment in which the person was employed on the date of the commencement of the service in the uniformed services, or a position of like seniority, status and pay, the duties of which the person is qualified to perform, only if the person is not qualified to perform the duties of a position referred to in subparagraph (a) after reasonable efforts by the city to qualify the person. 
(3)  Employee with a service-connected disability - if after reasonable accommodation efforts by the city, an employee with a service-connected disability is not qualified for employment in the position that would have been attained or in the position that was vacated, the employee will be employed in: 
a.  Any other position of similar seniority, status and pay for which the employee is qualified or could become qualified with reasonable efforts by the city, or 
b.  If no such position exists, in the nearest approximation consistent with the circumstances of the employee's situation. 
(f)  Application for reinstatement. An employee who has engaged in military service must, in order to be entitled to the reinstatement rights set forth above, submit an application for reinstatement according to the following schedule: 
(1)  If service is less than 31 days (or for the purpose of taking an examination to determine fitness for service) —The employee must report for reinstatement at the beginning of the first full regularly scheduled working period on the first calendar day following completion of service and the expiration of eight hours rest and after a time for safe transportation back to the employee's residence. 
(2)  If service is for 31 days or more but less than 180 days —The employee must submit an application for reinstatement with the applicable department head and the commissioner of human resources no later than 14 days following the completion of service. 
(3)  If service is 181 days or over —The employee must submit an application for reinstatement with the applicable department head and the commissioner of human resources no later than 90 days following the completion of service. 
(4)  If the employee is hospitalized or convalescing from a service-connected injury —The employee must submit an application for reinstatement with the applicable department head and the commissioner of human resources no later than two years following completion of service. 
(g)  Exceptions to reemployment. In addition to the employee's failure to apply for reemployment in a timely manner, an employee is not entitled to reinstatement as described above if either of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The city's circumstances have so changed as to make reemployment impossible or unreasonable. 
(2)  The employee did not receive an honorable discharge from military service. 
(h)  General benefits upon reinstatement. An employees reinstated following military leave will receive seniority and other benefits determined by seniority that the employee had at the beginning of the military leave, plus any additional seniority and benefits the employee would have attained, with reasonable certainty, had the individual remained continuously employed. In addition, an employee's time spent on active military duty will be counted toward their eligibility for FMLA leave once they return to their job with the city. 
(i)  Documentation. The applicable department head will, upon the employee's reinstatement, request that the employee provide the city with military discharge documentation (DD214) to establish the length and character of the employee's military service. 
(j)  Examination. An employee, ordered to appear for a physical examination for induction into the military service, shall be granted leave with pay for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-418. - Family leave. 
(a)  An employee who is the primary caregiver for a child/children shall be entitled to time off with pay not to exceed six weeks upon the occurrence of any of the following events: 
(1)  Birth of a biological child or children; or 
(2)  Legal adoption of a child or children; or 
(3)  Becoming a foster parent to a child or children through the Georgia Division of Family and Children's Services, or a related or successor state agency. 
(b)  An employee who is the non-primary caregiver for a child/children shall be entitled to time off with pay not to exceed two weeks for family leave to support a domestic partner or spouse upon the occurrence of any events listed in subsection (a) of this Code section related to the formation of a legally recognized parent-child or foster parent-child relationship. 
(c)  Employees shall provide documentation of the basis for any leave requested under this Code section. 
(d)  Family leave provided in this Code section shall run concurrently with FMLA leave. 
( Ord. No. 2015-34(15-O-1142), § 4, 6-25-15 ) 
Sec. 114-419. - Civil leave. 
(a)  An employee shall be entitled to time off with pay when performing jury duty or when subpoenaed to appear before any public body or commission, except when summoned to appear for personal matters. An employee will be permitted to take any necessary time off to vote in any municipal, county, state or federal political party primary or election, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-404. Such necessary time off shall not exceed two hours, and if the hours of work of such employee commence at least two hours after the opening of the polls or end at least two hours prior to the closing of the polls, the time off for voting need not apply. The employee's supervisor may specify the hours which may be used as provided in this section. 
(b)  An employee shall be entitled to time off with pay to work at the polls during a City of Atlanta Municipal Election, provided proper approval is received from the supervisor or department head of the employee. Eligible employees must submit an application to the Fulton or DeKalb County Department of Registration and Election, in accordance with applicable regulations, to be approved and selected to work at the polls on Election Day. 
(c)  An employee, while taking examinations before a federal, state or other governmental agency, may be granted leave with pay if such examinations are pertinent to the employment of such employee with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-420, 114-421. - Reserved. 
Sec. 114-422. - Leave of absence without pay. 
A department head, with notification to the commissioner of human resources, may grant a regular employee a leave of absence without pay for a period not to exceed one year. The granting of a leave of absence without pay shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Leave without pay shall be granted only when such will not adversely affect the interest of the service of the city. 
(2)  Failure of an employee to return to work at the expiration of approved leave shall be considered as absence without leave and shall be grounds for dismissal. 
(3)  An employee granted leave of absence without pay and who wishes to return before the leave period has expired shall be required to give the department head of such employee written notice of such wish at least two weeks in advance of the date such employee wishes to return. Upon giving such notice, the employee shall be permitted to return to work on the date specified, unless the employee's position has been temporarily filled by another employee for the period of time originally specified in the leave of absence. 
(4)  The officers and employees may continue group life and health insurance benefits while on leave of absence from the employ of the city, provided that such leave of absence is granted for one of the following reasons: military leave, maternity leave, sick leave or study leave of absence. The premium payments for such insurance shall be made by the employee. 
(5)  Upon the return from a leave without pay, the employee shall occupy the salary grade which such employee occupied at the time of the commencement of the leave; provided, however, that any across-the-board increases granted during such employee's leave shall be granted to such employee. 
(6)  Upon the return from a leave without pay, the employee shall be entitled to employment in the department and in the same or equivalent class in which such employee was employed at the time of commencement of the leave. 
(7)  An employee who obtains employment elsewhere while on an authorized leave of absence shall forfeit such employee's position of employment with the city. 
(8)  An unclassified employee who is granted a leave of absence without pay to work on a political campaign shall have the employee's position of employment abolished with the city if the leave of absence to work on the political campaign extends for more than three months. 
(9)  All leaves of absence granted under this section, except leaves of absence to work on political campaigns, will be reviewed by the department head three months from the date such leave of absence begins to determine if it is in the best interest of the city for such leave to continue. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-423. - Compensatory time. 
(a)  Employees nonexempt from FLSA may be given compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay at the same overtime rate to which the employee is entitled. 
(b)  Employees exempt from FLSA may be given compensatory time off at the rate of one hour for each hour worked beyond their regularly scheduled work period. Exempt employees are not eligible for overtime pay. 
(c)  Each employee must use all compensatory time accrued by the end of the calendar year in which the time was earned. Except when work exigencies prevent the use of properly requested and approved leave, such leave may, with the request of the department head and the approval of the commissioner of human resources, be used in the following calendar year. 
(d)  All city employees who qualify can accrue a maximum of 160 hours of compensatory time. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-424. - Disability leave. 
(a)  This section shall apply to both the classified and unclassified service of the city. Any employee who is covered by the state workers' compensation act and who suffers an on-the-job injury which is compensable under O.C.G.A. tit. 34, ch. 9 (O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq.), the state workers' compensation act, may receive salary in lieu of workers' compensation during the period of disability as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Receipt of salary during such disability leave shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No compensation in the form of disability leave shall be allowed for the first three working days of incapacity resulting from an injury; however, if an employee is incapacitated for 28 consecutive days following an injury, disability leave shall be paid for such first three working days of incapacity. 
(2)  When an employee is injured in the line of duty, the department head shall file a report of the injury using form WC1 of the state board of workers' compensation, which must be received by the department of finance within 48 hours of the injury and which must be supplemented, if necessary, to advise fully of the injury and all related circumstances. 
(3)  A physician selected by the employee from the panel of physicians posted by the city under the provisions of the state workers' compensation act must be used to determine the extent of such employee's injury, the physical impairment of the employee resulting from the injury, the disability of such employee, the physical ability of such employee to continue to perform the duties of such employee's position or perform the duties of other positions and the physical ability of such employee to return to such employee's position after recovery from the injury. 
(4)  Should the employee's physical condition, as determined by the medical evaluation described in this subsection, warrant, such employee may be assigned by such employee's department head to the duties of other positions during the period of recuperation from injury or to any position citywide by the commissioner of human resources, should no appropriate position be available within such employee's department. 
(5)  Disability leave with full salary shall not exceed 90 calendar days from the date of injury, unless the authorized physician shall certify that such employee is unable to perform any duties during the period of recuperation from injury. In such case, the department of finance may extend the period of disability leave with full salary in increments of not more than 90 calendar days to a maximum period not to exceed six months from the date of such injury. The employee shall provide a doctor's certification of inability to perform duties every 30 days to continue to receive injury-on-the-job compensation. Thereafter, should the employee be physically unable to work as determined by the authorized physician, such employee shall be allowed to utilize all accrued sick and annual leave or be paid the rate provided by the state workers' compensation act. The payment of full salary as sick or annual leave shall be considered payment of full salary in lieu of workers' compensation income benefits provided by the state workers' compensation act. Holidays which occur during the employee's absence on disability leave shall not be accrued for use upon return to work. 
(6)  A temporary employee who is disabled in the line of duty shall not receive disability leave but shall be paid in accordance with the state workers' compensation act. 
(7)  Payments of salary made to an employee on disability leave shall be subject to subrogation rights by the city in those instances where payments of salary shall be made to the employee as a result of the act of a third party and if such employee should obtain a recovery from the third party. Any and all information necessary in order to effect such subrogation rights shall be furnished to the department of finance by the head of the department in which the employee was working at the time of the injury, and the employee shall be subject to dismissal from employment for refusing to cooperate in effecting the subrogation rights of the city. 
(c)  The commissioner of human resources is authorized to identify appropriate jobs which may be filled by those officers or employees subject to 1981 Ga. Laws, page 3569 and for purposes of O.C.G.A. tit. 34, ch. 9 (O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq.), the workers' compensation act. Such job assignments shall be known as "modified duty." 
(d)  All city employees who are not covered by the city's pension plan shall be paid only the compensation required by the state workers' compensation act (O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq.). 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, a sworn officer of the department of police shall be deemed to be injured in line of duty upon the occurrence of any of the following: 
(1)  The officer sustains an injury while on duty performing such officer's normal functions 
(2)  The officer sustains an injury while in the course of employment with another employer, within the boundaries of the city, pursuant to a valid permit approved by the department of police, and while taking appropriate and necessary action for the protection of the public. 
(3)  The officer sustains an injury while off duty performing a duty that is authorized by the rules and regulations of the department of police and which is appropriate and necessary for the protection of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-425. - Absence without leave. 
Any absence of an employee from duty for all or part of a day which is not authorized by a specific grant of leave of absence under this division shall be deemed to be an absence without leave. Any such absence shall be one without pay, and shall subject the employee so absent to disciplinary action. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-426. - Blood donation leave of absence. 
An employee shall be entitled to a leave of absence of not more than 16 hours in each calendar year without loss of pay for the purpose of donating blood. This absence shall be computed at four hours per donation, up to four times per year upon satisfactory evidence of having donated or attempted to donate blood. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-427. - Leave to serve on an approved city employee board or commission. 
City employees who are elected to or appointed to an approved city employee board or commission may attend meetings and other official functions of such board during such employees' regular or assigned working hours, and the time spent attending such meetings and functions shall not be charged to such employees' leave time, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The employees shall notify, in writing, their immediate supervisors of their attendance at such meeting not less than 48 hours prior to the scheduled date and time of the meeting. With regard to specially called or emergency meetings, the employees shall notify, in writing, their immediate supervisors of such meeting as soon as is practicable under the circumstances. In the case of emergency or special meetings called on short notice, reasonable accommodation shall be afforded the employee; however, if an employee's services are deemed indispensable by such employee's supervisors, the needs of the service shall take precedence over the board or commission meeting. 
(2)  Should it become necessary for an employee to travel out of the city in connection with such employee's official duties as a member of any city board or commission, or other such board or commission where city employee representation is required, such time shall be charged in the same manner as that related to absences while on official business of the city. 
(3)  The time taken pursuant to this section for attendance at meetings and other official functions of boards and commissions of the city or other such boards and commissions where city employee representation is required shall not exceed 48 hours per year for regular, special or emergency called meetings and shall not exceed three days per year for travel out of the city. Travel out of the city for "53 hour" employees of the fire department shall not exceed six days per year. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-428. - Paid leave for health screenings for certain health concerns. 
(a)  The city shall make available up to four hours of paid leave, one time per calendar year, to regular, full-time city employees for the purpose of undergoing health screening for cardiovascular disease, cancer, HIV, diabetes and pneumonia/influenza. 
(b)  Employees must submit to their supervisor or appropriate department personnel representative a signed copy of the medical documentation verifying they underwent a health screening for one or more of the above illness or disease processes, in order to be granted leave under provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-429. - Voluntary shared leave program. 
(a)  Purpose and applicability. The purpose of this section is to set forth procedures and requirements for a "Voluntary Shared Leave Program" under which leave (annual, sick and compensatory time) may be transferred from one employee to another in the event the receiving employee or an immediate family member suffers from a serious illness or injury that necessitates the employee's absence from work. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Family member refers to the following relatives of the employee: 
a.  Spouse or domestic partner and his/her parents; 
b.  Children, including adopted children, and their spouses; 
c.  Parents; 
d.  Brothers and sisters and their spouses; and 
e.  Any individual related by blood or whose close association is the equivalent of a family relationship. 
(2)  Leave recipient means an employee who receives donated leave. 
(3)  Leave donor means an employee who voluntarily transfers leave to the shared leave account of a leave recipient. 
(4)  Severe illness or injury means a catastrophic medical condition of an employee or a family member that would require the employee's absence from work for an extended period of time and would result in a loss of income. 
(5)  Shared leave account refers to an account established for a leave recipient to receive donated leave and shall be maintained separately from other leave balances. 
(c)  Requesting shared leave. To be eligible to receive shared leave, an employee shall: 
(1)  Meet the following eligibility requirements: 
a.  Is a regular employee with satisfactory or effective performance rating; 
b.  Incur a severe illness or injury; or 
c.  Serve as a caregiver responsibility for a family member with a severe illness or injury; and 
d.  Has exhausted all accrued leave. 
(2)  Prepare a "shared leave request form" by: 
a.  Obtaining a request form from the supervisor or manager; and 
b.  Submitting a completed form to the supervisor and department head for signatures and transmission of the form, including medical verification, to the department of human resources, before or during the period of leave. 
(3)  Provide medical verification by: 
a.  Obtaining a medical statement signed by a licensed physician that: 
1.  Verifies and describes the incapacitating condition which requires the employee's absence; and 
2.  Provides the beginning date of treatment and the date employee is expected to return to work, or in the case of a family member, the expected duration of the illness. 
b.  Sending the medical statement directly to the department head of the leave recipient. 
(d)  Status while receiving shared leave. 
(1)  Insurance benefits and leave accrual continue if an employee is in a shared leave status. 
(2)  Shared leave ends when an employee returns to work or is separated from employment. If the medical provider recommends a gradual return to work, additional shared leave use may be approved by the commissioner of human resources in conjunction with the recipient's department head. 
(3)  Any employee on shared leave shall be prohibited from taking another job. Violation of this section shall cause the immediate forfeiture of any remaining donated leave. 
(e)  Donating leave. 
(1)  An employee who desires to donate leave shall complete a "voluntary shared leave form" designating the recipient of the leave and the amount and category of leave to be donated. 
(2)  Employees donating leave shall donate a minimum of hours in any leave category. 
a.  An employee may donate no more than 50 percent of the annual or sick leave accrued in a work year. The amount of leave donation shall not exceed 50 percent of the leave balance at the time of donation. 
b.  A non-exempt employee may donate as many hours of compensatory hours as desired. 
(f)  Leave limitations. 
(1)  A leave recipient may receive and be allowed to use no more than 2,080 hours from the date of approval, per occurrence of severe illness or injury; except that sworn employees of the Atlanta Fire Department on a 53-hour schedule shall be entitled to receive and use no more than 2,756 hours. 
(2)  Donated leave may be used only for the severe illness or injury for which the leave recipient is approved. 
(3)  No employee may donate leave to an immediate supervisor. 
(4)  Donated leave may not be used to repay advance sick leave. 
(5)  A leave recipient shall not transfer donated leave to another leave recipient. 
(6)  Unused donated leave shall not be credited to the leave recipient's accrued or earned leave balances, or pension account. Any unused leave shall be forfeited. 
(7)  Nothing in this plan is grievable. 
(8)  Exempt employees may not donate compensatory time. 
(g)  Prohibition of coercion. An employee may not directly or indirectly intimidate, threaten, or coerce, or attempt to intimidate, threaten, or coerce any other employee for the purpose of interfering with respect to donating, receiving, or using sick or vacation leave. 
(h)  Records and reports. 
(1)  The department of human resources shall retain the following documents on individual leave donations: 
a.  Approved and disapproved leave recipient and donor forms; 
b.  Number of hours transferred to each leave recipient; 
c.  Number of donated hours used by each recipient, 
d.  Written notice of termination of severe illness or injury, and 
e.  Any other material pertinent to each leave recipient or donor. 
(2)  Voluntary shared leave program documents must be maintained separately from other employee personnel files. 
(i)  Administrative responsibilities. 
(1)  Department head of leave recipient shall review and provide recommendation concerning employee's request, monitor the status of the employee's severe illness or injury to ensure adherence to the policies and requirements concerning the voluntary shared leave program. 
(2)  The department of human resources shall: 
a.  Review request to become a leave recipient; 
b.  Verify the eligibility of a leave donor; 
c.  Advise when request to become a leave recipient is approved or disapproved; 
d.  Notify the department of finance of request approval; and, 
e.  Notify the department of finance when the leave status has ended. 
(3)  Department of finance shall: 
a.  Make appropriate adjustments to recipient and donor leave balance; and 
b.  Maintain special shared leave account. 
(j)  Confidentiality. This information will be kept confidential to the extent authorized under the Open Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-430—114-435. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT 

Sec. 114-436. - Definition and conditions. 
Outside employment shall constitute any paid employment of an employee which is in addition to such employee's employment with the city. As related to one's employment with the city, outside employment shall only be allowed under the following conditions: 
(1)  Such employment shall not interfere with or affect the performance of the employee's duties. 
(2)  Such employment shall not involve a conflict of interest or a conflict with the employee's duties. 
(3)  Such employment shall not involve the performance of duties which the employee should perform as part of such employee's employment with the city. 
(4)  Such employment shall not occur during the employee's regular or assigned working hours, unless the employee is on either annual leave, compensatory leave or leave without pay. 
(5)  No employee engaging in outside employment shall work at such outside employment for a longer period of time than that stated in the employee's request for permission to engage in such employment. 
(6)  Such employment shall be conditioned upon the employee's being relieved immediately for the return to and performance of the duties of such employee's employment with the city, if such employee should be called for emergency service. 
(7)  Such employment shall not involve the use of records or equipment of the city. Police uniforms shall not be considered equipment in the meaning of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-437. - Procedure. 
(a)  No employee shall perform outside employment without having first filed a written request with such employee's department head for permission to engage in outside employment. Such request shall state the type and duration of employment, the hours of work, the name and business address of the prospective employer and the location of the place at which such employee shall be engaged in outside employment. 
(b)  The department head shall have the right to deny the request or approve the request, provided that such employment is in compliance with section 114-436. 
(c)  The finance/executive committee of the city council shall be notified when outside employment has been approved for employees whose appointments are subject to city council confirmation. Such notification shall be accompanied by a copy of the written request required by subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-438—114-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - EMPLOYEE DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 114-451. - Employee development. 
(a)  The commissioner of human resources shall cooperate with department heads, employees and others in promoting and providing programs of development for the civil service. Such programs shall improve the quality of service rendered to the public and to enhance employees' skills for advancement and career success. 
(b)  The commissioner of human resources shall cooperate with department heads, employees and others in promoting measures directed toward making working conditions more sanitary, safe and healthful. 
(c)  The commissioner of human resources shall create a comprehensive tuition assistance/job training program for all eligible employees of the city. The tuition assistance/job training program shall consist of associate and/or college degree programs and job-specific certification programs that are directly related to an employee's present position or to a reasonable promotional/transfer opportunity within the city that are approved by the commissioner of human resources. Included in the establishment of this program, the commissioner of human resources shall also create policies related to eligibility criteria, application process, performance requirements, and repayment obligations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2015-24(15-O-1194), § 1, 5-27-15 ) 
Sec. 114-452. - Administration of employee development. 
The commissioner of human resources shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Recommend to department heads programs and standards for employee development. 
(2)  Assist department heads in development and implementation of programs to meet the specific needs of such departments and aid in the development and utilization of other techniques for increasing employee efficiency. 
(3)  Develop and implement supervisory, management and other employee development programs for all departments. 
(4)  Provide information concerning career development opportunities for employees. 
(5)  Ensure that all development opportunities and programs are provided to all employees without regard to political affiliation, race, color, national origin, disability, age, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, or religious creed. 
(6)  Maintain a record of all programs and a record of those employees successfully completing such. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2013-24(13-O-1183), § 5-F, 7-16-13) 
Secs. 114-453—114-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LABOR RELATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 114-501. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the labor-management relations ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-502. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adverse action means a disciplinary action taken for cause by a department head or designee which results in suspension without pay, demotion or dismissal of a regular, nonprobationary employee in the classified service of the city or any regular nonprobationary sworn officer of the department of police who holds the rank of lieutenant or below or any regular nonprobationary sworn officer of the department of fire who holds the rank of captain or below. It does not include actions which result from challenging the decision to implement or the scope of a reduction in force or actions resulting from insufficient funds, decrease in funds or departmental reorganization or denial of annual increase based on the employee receiving a less than effective performance evaluation. Adverse actions may be appealed to the civil service board. 
Appeal means a written request by an employee for review by the civil service board of an adverse action, removal from the eligible list, procedures used in a reduction in force or unjust coercion or reprisal as provided in this article. 
Appointing authority means the official, group of officials, acting official or other person designated by the proper authority having the power of appointment, employment or election to or removal from subordinate positions in the city employment service. 
Board means the civil service board of the city. 
Classified service means that which is referenced in 114-84. 
Commissioner, unless otherwise specified, means the commissioner of human resources. 
Counseling means a deliberation or discussion between employee and supervisor in which the employee's supervisor advises the employee regarding the appropriateness of work-related attitudes, behaviors, actions, conduct or performance of the employee and where necessary offers assistance or advise in correcting such. 
Days, unless otherwise specified, means working days. 
Demotion means a change of employment to a position in a class which has a lower maximum salary limit than the class from which the assignment was made. A reduction in pay shall not be deemed a demotion for cause if such reduction results from a demotion during a probationary period such that the employee is returned to the position held immediately prior to the promotion, a reduction in force, insufficient funds, decrease in funds, departmental reorganization or a change of appointment made in the discretion of the appointing authority as provided by this Code and shall not be appealable under this article. 
Disciplinary action means an action taken for cause by a department head or designee which results in an oral admonishment, a written reprimand, demotion, suspension with or without pay or dismissal of a regular nonprobationary employee in the classified service of the city or any regular nonprobationary sworn officer of the department of police who holds the rank of lieutenant or below or any regular nonprobationary sworn officer of the department of fire who holds the rank of captain or below. Disciplinary actions include all adverse actions. Only those disciplinary actions which are adverse actions, suspension without pay, demotions or dismissals, by definition of this article, are appealable to the civil service board. 
Dismissal means the discharge, termination or removal of an employee from employment with the city. 
Eligible means a person who has qualified to be placed on a list or register of persons eligible for employment with the city pursuant to article IV of this chapter pertaining to civil service. 
Grievance means a written request by an employee for review of an allegation which describes a work-related event or a condition of employment which the employee reasonably believes is unfair in light of the rules, regulations and standards which govern the employment relationship with the city. 
Hearing officer means a member of the civil service board appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council as provided in this article and who is designated in routine rotation sequence to hear appeals filed with the civil service board. 
Hearing panel means three members of the civil service board who are designated in routine rotation sequence to hear appeals of dismissals filed with the civil service board. 
Oral admonishment means a verbal discussion by a supervisor with an employee calling attention to the employee's substandard work performance or inappropriate conduct and requiring correction of the substandard work performance or inappropriate conduct within a specified timeframe. 
Performance evaluation means a periodic written report approved by the appointing authority or designee relative to the work-related conduct and performance of the employee and which is issued in accordance with article IV of this chapter. 
Probationary employee means any employee appointed to a regular position who has not completed the required probationary period in a given class qualifying the employee for regular employment in that class served in accordance with article IV of this chapter. 
Reprimand means a written report to an employee by a supervisor calling attention to the employee's substandard work performance or inappropriate conduct and requiring correction of the substandard work performance or inappropriate conduct within a specified timeframe. 
Separation means termination of the employment relationship. 
Suspension means the temporary removal of an employee from a position of employment with the city with or without pay. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2010-34(10-O-0952), § 6, 6-30-10, eff. 7-1-10) 
Sec. 114-503. - Point of contact. 
The commissioner of human resources shall serve as the principal employee relations official for this city and shall be responsible for representing the city in discussions with employee organizations concerning personnel policies, practices or procedures and working conditions of city employees. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-504. - Disparate treatment prohibited. 
There shall be no disparate treatment against or in favor of any employee because such employee is a member of an employee organization. No employee shall be required, as a condition of employment with the city, to become or to remain a member of a labor or employee organization. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-505. - Meet and confer sessions. 
(a)  The mayor or designee shall meet and confer annually with any interested employee organization group recognized for deduction of dues under section 114-28 of this Code, for the purpose of discussing wages, rates of pay, working conditions, and other terms and conditions of employment. 
(b)  Any consensus reached between the mayor and employee organizations may be embodied in a written memorandum of understanding. 
(c)  The commissioner of human resources or designee shall meet and confer monthly with any interested employee organization recognized for deduction of dues under section 114-28 of this Code, for the purposes of discussing wages, rates of pay, benefits, working conditions and other terms of employment for its members. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-506—114-515. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GRIEVANCES 

Sec. 114-516. - Application of division. 
The policies and procedures set forth in this division for the processing of grievances shall apply to all regular employees in the classified service of the city and all nonprobationary sworn employees in the departments of police and fire. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-517. - Statement of policy. 
Employee grievances should, to the fullest extent practicable, be promptly considered and/or equitably resolved. The city establishes its policy to encourage employees to seek review of legitimate grievances and to require that the managerial and supervisory personnel of all city departments make every effort to fairly resolve grievances of employees in their respective departments at the earliest opportunity. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-518. - Purposes. 
The procedures set forth in this division are established to: 
(1)  Establish and implement a clear, expeditious, efficient and equitable system of processing employee grievances; 
(2)  Allow for informal resolution of grievances between employees and managerial and supervisory personnel of city departments; 
(3)  Provide a prompt and fair opportunity for employees to seek review of legitimate grievances without fear of reprisal or coercion or unequal treatment; and 
(4)  Encourage managerial and supervisory personnel of city departments to eliminate or correct causes of legitimate grievances of employees. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-519. - Matters for which grievances may be filed. 
The procedures set forth in this division for the resolution of employee grievances shall apply to the following: 
(1)  Supervisory-employee relationships; 
(2)  Working conditions; 
(3)  Classification and pay issues; 
(4)  Departmental policies and procedures; 
(5)  Citywide policies and procedures; 
(6)  Other employment-related issues not prohibited by city, state, county or federal law; 
(7)  Disciplinary actions other than adverse actions; and 
(8)  Any other matter determined grievable by the commissioner of human resources pursuant to section 114-521. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-520. - Matters for which grievances may not be filed. 
The procedures set forth in this division for the resolution of employee grievances shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Routine transfers. 
(2)  Selection from a properly certified eligibility list. 
(3)  Reassignment. 
(4)  Staffing levels. 
(5)  Neither the commitment setting session nor the rating an employee receives under the employee performance appraisal system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-521. - Determination as to whether a matter is grievable. 
If the determination by the employee's department is that the matter is not grievable under sections 114-519 and 114-520, the department must notify the employee in writing of the employee's right to request a review of the determination of grievability by the commissioner of human resources. The employee may request such review and the determination of grievability shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Submission of request for determination of grievability form. The employee shall obtain a request for a determination of grievability form from the commissioner of human resources. The employee shall complete the form and shall provide therein sufficient facts and details of the circumstances giving rise to or the causes of the employee's grievance. The employee shall submit the form to the commissioner of human resources within five days from the date the employee was notified by the employee's department that the matter for which the employee seeks redress is not grievable. 
(2)  Determination by commissioner of human resources. Within five days of receipt of the determination of grievability form, the commissioner of human resources shall make a written determination as to whether the matter is grievable under section 114-519. 
(3)  Notice of determination of grievability. A notice of determination of grievability shall be sent to the employee by certified mail and a copy to the employee's department. The notice shall state whether the commissioner of human resources finds the matter grievable or not grievable and shall contain the statement of reasons for such determination. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-522. - Right of representation. 
The employee shall have the right of representation at all stages of the grievance procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-523. - Grievance resolution procedures. 
The following procedures shall govern the processing of grievances: 
(1)  Verbal discussions initiated by aggrieved employee. Any employee who has a grievance, as provided in section 114-519, or a matter found to be grievable, as provided in section 114-521, may initiate the grievance process by requesting a meeting for the verbal discussion of the grievance with the employee's immediate supervisor within three working days of the occurrence of the incident giving rise to the grievance or becoming aware of the incident giving rise to the grievances. The immediate supervisor, at the time of the employee's request for a meeting, shall schedule a meeting for discussion for a definite time and place, but such meeting shall not take place later than three working days following the employee's request. 
After the meeting, the supervisor shall investigate the employee's grievance and verbally communicate a decision to the employee within three working days of the meeting. 
(2)  Submission of grievance to immediate supervisor. If, after the supervisor's verbal response, the grievance is not resolved to the employee's satisfaction and the employee desires to pursue the matter, the employee shall submit, in writing, on a form supplied by the commissioner of human resources, the nature of the grievance, the facts to support the grievance, any supporting documents and the requested remedy. Copies of the grievance will be forwarded to the head of the affected department and the commissioner of human resources. The form shall be submitted by the employee to the immediate supervisor within five working days of receipt of the verbal decision rendered by the supervisor. Within three working days of the receipt of the grievance form, the supervisor shall set forth in writing on the corresponding section of the grievance form and transmit to the employee the findings of the investigation and the reasons therefor and shall attach all supporting documents. 
(3)  Submission of grievance to next level supervisor. If the grievance is not resolved by the supervisor to the employee's satisfaction and the employee desires to pursue the matter, the employee may submit the completed grievance form to the next level supervisor having authority to resolve the grievance within three working days of receipt of the decision by the supervisor. The next level supervisor shall investigate the grievance and, as necessary, shall collect evidence. Within five working days of receipt of the grievance form, the next level supervisor shall set forth in writing on the corresponding section of the grievance form and transmit to the employee the findings of the investigation, the decision on the grievance and the reasons therefor and shall attach all supporting documents. 
(4)  Submission of grievance to director. If the grievance is not resolved by the next level supervisor to the employee's satisfaction and the employee desires to pursue the matter, the employee shall submit the completed grievance form to the director of the office under which the employee is employed within three working days of receipt of the supervisor's decision. The director shall investigate the grievance and, as necessary, shall collect evidence. Within five days of receipt of the grievance form, the director shall set forth in writing on the corresponding section of the grievance form and transmit to the employee the findings of the investigation, the decision on the grievance and the reasons therefor and shall attach all supporting documents. 
(5)  Submission of grievance to department head. 
a.  If the grievance is not resolved by the director to the employee's satisfaction, the employee may submit the completed grievance form to the head of the employee's department within three working days of receipt of the decision of the director. The head of the employee's department shall investigate the grievance as appropriate and shall collect evidence. Within five working days of receipt of the completed grievance form, the department head shall set forth in writing the final determination of the employee's grievance by the department. The final determination shall include the decision on the grievance, state the reasons therefor shall and include any supporting evidence. A copy of the final determination by the department shall be given to the employee or sent to the employee by registered mail no later than the tenth day from date of receipt of the grievance by the head of the employee's department. 
b.  If the grievance is from an employee of the department of fire or department of police, the final paragraph of the chief's letter will differ significantly depending upon the grieving employee's sworn or nonsworn status as follows: 
1.  If the grieving employee is sworn, the last paragraph will advise the grievant that the chief's decision is not subject to any further administrative appeal, but that the grievant could seek redress in the civil courts on the employee's own initiative and expense. Copies of this letter will be distributed to the deputy chief, the immediate supervisor, the employee's personnel file and the city attorney's office. 
2.  If the grieving employee is nonsworn, the last paragraph will advise the grievant that the chief's decision could be appealed to the commissioner of human resource as per subsection (6) of this section. Copies of this letter will be distributed to the deputy chief, immediate supervisor, the employee's personnel file and the city attorney's office. 
3.  The time constraints of subsection (5)a of this section shall apply to this subsection. 
(6)  Submission of grievance to department of human resource. If the employee is not satisfied with the final determination on the grievance by the department and the employee desires to pursue the matter, the employee may submit the completed grievance form to the commissioner of human resources within three working days of receipt of the decision by the department. Within ten working days of the receipt of the grievance, the office will investigate the circumstances surrounding the grievance, prepare findings of fact thereon and, upon approval of the commissioner of human resources, recommend to the employee and the department, in writing, a resolution of the grievance. If the grievant is an employee of the department of human resources, such prior approval shall not apply. If the recommended resolution requires action by the employee's department, the recommendation shall include a timetable for the implementation of the action. All recommendations made by the commissioner of human resources shall be binding on both the employee and the affected department. Should the employee's department disagree with the decision of the commissioner of human resources, the recommendation may be submitted by the commissioner of human resources to the chief operating officer or designee who shall make within ten days the final determination on the grievance. In no case shall the time to inform the employee of the final decision exceed 15 days from the date of the decision by the commissioner of human resources, and to the extent that this subsection is in conflict with subsection (5)b of this section, then subsection (5)b of this section controls. 
(7)  Failure to follow procedure. The failure of supervisory employees or city officials to follow the steps outlined in this section shall result in conferring upon the employee the right automatically to proceed to the next step in the grievance procedure. Failure of the employee to follow the steps outlined in this section shall result in the dismissal of the grievance. 
(8)  Final determination. The decision by the commissioner of human resources or, in instances in which the grievance is submitted to the chief operating officer, the decision of the chief operating officer shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-524. - Extension of time in grievance process. 
Time limit requirements for employees who request action on a grievance or for departmental supervisor to respond to employee grievances, as specified in section 114-523, may be extended by agreement of the employee and the supervisor. All agreements for extension of time shall be in writing and shall be signed by the parties thereto. Copies of such agreement shall be attached to the grievance form, kept by the supervisor and given to the employee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-525. - Grievance forms. 
The diversity manager, upon approval of the commissioner, shall issue standard grievance forms for use by employees and managerial personnel of city departments in the grievance resolution process prescribed in section 114-523. Grievance forms shall be available at least in the following places: the offices of department heads, office directors and agency heads of all city departments, and the department of human resources. The form should require at a minimum the following: 
(1)  Name; 
(2)  Title of position; 
(3)  Grade; 
(4)  Department and office; 
(5)  Code section violated; 
(6)  Remedy requested. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
DIVISION 3. - DISCIPLINARY ACTION 

Sec. 114-526. - Statement of policy. 
(a)  Progressive discipline. It is the policy of the city to impose, where reasonable, progressive discipline according to procedures that are fair, prompt and appropriate to the situation. However, when an infraction is such as to impair or destroy the future effective performance of the employee or when the employee's presence impairs the effectiveness of others or presents danger to the employee, others or city property, action shall be taken to immediately remove the employee from the work environment. The city supports a process in which disciplinary action is applied in several steps of increasing severity. The usual sequence of progressive discipline is oral admonishment, written reprimand, suspension and dismissal. The progressive disciplinary process affords the employee the opportunity to correct behavior or inadequate job performance with the minimum level of discipline applied at each step. 
(b)  Authority of fire chief and police chief. Notwithstanding anything in this division to the contrary, the fire chief and police chief shall retain authority to administer corrective and disciplinary action, to formulate rules and regulations for the operation of their departments and such other powers and responsibilities as are provided by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-527. - Process of progressive discipline. 
Prior to application of any disciplinary action permitted by this division, the following shall be met: 
(1)  Orientation. During the probationary period all employees shall be informed of their job duties and the rules, regulations and standards that apply to them. At a minimum, this should include an initial orientation to the job and the organization. 
(2)  Course of action when rule or standard is violated. 
a.  Duty to promptly investigate violation. The manager or supervisor shall promptly investigate the facts and circumstances of the incident before deciding on the disciplinary action to be taken. 
b.  Determination of appropriate disciplinary action. The reasonable disciplinary action shall be determined by considering relevant factors, including but not limited to the seriousness of the offense, whether the offense was willful and deliberate, unintentional or the result of gross negligence and the employee's record of performance and conduct. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-528. - Cause for action. 
(a)  No employee shall be dismissed from employment or otherwise adversely affected as to compensation or employment status except for cause. However, this shall not apply to employees dismissed or otherwise adversely affected due to curtailment of funds or reduction in staff or reorganization or demoted during a probationary period such that the employee is returned to the position held immediately prior to promotion when such action is in accordance with article IV of this chapter. 
(b)  The following actions constitute cause for which disciplinary action may be imposed, but the imposition of disciplinary action shall not be limited to such offenses: 
(1)  Negligence in performing assigned duties. 
(2)  Incompetence, inability or failure to perform assigned duties, including but not limited to loss of job requirements, such as the loss of a required license. 
(3)  Failure to carry out an official directive or refusal to carry out the lawful, reasonable directions given by a supervisor or other acts of insubordination. 
(4)  Misconduct, including but not limited to engaging in offensive conduct or language toward the public, supervisory personnel or fellow employees. 
(5)  Excessive tardiness. 
(6)  Excessive absenteeism. 
(7)  Abuse of sick leave. 
(8)  Absence without official leave. 
(9)  Abandonment of job. An employee not on authorized leave of absence who, without valid reason, fails to report for work for three consecutive days. 
(10)  Unauthorized use of city property. 
(11)  Abuse or theft of city property. 
(12)  Willful making of false statements to the public, supervisors, officials, boards, department heads or agencies or the willful making of false statements on an employment application within the city. 
(13)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages, drugs or controlled substances while at work. 
(14)  Intoxication on the job. 
(15)  Acceptance of gratuities or contingent fees or other conduct in violation of the code of ethics. 
(16)  The refusal, when so directed, to be examined by a licensed physician designated by the city. 
(17)  Political activity in conflict with article IV of this chapter or with other sections of this Code. 
(18)  The conviction of a job related felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(19)  The violation of article IV of this chapter or of administrative rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this Code. 
(20)  Any other conduct or action of such seriousness that disciplinary action is considered warranted. 
(21)  The sale or distribution of any illegal drugs or controlled substances, as defined by state law. 
(22)  Failure to comply with the requirements of chapter 3 (transparency) in this Code. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything in this division to the contrary, the appointing authority or designee shall require the dismissal of any city employee who is convicted while a city employee of the sale, distribution or use of any illegal drug or controlled substance as defined by state law, rape, murder or any felony. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2018-41(18-O-1266), § 2, 9-25-18 ) 
Sec. 114-529. - Procedure for imposing disciplinary action. 
(a)  Oral admonishment. Oral admonishment, as defined in section 114-502, shall be given verbally and shall communicate a warning of an error or inappropriate behavior, inform the employee of the appropriate behavior and offer assistance in correcting the situation. The employee should be advised that the date and nature of the oral admonishment will be documented in the supervisor's file. Depending on the circumstances or seriousness of the offense, no more than two oral admonishments should be given to the employee for the same type of offense, after which a more severe type of disciplinary action should be taken. Sufficient time for improvement should be allowed before further action is taken. 
(b)  Reprimand. A reprimand, as defined in section 114-502, shall be written and given promptly following the act or behavior in question. It shall communicate a warning of error or inappropriate behavior and state more serious action will be taken if the offense is repeated. The reprimand shall be addressed to the employee and shall include the charge, the specific behavior, dates of the behavior where appropriate, the warning that continuance of the behavior will result in further disciplinary action. A copy of the reprimand should be forwarded to the commissioner of human resources and placed in the employee's official personnel file. 
(c)  Adverse actions. An adverse action shall be written and shall be imposed in accordance with the procedural requirements set forth in section 114-530. Adverse actions include the following: 
(1)  Suspension without pay. 
a.  When proper. The appointing authority or designee may suspend an employee without pay for cause and proper disciplinary purposes, as set forth in section 114-528, or for pending criminal court action when such criminal court action is job related or in the reasonable judgment of the department head would deter the employee from effective performance of job duties. 
b.  Length of suspension. A suspension without pay for disciplinary purposes shall be proportional to the offense and shall not exceed 30 days for any one offense or for multiple offenses arising out of the same incident. A suspension without pay pending the adjudication of criminal charges may be imposed until the final disposition of those criminal charges. However, back pay shall be awarded if the final disposition of charges does not result in a conviction. 
(2)  Demotion. The appointing authority or designee may demote an employee for cause as set forth in section 114-528, provided that a change of appointment made in the discretion of the appointing authority as provided by this Code or a demotion during a probationary period which results in an employee's being returned to the position held immediately prior to promotion shall not be considered an adverse action. 
(3)  Dismissal. The appointing authority or designee may dismiss an employee for cause as set forth in section 114-528. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-530. - Procedure for imposing adverse actions. 
(a)  Notice required. An employee against whom an adverse action is to be taken shall be given a written notice of proposed adverse action, signed by the appointing authority or designee, at least ten working days prior to the effective date of the proposed adverse action. However, in an emergency situation, the adverse action may become effective immediately following the employee's response, if any. During the period of the notice, the employee is expected to perform usual duties without disrupting the activities of other employees or operations of the city department. Any action by the employee to the contrary shall be considered an emergency situation as defined in section 114-532. 
(b)  Contents of notice required. The notice of the proposed adverse action shall include the following: 
(1)  The proposed action to be taken. 
(2)  The effective date of the adverse action, which shall be at least ten working days after the date the notice is received by the employee, or delivered by certified mail to the employee's last-known address. 
(3)  The specific and detailed charges and reasons for the adverse action. 
(4)  A statement that the employee has the right to respond in writing to the charges or to appear before the appointing authority or designee who has authority to affirm or modify the proposed adverse action at a specified time, with a representative if desired, during regular working hours within the employee response period specified in this section. 
(5)  A statement that failure by the employee to respond by the specified date means that the employee has waived all further appeal rights within the department. 
(c)  Procedures for employee response to adverse action. 
(1)  Purpose. The employee response procedure is created to protect the employee from erroneous, arbitrary adverse actions and to afford the acting department an opportunity to reevaluate its position on the proposed adverse action and affirm or modify the action. 
(2)  Requirements. The employee shall be given the opportunity to respond to charges before the appointing authority or designee who has authority to affirm or modify the proposed adverse action, provided that a full evidentiary hearing prior to the adverse action is not required. 
a.  Employee response period. The employee shall respond to the adverse action verbally or in writing within five working days from the date of receipt of the notice of the proposed adverse action. 
If the employee does not respond by the date required in the notice, the employee shall waive further appeal rights within the department. 
b.  Response options. The employee's response may be made in writing or in person or both. 
c.  Supporting documentation. The employee may submit statements or supporting documentation from persons having knowledge of the circumstances to support the employee's response. 
d.  Representative. If the employee chooses to meet with the appointing authority, the employee may be accompanied by a representative of the employee's choice. 
e.  Further official investigation. The appointing authority or designee may conduct further investigation of the charges, provided that if the appointing authority or designee determines that additional time is necessary for further investigation and proper consideration of the employee's response to the proposed adverse action, the period of consideration may be extended for a reasonable number of days but in no event longer than ten working days, by notifying the employee in writing as to the length of the extension. The extension notice shall also state that the effective date of the proposed adverse action shall be delayed for the same number of days as the length of the period of the extension of time for consideration. 
(d)  Determination and notice of final action. 
(1)  Time limit. The appointing authority shall issue the notice of final action not later than three days after the date of the employee's response. However, if the appointing authority or designee determines that additional time is necessary for further investigation and proper consideration of the employee's response to the proposed adverse action, the period of consideration may be extended as provided in this section. 
(2)  Contents of notice of final action required. The notice of final action shall include but not be limited to the following information: 
a.  Statement of the specific adverse action to be taken; 
b.  The specific charges for which the adverse action is taken and the reasons therefor; 
c.  The effective date of the final action which shall not be earlier than the effective date specified in the notice of proposed adverse action, except in emergency situations in which the effective date of the final action may become effective immediately following the employee's response; and 
d.  A statement advising the employee of the right to appeal the determination of final action to the civil service board. 
(e)  Copy to commissioner of human resources. A copy of the notice of final action shall be sent to the commissioner of human resources not later than the effective date of the action. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-531. - Modification of charges of proposed adverse action. 
If the appointing authority or designee determines that additional charges or substantially different charges should be made than specified in the notice of proposed adverse action, the following procedure shall govern: 
(1)  If the additional or substantially different charges are more severe than the original charges, a new proposed adverse action or other appropriate action shall be initiated. 
(2)  If the final charges are less severe but not substantially different than the original charges, no new proposed adverse action will be required, but the employee shall be furnished with a written notice of the charges, and the proceedings on these charges shall be concluded within the timeframe and according to the same procedures governing the original proposed adverse action. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-532. - Emergency situations. 
(a)  Conditions for use. The appointing authority or designee may immediately suspend an employee with pay upon the determination that the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  There is cause to believe that the employee has committed a crime involving moral turpitude or a felony which is job related or deters the employee from effective performance of the employee's job. 
(2)  The retention of the employee in active duty status may result in damage to property or may be disruptive, detrimental or injurious to the employee, coworkers, subordinates or the general public or may be disruptive to the daily operation of a city government function. 
(b)  Notice of emergency action. The appointing authority or designee shall give the employee against whom the emergency action is taken a notice of emergency action in writing, not later than five working days after the effective date of the emergency action. The notice of emergency action shall include a statement of the emergency situation that caused the action to be taken. Should the action be an adverse action, the notice shall meet the requirements of section 114-530. A copy of such notice shall be sent to the commissioner of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2007-46(07-O-1617), § 3, 8-28-07) 
Secs. 114-533—114-545. - Reserved. 
Sec. 114-546. - Right to file appeal. 
Unless otherwise provided, all appeals to the civil service board, pursuant to this division, are entitled to a hearing which shall be conducted by a hearing officer of the civil service board pursuant to this division. However, with the written consent of all parties and the approval of the hearing officer, a hearing may be waived and the appeal considered on the written record. The following matters constitute proper reasons for which appeals may be filed with the civil service board under this division, along with the conditions required for such appeals: 
(1)  Adverse actions. Any nonprobationary employee in the classified service or any nonprobationary sworn officer of the department of police who holds the rank of lieutenant or below that of lieutenant or sworn officer of the department of fire who holds the rank of captain or any rank below that of captain shall have the right to file an appeal of an adverse action, i.e., suspension, demotion or dismissal, to the civil service board pursuant to the procedures in this article. 
(2)  Removal from eligible list. An eligible, as defined in section 114-502, whose name is removed from a register pursuant to article IV of this chapter, may appeal to the civil service board for reinstatement to the eligible list. If the appeal is upheld, relief shall be limited to reinstatement to the current eligible list. 
(3)  Disqualification for reemployment. An employee under Section 114-84 who has been disqualified for reemployment, as provided in article IV of this chapter, may appeal to the civil service board. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of notice of disqualification for reemployment. 
(4)  Failure to follow procedures of layoff or reduction in force. A regular employee who has been laid off, demoted or reduced in salary as a result of a reduction in force may appeal to a civil service board if the reduction in force, as implemented by the appointing authority, is not in accordance with the plan of reduction as approved by the commissioner of human resources. 
(5)  Unjust coercion or reprisal. An employee who is subjected to coercion or reprisal because of participation in an appeal or grievance proceeding authorized by this article may appeal for relief to the civil service board, as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2010-34(10-O-0952), § 7, 6-30-10) 
Sec. 114-547. - Notice of appeal. 
(a)  Time for filing appeal. All appeals to the civil service board shall be initiated by filing a written notice of appeal with the commissioner of human resources, in accordance with the procedures established under this division. Unless otherwise provided, the notice of appeal shall be filed and postmarked within five days after the later of: 
(1)  The date when the employee receives final written notice of the action or decision or the date final notice is delivered by certified mail to the last known address or date of last delivery attempt by certified mail to the last known address, as documented by the United States Postal Service. 
(2)  The effective date of the action or decision. 
The notice of appeal shall be considered timely if postmarked within the time allowed for an appeal but shall not be considered filed until actually received by the commissioner of human resources. 
(b)  Transmittal of copies of notice within city and assignment to hearing officer/panel. Upon receipt of the notice, the commissioner of human resources shall immediately transmit a true copy of the notice to the appointing authority and the commissioner of human resources and shall promptly investigate and attempt to mediate the appeal. Upon completion of the investigation and after every effort has been made to mediate, the commissioner of human resources shall assign the appeal for hearing by a hearing officer of the civil service board in the normal rotation of hearing officer assignments as provided in section 114-548. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-548. - Civil service board members serving as hearing officers. 
(a)  Authorized. For the purposes of holding hearings of appeals as provided in article IV of this chapter and otherwise assisting in the resolution of appeals under this article, the civil service board shall serve as individual hearing officers. In a dismissal, a panel of three board members shall be convened for the purpose of hearing the dismissal. Notwithstanding any other authority and duties given to the civil service board members, as individual hearing officers they shall compile evidence, prepare findings of fact, issue initial decisions and the basis therefor, certify records and make investigations of matters under the jurisdiction of this article where a review is appropriate. 
(b)  Assignment of hearing officers to appeals. Upon appointment to the civil service board, the appointee's name shall be placed in the alphabetical listing of civil service board members for the purpose of being assigned appeals as scheduled by the commissioner of human resources. Appeals will be assigned according to alphabetical rotation of names. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-549. - Authority and duties of hearing officers/panels. 
Any duly appointing hearing officer/panel shall have the authority to do the following in connection with any hearing under this article: 
(1)  Administer oaths and affirmation. 
(2)  Regulate the course of the hearing. 
(3)  Set the time and place for continued hearings and prehearing conferences. 
(4)  Fix the time for filing written arguments as deemed appropriate. 
(5)  Dispose of motions to dismiss for lack of the board's jurisdiction over the subject matter or parties or for any other grounds. 
(6)  Dispose of motions to amend or to intervene. 
(7)  Provide for the taking of testimony by deposition or interrogatory. 
(8)  Reprimand or exclude from the hearing any person for any indecorous or improper conduct committed in the presence of the hearing officer. 
(9)  Make informal disposition of any case by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order or default, unless such disposition is precluded by law. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-550. - Hearing procedures. 
Under this article, the following are established to provide uniform procedures for the conduct of hearings by the board or hearing officer appointed by the board: 
(1)  Notice of hearing. The hearing shall be held within 60 days after receipt of the notice of appeal by the commissioner of human resources. Within ten days prior to the date for which the hearing is set, the commissioner of human resources shall designate, from an alphabetical rotation system, a hearing officer/panel of the civil service board and an appropriate time and place to conduct the hearing and shall so notify all parties in writing. Such notification shall be mailed or served at least ten days prior to the date for which the hearing is set. Any hearing officer/panel shall have the authority to postpone or to continue a hearing upon its own motion or upon the motion of either party. 
(2)  Representation. Opportunity shall be afforded both parties a representative of their choice. All arrangements for providing legal counsel shall be the responsibility of the party desiring such representation. 
(3)  Prehearing conference. The hearing officer/panel may arrange a prehearing conference for the purpose of reviewing the matter being appealed and establishing stipulations to expedite the hearing. 
(4)  Witnesses. The appellant or the agency may request the attendance of employees or other persons as witnesses when their testimony will aid in establishing the facts in the case. Employees appearing as witnesses shall be released from duty without the loss of pay or time and without effect on their service rating. No person shall directly or indirectly use or threaten to use any official authority or other influence which would tend to discourage any other person from testifying. 
(5)  Subpoenas. 
a.  Request for subpoena. The appellant, the department or the hearing officer/panel may request the commissioner of human resources to issue subpoenas for witnesses for hearings. The cost for securing the attendance of witnesses who are noncity employees, including fees or mileage, shall be computed and assessed in the same manner as prescribed by law for civil cases in the superior court. 
b.  Issuance of subpoenas. Subpoenas shall be issued without discrimination between public and private parties. When a subpoena is disobeyed, any party in the matter may apply to the superior court of the county in which the hearing is being held for an order requiring obedience. Failure to comply with such order shall be cause for punishment as for contempt of court. 
c.  Quashing or limiting subpoenas. Once issued, a subpoena may be quashed or limited by the hearing officer/panel upon the motion of the hearing officer/panel or any party or at the request of the witness, if it appears that the subpoena was used primarily as a means of harassment, that the testimony or documents sought are cumulative, that the testimony or documents sought are not relevant or material, that to respond to the subpoena would be unduly burdensome or that for other good reasons basic fairness dictates that the subpoena should not be enforced. 
(6)  Record of hearing. A court reported recording shall be made of all hearings; however, the recording of a hearing shall not be transcribed unless approved by the commissioner of human resources. If the transcription is so made pursuant to a request by either party in the hearing, the cost thereof shall be borne by the party making the request. In addition to the recording of the hearing of the transcription thereof, all documents entered into the record during the hearing shall be made part of the official record of the hearing. 
(7)  Appointing authority's opportunity to be heard. At the request of the appointing authority or at the invitation of the hearing officer/panel or the board, the appointing authority or designee shall be entitled to be heard and to submit evidence in any appeal in which the interpretation of a civil service rule, regulation, policy or practice is at issue. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-551. - Conduct of hearing. 
In the hearing of an appeal under this division, the proceeding shall be informal but orderly. The following procedure shall prevail: 
(1)  The hearing officer/panel shall open the hearing by explaining the procedure to be followed in the hearing. At the discretion of the hearing officer/panel, any or all witnesses may be sequestered. 
(2)  The hearing officer/panel shall read or cause to be read the charges and specifications as contained in the notice of appeal, as filed with the commissioner of human resources. Any written response to the notice of appeal as filed with the director shall then be read. By agreement, these documents may be inserted in the record without reading. 
(3)  The facts not in dispute shall be stipulated. 
(4)  Each party shall be given the opportunity to make a brief opening statement identifying the issues and stating what is to be proven. 
(5)  All witnesses shall testify under oath or affirmation. 
(6)  Each party may conduct such examination of the witnesses as shall be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. In addition, the hearing officer may examine the witnesses. 
(7)  Official notice may be taken of facts generally recognized by the public. In addition, official notice may be taken of technical facts within the specialized knowledge of the hearing officer. Parties shall be notified either before or during the hearing, by reference in preliminary reports or otherwise, of the material officially noted, including any staff memoranda or data, and they shall be afforded an opportunity to contest the materials so noticed. 
(8)  The hearing officer's/panel's experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge may be utilized in the evaluation of evidence. 
(9)  Before closing the hearing, the hearing officer/panel shall allow both parties the opportunity to make brief oral or written closing statements. 
(10)  The hearing officer/panel who presided shall, within 15 days from the close of the evidence, issue a decision. However, for good cause the time may be extended for rendering a decision but in no case shall exceed an additional 15 days. The decision shall be to the parties or their representatives. The hearing officer's/panel's decision shall become final, and there shall be no right to any additional administrative appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-552. - Evidence. 
With respect to all hearings before the board or the hearing officer/panel under this division, the following rules regarding the evidence shall govern: 
(1)  Formal, legal rules of evidence shall not be strictly applied. Evidence may be admitted if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. The hearing officer/panel shall follow the state rules of evidence regarding privileges, recognized by the law of the state. 
(2)  Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded. 
(3)  Objections to evidentiary offers may be made and shall be noted in the record. 
(4)  When a hearing will be expedited and the interest of the parties will not be prejudiced substantially, any part of the evidence may be received in written form, including but not limited to the use of depositions or interrogatories. 
(5)  Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies if the original is not readily available. Upon request and at the discretion of the hearing officer/panel, parties shall be given the opportunity to compare the copy with the original document. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-553. - Decision of hearing officer/panel. 
(a)  Requirements of decision. As part of the final decision, the hearing officer/panel shall include findings of fact and any law on which the decision is based, separately stated, and the effective date of the decision or order. Findings of fact shall be accompanied by a concise and explicit statement of the underlying facts supporting the findings. Copies of the decision or order shall be mailed to all parties of record by the commissioner of human resources. 
(b)  Finality of decision. The decision of the hearing officer/panel shall be binding on both parties. For appeals of adverse actions, the hearing officer/panel may modify the action of the appointing authority but may not increase the severity of such action on the employee. If the appellant is a nonprobationary sworn officer of the department of police who holds the rank of lieutenant or below that of lieutenant or sworn officer of the department of fire who holds the rank of captain or any rank below that of captain, the hearing officer/panel may not modify, but must affirm or revoke a suspension or demotion and may affirm, revoke or modify a dismissal to no less than a 30-day suspension. The appointing authority shall promptly comply with the final decision as may be issued as a result of the appeal. 
(c)  Relief of appellant. If the decision of the hearing officer/panel is in favor of the appellant on appeals of dismissal, suspension or demotion, the employee shall be reinstated in accordance with the decision to the classification from which the employee was removed. The effective date of the reinstatement shall be the date immediately following the effective date of the appealed action as if there had been no break in service, unless otherwise specified in the order. The employee shall be entitled to the same salary, with any increases in the position or salary which would have automatically inured to the employee if the employee had remained in actual service. The employee shall receive payment as if there had been no break in service, minus any amount earned by or paid to the employee from other employment and wage substitutions, including but not limited to unemployment compensation, during the period off the job and minus any amount paid the employee for annual leave. Sick and annual leave shall be restored to the employee in the same amount that existed at the time of the appealed action, plus sick and annual leave that would have been earned for the period if the employee had actually been in service. However, any period of postponement or continuance of the hearing for the convenience of the appellant shall be excluded from any payment of benefits due, and this period of time shall be considered as if the appellant had been on leave without pay. Prior to any payment to the employee, the employee shall certify under oath the amount of any income received from other employment and any wage substitutes received during the period off the job. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2010-34(10-O-0952), § 8, 6-30-10) 
Sec. 114-554. - Judicial review. 
The decision of the hearing officer/panel under this division shall not limit the right of either party to judicial review, and such decision shall be stayed by the filing of a petition for review. Any party, including the city or any city department, office, division, commission or board, who has exhausted all administrative remedies available before the board and who is aggrieved by a final decision or order of the board on any hearing may seek judicial review of the final decision or order of the board in the superior court of Fulton County. At the discretion of the appointing authority, it may comply with the decision of the civil service board with out waiving its right to petition for review of that decision. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-555. - Dismissal of appeal. 
Upon the motion of either party or upon its own motion, the hearing officer/panel may dismiss any appeal under this division prior to holding a full hearing of the appeal upon the following conditions: 
(1)  The appeal is clearly moot; 
(2)  The appeal is without merit; 
(3)  The appeal was not properly filed with the commissioner of human resources; or 
(4)  The appeal is not within the scope of the hearing officer's/panel's authority, as provided in section 114-549. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-556—114-565. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY 

Sec. 114-566. - Application of division. 
This division shall apply to all employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-567. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Substances includes the following: 
(1)  Alcohol; 
(2)  Illegal drugs, including but not limited to marijuana, cocaine, heroin, methamphetamine and any derivatives thereof; 
(3)  Legal drugs and other substances which may impair an employee's ability to effectively perform job functions; and 
(4)  Any other dangerous drugs or controlled substances as defined by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-568. - Employee reform. 
(a)  The city recognizes that the work environment should be free from the effects of alcohol and drug abuse. To this end the city shall provide all of its employees an opportunity to voluntarily enter the city's employee assistance program (EAP) for substance abuse without being subjected to any disciplinary action based on substance abuse provided that the employee: 
(1)  Voluntarily enters the EAP and adheres to its established guidelines and requirements. 
(2)  Completes the primary and after-care elements of the rehabilitation program in strict accordance with the established guidelines as set forth by the EAP. 
(3)  Is free of any criminal or administrative charges and has not been directed to be tested based upon reasonable suspicion prior to voluntary entry into the EAP substance abuse program. 
(4)  Successfully completes the primary care portion of the EAP and abides by the elements of after-care treatment. Any employee who voluntarily enters the EAP and fails to abide by the established guidelines and requirements shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the appointing authority or designee may take appropriate personnel action to protect the affected employee, fellow employees and the public and to meet the needs of the service, necessitated by an employee's temporary or permanent inability to adequately perform the employee's job. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-569. - Use of substances. 
(a)  The consumption or use of illegal drugs by employees is prohibited. 
(b)  The consumption or use of alcohol while on duty by employees is absolutely prohibited. 
(c)  The abusive use of prescription or other legal drugs and substances while on duty by employees is absolutely prohibited. 
(d)  An employee must not report to work or be subject to duty while the employee's ability to perform job duties is impaired due to the use of alcohol, prescription or other legal drugs and substances. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-570. - Drug-free workplace statement. 
(a)  No employee may illegally engage in the manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, or use of a controlled substance at any time or place, including while at the employee's workplace. Such unlawful activity will be considered a sufficient ground for a serious adverse personnel action, up to and including discharge. 
(b)  In addition to prohibiting employees from engaging in the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession or use of illegal drugs in the workplace, this city prohibits its employees from engaging in such illegal activity at all times and at all places. Such activity, even during nonworking hours, clearly affects an employee's ability to perform public duties. 
(c)  If an employee is convicted of violating any criminal drug statute in any jurisdiction, regardless of whether the alleged violation occurred at the workplace or elsewhere, the employee must notify the city personnel office in writing of the conviction within five calendar days of conviction. 
(d)  Failure to comply with any part of this section will result in disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal. Specific disciplinary action will follow the prescribed guidelines of this article. 
(e)  The implementation of this section shall be the responsibility of all department heads, office directors and supervisors. Each employee will receive a copy of the drug awareness program along with one hour of in-service training on the city's substance abuse policy in this division. Each employee will acknowledge by signature receipt of the policy. All city employees are responsible for the continued adherence to all policies and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-571. - Supervisors' responsibilities and guidelines. 
(a)  Supervisors are responsible for consistent enforcement of this division. Any supervisor who knowingly permits a violation of this division by employees under the supervisor's direct supervision shall be subject to disciplinary action. 
(b)  Reasonable suspicion. 
(1)  When a supervisor has reasonable suspicion that an employee is intoxicated or under the influence of drugs or alcohol, the supervisor must immediately notify the appointing authority or designee. The appointing authority or designee shall advise the employee of right of representation and allow the employee the opportunity to explain the employee's behavior. The appointing authority or designee may require the employee to submit to a drug and/or alcohol analysis. 
(2)  Reasonable suspicion must be based on specific, objective facts about the conduct of an individual that would lead the reasonable person to suspect that the individual is or has been using drugs. Observations which may constitute a factual basis for determining reasonable suspicion may include but are not limited to the following, alone or in combination: 
(i)  Slurred speech. 
(ii)  Alcohol on breath. 
(iii)  Inability to walk a straight line. 
(iv)  Any accident involving city property when the following elements are present: 
a.  Vehicular accidents involving city employees who are cited for traffic code violations. 
b.  Other accidents involving city property in conjunction with additional behavior as outlined in this subsection. 
(v)  Behavior which is so unusual and inappropriate in its nature as to create an unsafe work environment or disrupt the normal working condition. 
(vi)  Possession of alcohol and/or illegal drugs. 
(c)  Random drug-testing. 
(1)  Sworn employees of the Departments of Police, Fire, and Rescue, Corrections as well as all other employees of the various departments of the City of Atlanta who hold positions which have been designated by the Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources as being safety-sensitive in accordance with section 114-575, are subject to random drug and/or alcohol analyses as established by the subject employees' respective departments, when directed by the appointing authority. 
(2)  The Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources may designate certain employment classifications which affect safety and/or security as safety-sensitive positions in accordance with applicable law, rules, and regulations. 
(3)  Random drug screens for general fund employees in safety sensitive positions shall only be conducted when funding has been allocated in the annual operating budget. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2008-68(08-O-0632), § 1, 7-28-08) 
Sec. 114-572. - Drug and/or alcohol analysis. 
(a)  When directed by the appointing authority or designee, an employee must submit to a drug and/or alcohol analysis test. The direction to submit to the drug/alcohol test must be in writing, signed by the appointing authority or designee, in accordance with section 114-571(b) or (c). The method of testing shall be established by the Commissioner of the Department of Human Resources. All testing labs, utilized by the city to analyze specimens, shall be certified to do so in accordance with applicable state and federal law and guidelines. 
(b)  The recognized limit for the level of alcohol which cannot be exceeded for purpose of this section shall be 0.02. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2008-68(08-O-0632), § 1, 7-28-08) 
Sec. 114-573. - Results of drug/alcohol analysis. 
A positive test result of the drug/alcohol analysis made under this division shall constitute cause for which disciplinary action may be imposed, up to and including dismissal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-574. - Disclosures. 
No public release of information obtained by the city pursuant to this division will be made, except as required by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-575. - Procedures. 
The commissioner of human resources shall be responsible for developing procedures for the implementation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Secs. 114-576—114-600. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY 

Sec. 114-601. - Statement of policy. 
The city is proud of its tradition of a collegial work environment in which all individuals are treated with respect and dignity. Each individual has the right to work in a professional atmosphere which promotes equal opportunities and prohibits discriminatory practices, including sexual harassment. Sexual harassment, whether verbal, physical or environmental, is unacceptable and will not be tolerated. In the event incidents of sexual harassment do occur, it is the policy of the city to take prompt remedial action, calculated to end the harassment. Retaliation for making a complaint of sexual harassment will not be tolerated. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-602. - Definition of sexual harassment. 
It is illegal and against the policies of the city for any employee, male or female, to sexually harass another employee. It is also illegal and against city policy for any employee who may be deemed a representative of the city to sexually harass a non-employee. Sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature constitute sexual harassment when: 
(1)  Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment; 
(2)  Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; 
(3)  Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment. 
Examples of sexual harassment include, but are not limited to: unwanted sexual advances; demands for sexual favors in exchange for favorable treatment or continued employment; repeated sexual jokes, flirtations, advances or propositions; verbal abuse of a sexual nature; graphic, verbal commentary about an individual's body, sexual prowess or sexual deficiencies; leering, whistling, touching, pinching, assault, coerced sexual acts or suggestive, insulting, obscene comments or gestures; display in the workplace of sexually suggestive objects or pictures; ostracizing an employee in conformity with sexual conduct; sexual conduct that reasonably causes mental and emotional detriment to the victim; retaliation against an individual for reporting or complaining about sexually harassing conduct. This behavior is unacceptable in the workplace and is unacceptable in other work-related settings such as business trips and business-related social events. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-603. - Individuals covered. 
(a)  The provisions of this division are applicable to all city employees. The use of the term "employee" shall include any person holding any position or employment with the city, to include without any limitation, employees of any status or tenure, appointed and elected officials, members of commissions and boards, agents, representatives or interns. The city encourages reporting of all incidents of sexual harassment, regardless of who the offender may be, in accordance with the methods set forth in section 114-604. 
(b)  In order to ensure the integrity of the work environment, managerial and supervisory personnel are required to ensure adherence to and compliance with this policy and, upon being informed of possible harassment, are required to take appropriate, prompt action in response thereto, including informing complainants of their rights under the procedures set forth in this policy. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-604. - Complaint and investigation procedure. 
Employees who feel that they have been victims of sexual harassment should file a discrimination complaint. Prompt reporting of complaints is strongly encouraged, as it allows for rapid response and resolution of objectionable behavior or conditions for the complainant and any other affected employees. An individual who believes he or she has been subjected to sexual harassment should report the incident to any of the following: employee's departmental EEO coordinator or complaint investigator, the city's diversity manager, or the employee's supervisor or commissioner. In the case of employees in the departments of police, fire or corrections, complaints of sexual harassment may also be made at their respective office of professional standards. The aggrieved employee may elect, at his or her option, to use formal or informal procedures as follows: 
(1)  Informal complaint procedure: 
a.  Each department shall designate the departmental EEO coordinator (DEEOC) and at least one man and one woman from the department to serve as complaint investigators. 
b.  The complainant will meet with a complaint investigator of his/her choosing to discuss any complaint of sexual harassment. A written statement will be taken. An accurate record of objectionable behavior is necessary to resolve a complaint of sexual harassment. 
c.  The complaint investigator will immediately attempt to resolve the complaint through discussions with appropriate managers, scheduling of meetings with concerned parties, and other informal efforts as appropriate, taking care to preserve confidentiality to the maximum reasonable extent. 
d.  Upon completion of the investigation, the complaint investigator will forward a written report of the investigation to the department head, with recommendations for resolution or corrective action as appropriate. 
e.  If the investigative report indicates that there is "reasonable cause" to believe that sexually harassing conduct has occurred, the department head shall implement disciplinary procedures, as outlined below in section 114-605(b), as may be appropriate. 
f.  If the informal efforts are unsuccessful, the complaint investigator will inform the complainant of his/her right to file a formal complaint with the affirmative action division, and will provide the complainant with a copy of the formal charge form. 
(2)  Formal complaint procedure: If the complainant elects not to pursue the informal procedures or is not satisfied with the results of the informal procedures, a formal complaint may be filed with the diversity manager in the department of human resources as follows: 
a.  The complaint will be reduced to a written statement on an appropriate form. An accurate record of objectionable behavior is necessary to resolve a complaint of sexual harassment. 
b.  The diversity manager will review the complaint to assure that the issue is appropriate for the discrimination complaint process. If it is incomplete, the diversity manager will seek clarification. 
c.  The diversity manager will notify the appropriate departmental officials of the complaint. 
d.  An investigation of the formal complaint will be initiated by the affirmative action division within five working days of the notification. 
e.  Upon completion of the investigation, the diversity manager will forward a report of the investigation, with recommendations for appropriate resolution or corrective action, to the commissioner of the department of human resources for review and any recommended changes. 
f.  The commissioner of the department of personnel and human resources shall forward the report to the head of the office or department in which the harassment is alleged to have taken place. 
g.  If the investigative report indicates that there is "reasonable cause" to believe that sexually harassing conduct has occurred, the department head shall initiate disciplinary procedures, as outlined below in section 114-605 as may be appropriate. 
h.  The finding of "reasonable cause" by the diversity manager as approved by the commissioner of the department of human resources on a formal complaint will result in the issuance of a notice of proposed adverse action, where appropriate. 
(3)  A member of the public who believes that he or she has been subjected to sexual harassment by a city employee should report the incident to the employee's department head or to the diversity manager, for investigation by the diversity manager in the manner outlined in subparagraph (2) above. Alternatively, members of the public may make sexual harassment complaints against employees of the departments of police, fire and corrections at the office of professional standards of the appropriate department. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-605. - Resolving the complaint. 
(a)  Determination of "no cause": If the investigation reveals that there is no "reasonable cause" to believe that the allegation of sexual harassment is true, the matter shall be deemed resolved for city purposes and the parties shall be free to pursue other available legal remedies. 
(b)  Determination of "cause": 
(1)  Discipline of "cause": If the investigation reveals that there is "reasonable cause" to believe that the allegation of sexual harassment is true, the employee determined to have committed the offense of sexual harassment shall be subject to disciplinary action. The complainant shall be informed of the disciplinary action taken. 
(2)  Penalty: Sexual harassment is considered a sufficient ground for serious adverse personnel action. Failure to comply with any part of this policy will result in disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal. A severe or pervasive violation of this policy may result in an employee's termination for the first offense. Where appropriate, specific disciplinary action will follow the process prescribed by section 114-526 through 114-556 of this Code of Ordinances. The employee's appointing authority shall impose discipline within the following ranges: 
a.  First offense: Sexual harassment training and disciplinary action ranging from a ten-day suspension to dismissal. 
b.  Second offense: Dismissal. 
(c)  Return to the workplace upon a finding of "cause": As the staffing needs of the city dictate, and whenever possible and practical, an employee who has been disciplined upon a finding of "cause" and who returns to the workplace shall not be returned to the same location or assignment that placed him/her in close proximity to the victim, for a period of at least one year from the date of the last act of sexual harassment. As the staffing needs of the city dictate, and whenever possible and practical, a victim's request for a transfer to an assignment or location away from that of the harasser shall be granted for a period of at least one year from the date of the last act of sexual harassment. This provision shall not be mandatory where impractical, inefficient, logistically impossible or contrary to the best interests of the city as a whole, or a department, office or agency. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-606. - Complaints against elected officials. 
(a)  Complaints against elected officials can be reported either through the "informal" or "formal" processes in section 114-604, however such complaints shall be promptly investigated by an independent investigator specifically selected for this purpose. Such investigator shall be selected by the city attorney and shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia with appropriate skills and experience. Upon completion of the investigation, the findings and recommendations of the investigator shall be transmitted by the city attorney, to the complainant, the alleged harasser and to the city council president or the chair of the committee on council or the committee on the executive, as appropriate. 
(b)  Upon a determination of cause, the city council president, or the chair of the committee on council, or the chair of the committee on the executive, as appropriate, shall take remedial action against the harasser. That remedial action may include, but is not limited to, counseling by the city council president or committee chair, or a resolution sponsored by the appropriate council committee censuring the offending official. 
(c)  Any further remedies against an elected official for violation of this sexual harassment policy would be those provided to the electors by the Georgia Recall Statute O.C.G.A. § 21-4-1, et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-607. - Confidentiality. 
In an attempt to protect the privacy of all persons involved, confidentiality will be exercised throughout the investigatory process to the greatest extent practicable. Inasmuch as the city is subject to the Open Records Act, (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70, et seq.) and the Open Meetings Acts, (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1, et seq.), absolute confidentiality cannot be assured. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-608. - Retaliation. 
No city employee, official or officer shall discriminate or retaliate against an individual who makes a report of sexual harassment. Retaliation is a very serious violation of this policy and should be reported immediately. Any individual found to have retaliated against an individual for reporting sexual harassment, or against anyone participating in the investigation of a complaint, will be subject to the disciplinary actions as provided by section 114-605. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-609. - Sexual harassment prevention training. 
(a)  Supervisory and management employees: 
(1)  Each supervisory and management employee shall receive an initial training course of at least four hours and a one-hour annual update training session. 
(2)  The training course for supervisory and management employees shall include instruction on what sexual harassment is, how to prevent it, what the repercussions are, and the complaint process. 
(3)  Training for supervisory and management employees shall include sensitivity training. 
(4)  Training shall be conducted by the diversity manager or his/her designee, who shall be assisted by at least one person of the opposite gender. 
(b)  Other employees: 
(1)  Each nonsupervisory, nonmanagement employee shall receive an initial training course of at least three hours and a one hour annual update training session, separate and apart from supervisory and management employees. 
(2)  The training course for nonsupervisory and nonmanagement employees shall include instruction on what sexual harassment is, how to respond to it, what the repercussions are, and the complaint process. 
(3)  Training shall be conducted by the diversity manager or his/her designee, who shall be assisted by at least one person of the opposite gender. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 114-610. - False allegations. 
If an investigation results in a finding that the complainant willfully made a false complaint of sexual harassment, that complainant shall be subject to disciplinary action as provided by section 114-605. 
(Ord. No. 2007-22(06-O-2700), § 1, 3-27-07) 
Chapter 122 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 122-1—122-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SECONDHAND DEALERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; local regulation of same, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-5; used motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-4-1 et seq. 

Sec. 122-26. - Applicability of article. 
Every person, except licensed junk dealers and pawnbrokers, who, exclusively or as incidental to or in connection with other business, purchases, sells or acquires in trade used or secondhand jewelry of any kind or description, including watches and clocks or articles of that kind or description made in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals; diamonds, emeralds, rubies or other precious stones; pistols or guns; bicycles or accessories, shall, for the purpose of this article, be a secondhand dealer. Any person who shall purchase any article of the kinds described in this section from any person other than a bona fide dealer in those articles shall, for the purpose of making the reports required in this article, also be a secondhand dealer and subject to all the sections of this article relating to those records and reports. However, secondhand dealers are specifically prohibited from buying or selling any automobile parts and accessories, including tires and batteries, under this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6391) 
Sec. 122-27. - Construction and interpretation of article. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as repealing or modifying any section of this Code or other ordinance regulating pawnbrokers and junk dealers. The sections of this article with reference to the acquisition of automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicular tires and tubes by purchase, exchange, gift or in any other manner shall apply not only to secondhand dealers as described in section 122-26 but to every person, unless the tires or tubes were acquired from a regularly licensed dealer therein. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6392) 
Sec. 122-28. - Records required. 
(a)  Contents. All secondhand dealers shall keep a book wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property of the kinds specified in section 122-26 which they acquire by purchase or trade and the name, address, estimated age, weight and height of the person from whom purchased or acquired and the date and hour of the purchase. These entries shall be made as soon as possible after the transaction is had, in no case more than one hour thereafter. 
(b)  Inspection. This record shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by the department of police. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6393) 
State Law reference— Permanent records required of dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-3. 
Sec. 122-29. - Serially numbered entries in record with corresponding numbers on property. 
Every entry required to be made in the secondhand dealer's book required by section 122-28 shall be numbered serially, and the property described in the entry shall have attached to it a tag bearing the same serial number. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6394) 
Sec. 122-30. - Acquiring articles with serial number mutilated or altered. 
It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer to purchase or acquire in trade any watch, clock, pistol, gun, automobile tire or battery or any other article commonly branded with a serial number, upon which the number has been mutilated or altered. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6395) 
Sec. 122-31. - Daily reports to police. 
Every secondhand dealer shall make a daily report in writing to the department of police in such form as may be prescribed by the police chief of all property purchased or acquired by the secondhand dealer during the 24 hours ending at 8:00 p.m. on the date of the report. In addition, secondhand dealers shall make daily reports of all typewriters, adding machines and radios coming into and going out of their places of business. The daily report shall be in such form and shall contain such information as may be required by the police chief but shall contain sufficient information to identify each of the articles. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6396) 
State Law reference— Reports of purchaser by dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-4. 
Sec. 122-32. - Examination and inspection of articles by police; segregation of suspicious articles. 
All property purchased or acquired by a secondhand dealer shall at all times be subject to examination and inspection by the department of police. If, upon the inspection, a police officer shall have reasonable cause to believe that any of the property is stolen, the police officer shall segregate it. It shall thereafter be unlawful for the person in possession of the property to dispose of it or in any manner mutilate, melt or disfigure it, until 15 days have elapsed from the date of the inspection. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6397) 
Sec. 122-33. - Time period for holding property. 
All property purchased or acquired by a secondhand dealer shall be held for not less than 15 days. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6398) 
Sec. 122-34. - Acquiring property from underage persons. 
It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer to buy or receive any property of the kinds described in section 122-26 from any person under the age of 18 years. However, any secondhand dealer taking from the seller a statement in writing that the seller is of age will not be held subject to this section, if the appearance of the seller is such as to make it uncertain that the seller is not 18 years of age. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6399) 
Sec. 122-35. - Purchase and sale of used tires or tubes. 
(a)  Report to police chief. All persons who shall acquire by purchase or otherwise any used vehicular tires or tubes from any source other than from a regular licensed dealer shall, within 24 hours after the acquisition, make and deliver to the police chief, upon a form to be prescribed and furnished by the police chief, a report disclosing the name and make of each tire or tube; the size, serial number; and for tires the type or description of the tread or if the tread is smooth a statement to that effect. The report shall further contain and disclose the name, address and detailed physical description, together with a legible print of a flat impression of the prints of the four fingers of the right hand of the person or the representative from whom each of the tires or tubes were acquired, stating the manner of acquisition thereof. 
(b)  Retention; segregation; inspection. All persons to whom subsection (a) of this section shall apply shall not, for a period of 15 days after the delivery of the report required to be made to the police chief covering the acquisition of the tires or tubes, sell or otherwise dispose of any of them except upon written permission from the police chief or other police officer authorized to grant permission and shall, during that 15-day period, make and keep accurate and detailed bookkeeping records as to the acquisition of each tire and tube, segregated and tagged so that they may be readily and easily identified from the information describing them upon the report and so that they may be readily and easily examined and inspected by the police chief or any other police officer who has been properly authorized to make the examination and inspection. 
(c)  Acquisition if serial number, maker's name is altered, mutilated or defaced. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to acquire, by purchase or otherwise, any used vehicular tire or tube commonly branded with the name of the maker or a serial number, upon which the name of the maker or the serial number has been altered, mutilated or defaced. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6400) 
Sec. 122-36. - Dealers in secondhand automobiles. 
(a)  Daily report. Every dealer in secondhand automobiles shall furnish the police chief at the chief's office each day a complete description in writing of all automobiles bought by the dealer during the preceding day or left or deposited with the dealer for the purpose of sale or exchange. The report shall state the make, year, model, type, motor and serial numbers of any secondhand automobile and also the date and hour of the sale to the dealer. 
(b)  Report by auctioneer. Any person acting as auctioneer of secondhand automobiles shall furnish a description with respect to any automobile offered by the auctioneer for sale at auction, whether the automobile is sold at auction or not. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6401) 
State Law reference— Records of purchasers of used motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-4-5, 40-4-40. 
Sec. 122-37. - Dealers in secondhand watches. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, a watch shall be deemed to be secondhand if: 
(1)  It, as a whole, or the case thereof or the movement thereof has been previously sold to or acquired by any person for such person's use or the use of another, but not for resale; provided, however, a watch that has been so sold or acquired and is thereafter returned either through exchange or for credit to the original vendor who sold or passed title to the watch shall not be deemed to be a secondhand watch for the purpose of this section, if the vendor shall keep a written or printed record setting forth the name of the purchaser thereof, the date of the sale or transfer thereof and the serial number, if any, on the case and movement and any other distinguishing number or identification mark, which record shall be kept five years from the date of the sale or transfer and shall be open for inspection during all business hours by the police or prosecutor for the city; 
(2)  Its case or movement serial numbers or other distinguishing numbers or identification marks shall be erased, defaced, removed, altered or covered; or 
(3)  Its movement is more than five years old and has been repaired by any person, including the vendor, notwithstanding that it may have been returned either through exchange or for credit to the original vendor. Cleaning and oiling a watch movement or recasing the movement in a new case shall not be deemed a watch repair for the purpose of this subsection. 
(b)  Tagging. Any person engaged in the business of buying or selling watches, who may sell or exchange or offer for sale or exchange, expose for sale or exchange, possess with the intent to sell or exchange or display with the intent to sell or exchange any secondhand watch shall affix and keep affixed thereto a tag with the term "secondhand" clearly and legibly written or printed thereon, which shall be affixed or placed so that the term "secondhand" shall be plainly visible at all times. 
(c)  Contents of invoice; records. Any person who may sell a secondhand watch or in any other way pass title thereto shall deliver to the vendee a written invoice bearing the term "secondhand" in bold letters larger than any other written matter upon the invoice. The invoice shall further set forth the name and address of the vendor, the name and address of the vendee, the date of the sale, the name of the watch or its maker and the serial number, if any, and any other distinguishing numbers or identification marks upon its case and movement. If the serial number or other distinguishing numbers or identification marks shall have been erased, defaced, removed, altered or covered, the invoice shall so state. The vendor shall keep on file a duplicate of the invoice five years from the sale thereof, which shall be open to inspection during all business hours by the police or prosecutor for the city. 
(d)  Advertising. Any person who may advertise or display in any manner a secondhand watch for sale or exchange shall state clearly in the advertisement or display that the watch is secondhand. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6402) 
State Law reference— Secondhand watches, O.C.G.A. § 43-49-1 et seq. 
Secs. 122-38—122-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PAWNBROKERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; local regulation of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 122-61. - Records required. 
All pawnbrokers shall keep books wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property pledged or sold to them. The description shall include the name of the maker of the article, any identifying mark or number and a statement of the kind of material of which it is made. In these books shall also be entered the name of the person by whom the article was deposited or sold and the time when the deposit or sale was done. These entries shall be made as soon after the transaction as is possible, in no event more than one hour thereafter. The books and the articles themselves so pledged or sold shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by the police. Any person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker who shall fail or refuse to keep books as provided in this section or who shall make false entries concerning the transactions named or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection and examination by any police officer of the books and of the property pledged with or sold to them shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6306) 
State Law reference— Permanent records required of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132 et seq. 
Sec. 122-62. - Daily report to police; fingerprints and information required from persons pawning property. 
(a)  Contents of daily report. Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report in writing to the department of police in the form prescribed by the police chief of all property pledged to or bought by the pawnbroker during the 24 hours ending at 8:00 p.m. on the date of the report. The reports shall be typewritten. In addition to any other information required by the police chief, the reports shall show the name and address of the pawnbroker; the time of the transaction; the serial number of pawn tickets; the amount paid or advanced; a full description of the articles, including kind, style, material, color, design, kind and number of stones in jewelry and all identifying names, marks and numbers; and a description of person selling or pawning, including name, address, weight and height. Insufficient reports shall be rejected, and any pawnbroker making them shall be deemed guilty of an offense. In addition, pawnbrokers shall make daily reports of all typewriters, adding machines and radios coming into and going out of their places of business. The daily report shall be in such form and shall contain such information as may be required by the police chief, but shall contain sufficient information to identify each of the articles. 
(b)  Fingerprints and information required. In addition to the owner records and information called for in subsection (a) of this section, each pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pawning any article with that pawnbroker the fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless that finger is missing in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand of the person pawning the article shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. All prints shall be made on forms to be furnished by the department of police, and the pawnbroker shall obtain all other information called for on the form furnished. Fingerprints and the information as required in this section shall be obtained from all persons each time the persons pawn any article with a pawnbroker, regardless of whether or not that person may have previously pawned an article with the pawnbroker and been fingerprinted. 
(c)  Exception. Subsection (b) of this section need not be complied with where the pawnbroker knows personally the person pawning the article or can identify within 90 days after the transaction the person pawning the article. 
(d)  Effect of failure to comply. Failure to fingerprint or, in the alternative, to know personally or to be able to identify when called upon within 90 days after an article has been pawned the person pawning the article shall constitute an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6307) 
Sec. 122-63. - Hours of operation. 
The hours within which pawnbrokers may keep open their places of business shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., except Saturdays and the week before Christmas, when the hour of closing shall be 12:00 midnight. The department of police shall enforce this section. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6308) 
Sec. 122-64. - Adding merchandise to stock. 
Pawnbrokers selling goods other than those pledged may add new merchandise to their stock of the same type as that on which loans are made, up to value of $1,000.00, without having to pay a license tax in addition to the general pawnbroker's license prescribed in chapter 30, article III. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6309) 
Sec. 122-65. - Time period for holding articles. 
Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license who takes goods on pawn or buys goods, taking full title thereto shall hold the goods so taken in pawn or purchased for 30 days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. As used in this section, the term "goods" shall be used in the broadest sense and shall include all kinds of personal property. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6310; Ord. No. 2004-45, § 1, 7-22-04) 
Sec. 122-66. - Restrictions upon sale, pledge of building glass and plumbing material. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for pawnbrokers to purchase, advance money on or take in pawn glass taken from buildings, such as mantel mirrors, art glass and the like, or copper wire, copper lining of bathtubs, lead pipes or any kind of plumbing material sold as junk where offered for sale or pawn by others than persons of known good character. 
(b)  Duties of pawnbrokers. In all cases where these goods are purchased or money advanced, pawnbrokers shall keep a record of the purchases or advances, showing the names of the persons from whom received, their residence, the goods so taken and the amount of money paid or advanced, and this shall be at all times open for inspection to members of the department of police. It shall also be unlawful for pawnbrokers to purchase these goods or to advance money thereon where their appearance indicates that they have been tampered with or there is an effort to conceal identity or if they are mutilated or otherwise show an effort to destroy evidence of the former location of the property. While the goods are being kept for ten days before being disposed of, they shall be so arranged that they can be inspected by members of the department of police on demand. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6311) 
Sec. 122-67. - Receiving goods from underage persons. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or the pawnbroker's agents or employees to receive in pawn from any person under 18 years of age goods of any character or description. Any pawnbroker taking from an applicant a statement in writing that the applicant is of age will not be deemed to have violated this section if the appearance of the applicant as to age and size makes it uncertain that the person is not 18 years of age. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6312) 
Sec. 122-68. - Effect of conviction for furnishing weapons to underage persons. 
A conviction of any person for furnishing weapons to a person under 18 years of age in violation of any laws of the state shall constitute cause for the revocation of any license issued by the city, and, upon notice to the person and a hearing before the license review board, the license shall be subject to revocation. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6313) 
Secs. 122-69—122-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT AND LICENSE 

Sec. 122-81. - Permit required. 
Every person, before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, shall first file an application with the department of police for a permit to conduct the business. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6301) 
Sec. 122-82. - Contents of application for permit. 
In order to obtain a pawnshop license, the owner(s) of the proposed pawnshop must first file an application for a pawnshop license with the licenses and permits unit of the Atlanta Police Department. A nonrefundable application fee of $100.00 is due at the time of application. Each applicant shall submit the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the proposed business. 
(3)  The nature and character of the business. 
(4)  If a partnership, the name of the partnership and the names and addresses of the partners. 
(5)  If a corporation, the name of the corporation and the names and addresses of the officers and members of the board of directors and stockholders. 
(6)  Any bank accounts listed in the name of the applicant, or maintained by the applicant, whether an individual, partnership or corporation. 
(7)  Whether the applicant, or any partners, or any corporation officers or board members, or any principal shareholders, have, within the preceding five years, a record for any conviction for the violation of any statute of the several states, or the United States, or of any ordinance of any city in the United States. "Conviction" as used in this section shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere, or the forfeiture of a bond. 
(8)  A listing of all real property which the applicant, partnership or corporation is presently leasing, and names and addresses of all lessees and lessors of such property. 
(9)  A certified copy of the applicant's financial statement for the 12-month period ending one week before the filing of the application for license, and state of incorporation of such corporation, as well as the names and addresses of the agents and employees of such corporation for a period of two years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(10)  Documentation of oral agreements and copies of all written agreements among any persons or stockholders of corporations or partners of partnerships applying for licenses to engage in adult entertainment, which agreements reflect or control ownership or division of profits, sharing of revenues or payment of rents, or which agreements reflect any other arrangements in connection with ownership, rents, profit sharing or income application of use. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6302; Ord. No. 1999-11, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 122-83. - Investigation, granting or denial. 
(a)  Investigation. All applicants shall be investigated by the department of police, and its findings shall be presented to the license review board at a public hearing on the application as provided in this division. 
(1)  Upon receiving an application for a pawnshop license, the permits division of the department of police, shall forward a copy of said application to the chairperson(s) of the affected neighborhood planning unit(s) for review. 
(2)  Said NPU(s) shall subsequently forward its recommendation to the permits division. The recommendation shall become a part of the permits division's report to the license review board. 
(b)  Granting or denial. The license review board shall conduct the hearing and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(c)  Fees. The fee for an annual pawnshop license shall be $750.00. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6303; Ord. No. 1999-11, § 2, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-36, § 1, 3-9-99; Ord. No. 2004-44, § 1, 7-22-04; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 24, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 122-84. - Grounds for nonissuance. 
(a)  No license or renewal for the operation of a pawn shop shall be issued to any person where any individual, having an interest either as owner, partner, officer, or principal shareholder, directly beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of such application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal ordinance involving a crime of moral turpitude or relating to sexual offenses and related matters, to alcohol or drug offenses and related matters or to gambling offenses and related matters. 
(b)  No license shall be issued under this article if the application contains a material omission, untrue or misleading information, or if the application fails to indicate the true ownership of the proposed establishment. 
(c)  No license shall be issued under this article if the applicant fails to furnish any and all data, information, and records related to the operation of licensed establishments, when the same has been requested by the department of police or the license review board. 
(d)  No license shall be issued under this article if the proposed premises do not comply with the zoning ordinances, the fire code or the building code of the city. 
(e)  No license shall be issued under this article where the person applying has had a permit to conduct a similar type business denied or revoked within a period of five years. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6304; Ord. No. 1999-11, § 3, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 122-85. - Renewal. 
Licenses to operate a pawnshop shall be renewed annually as of the date of the original issuance of the license for a fee of $750.00. All applications for renewal licenses shall furnish all data, information and records requested by the license review board or the department of police. The chief of police or designee shall have the authority to renew the license, and such decision may be appealed to the license review board for a hearing and recommendation to the mayor for final action. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6305; Ord. No. 1999-11, § 4, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-36, § 2, 3-9-99) 
Sec. 122-86. - Revocation; hearing. 
Any license issued under this article shall be subject to revocation for: 
(1)  The violation of any of the prohibitions contained in this article or in this Code. 
(2)  The violation of any other law, ordinance or regulation governing the operation of establishments licensed as pawnshops or which are reasonably related to the operation of such business. 
(3)  The violation of any occurrence which would have barred issuance of the original license. 
(4)  Permitting the solicitation of patrons on the licensed premises for prostitution or any other illegal act where the licensee, the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct. 
(5)  The failure to obtain prior approval of the maybe after hearing by the license review board for changing the type of establishment operated pursuant to this section. 
(6)  Failure by the licensee to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, patrons and others on the licensed premises, or on any property owned or leased by the licensee, including but not limited to the parking lots and parking areas, or on any parking lots or areas which may be lawfully used by patrons of a licensed establishment, in order to protect the safety and well being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. 
(7)  The violation of the human relations ordinance of the city, which violation shall be evidenced by receipt of an order by the human relations commission which shall contain findings of discrimination pursuant to chapter 94, article III of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1999-11, § 5, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-36, § 3, 3-9-99) 
Sec. 122-87. - Background checks. 
The owner of a licensed pawnshop shall perform criminal background checks on all employees hired after the date of passage of the ordinance. The pawnshop shall maintain such background check records for a minimum period of at least five years after an employee leaves the pawnshop's employ. The pawnshop shall provide all information relevant to the criminal background checks on all new employees to the Atlanta Police Department Licenses & Permits Unit within 30 days of the date of hire of said employee. 
(Ord. No. 1999-36, § 7, 3-9-99) 
Sec. 122-88. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn. This distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(b)  No pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, shall be located within 1,000 feet of any of the following uses: 
(1)  From any structures in residential use. 
(2)  From any public or private school. 
(3)  From any public or private park or recreation facility. 
(4)  From any public library branch. 
(5)  From any church or similar place of religious worship. 
(6)  From any public or private hospital or mental health care facility. 
(7)  From any child care or day care facility. 
The distance in subsection (b)(1)—(7), notwithstanding the definition of distance contained in subsection (a), shall be measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of the site proposed to be occupied by the pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, to the closest property line of any use identified above. 
(c)  Applicants for license to operate a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, shall include with their application, a plat of survey prepared and sealed by a surveyor registered in the state certifying that all of the locational requirements listed above in subsections (a) and (b) have been met. Such applications shall be reviewed by the bureau of buildings for compliance with all distance requirements. 
(d)  Except as provided in section 122-89, a location licensed to operate a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn on or before July 1, 2010 shall not be required to comply with the distance requirements set forth in subsections (a) and (b) above, provided that such location is not expanded or enlarged. 
Nor shall the distance requirements set forth in subsections (a) and (b) above apply to any location for which a new application to operate a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, has been filed with the police department if such application was filed prior to July 1, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09(10-O-0388), § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 122-89. - Application for new license at existing location. 
(a)  An applicant for a new license to operate a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, who has acquired a previously licensed pawn location may, within one year after the expiration of the previous owner's license, apply for a pawnshop license for that location even though the location may not meet distance requirements from churches, schools, private residences and other distance requirements set forth in section 122-88. 
(b)  An application filed under this section shall meet and qualify under all other requirements of this division for the granting of a new license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09(10-O-0388), § 2, 3-23-10) 
Secs. 122-90—122-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; local regulation of same, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 122-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Precious metals means any metals, including but not limited to, in whole or in part, silver, gold, platinum. 
Precious metals dealer means any person who, exclusively or as incidental to or in connection with any other business, is engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or goods made from precious metals from persons or sources other than industrial producers, manufacturers or licensed dealers. The term "precious metals dealer" also means any person as defined in this subsection and who engages in such business for a period not exceeding 180 days. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6501) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 122-107. - Effect of state law. 
This article shall be automatically repealed and shall have no force and effect after such date as a statute of general application which regulates in any way the subject matter of this article becomes the law of the state. 
(Ord. No. 1980-102, § 2, 11-22-80) 
State Law reference— State regulation of dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq. 
Sec. 122-108. - Records required. 
(a)  Every precious metals dealer shall maintain a book, in permanent form, in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each purchase of precious metals or goods containing precious metals, the following information: 
(1)  The date of the purchase transaction. 
(2)  The name of the person making the purchase from the seller. 
(3)  The name, age and address of the seller of the items purchased; a description of the general appearance of such seller or a photograph of the seller; and the number from such seller's driver's license or other similar identification. 
(4)  An identification and description of the purchased goods, including the serial numbers, model numbers or other numbers, and any identifying marks inscribed therein. 
(5)  The signature of the seller. 
(b)  The permanent record book required in this section shall be maintained for each purchase of precious metals or goods for a period of four years. 
(c)  Entries shall appear in chronological order in ink. No blank lines may be left between the entries. No obliterations, alterations or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book and all precious metals and goods containing precious metals shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer at all times. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6504) 
State Law reference— Permanent records of dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-3. 
Sec. 122-109. - Daily written report to police. 
(a)  Every precious metals dealer shall make a daily report in writing to the department of police of all precious metals or goods containing precious metals purchased during the 24 hours ending at 8:00 p.m. on the date of the report. The reports shall be on forms or on duplicate invoices as may be prescribed or approved by the department of police. The reports shall be typewritten and mailed or delivered to the department of police prior to 10:00 a.m. on the day following the date of the report. In addition to any other information required by the department of police, the reports shall include the name and address of the permittee, date of transaction, description and amount of the precious metals or goods containing precious metals purchased and the name and address of the person from whom purchased. 
(b)  The department of police may promulgate rules and regulations consistent with this section to require the proper enforcement of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6505) 
State Law reference— Written reports of purchases by dealers of precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-4. 
Sec. 122-110. - Time period for retention. 
For a period of 30 days, excluding Sundays and legal holidays, after the purchase or receipt of any precious metals or goods containing precious metals, every precious metals dealer shall retain upon the licensed premises or in a sealed vault off the premises, provided such a precaution is necessary for safekeeping, all such precious metals or goods containing precious metals purchased or received and shall not alter the original form, shape or condition of such metals or goods until that time shall have elapsed. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6506; Ord. No. 2004-45, § 2, 7-22-04) 
Sec. 122-111. - Applicability of certain sections. 
(a)  Sections 122-108 through 122-110 shall not apply to any precious metals or goods containing precious metals from industrial producers, manufacturers, licensed dealers or distributors. 
(b)  Division 2 of this article shall not apply to licensed pawnbrokers, scrap metal processors or secondhand dealers. Pawnbrokers, scrap metal processors and secondhand dealers are not, however, relieved from compliance with sections 122-108 through 122-110 when the purchase of precious metals or goods containing precious metals is from persons or sources other than industrial producers, manufacturers or licensed dealers or distributors. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6507) 
Sec. 122-112. - Unlawful activities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any precious metals dealer or any agent or employee of a precious metals dealer who makes purchases of precious metals or goods containing precious metals to: 
(1)  Fail to maintain and make entries in the permanent record book as required by section 122-108; 
(2)  Make any false entries therein; 
(3)  Falsify, obliterate, destroy or remove from the place of business such permanent record book; 
(4)  Fail to submit daily reports as required in section 122-109; or 
(5)  Refuse to allow a duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect such permanent book or any precious metals or goods containing precious metals in such dealer's possession. 
(b)  Any person violating subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6508) 
Secs. 122-113—122-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-2. 

Sec. 122-126. - Required; application. 
(a)  No person shall engage in business as a precious metals dealer without first obtaining a permit. 
(b)  A permit for a precious metals dealer shall authorize the permittee to engage in the business of a precious metals dealer. 
(c)  Application for the permit to engage in business as a precious metals dealer shall be made to the police department and shall be accompanied by an application fee of $100.00. 
(d)  The application for a permit shall be in writing and shall be sworn to or affirmed by the applicant. The application shall contain the name, address and age of the applicant, together with the names, addresses and ages of all other persons having an ownership interest in the business other than a publicly held corporation. Applications for publicly held corporations shall include the names, addresses and ages of all officers of the corporation and their titles, as well as the name and address of a permanent agent for service within the city. All applications shall contain an accurate description of the premises upon which the business is conducted and the zoning and planning classification of the premises, as well as such other things as may be required from time to time by the department of police. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6502; Ord. No. 1999-12, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-35, § 1, 3-9-99) 
Sec. 122-127. - Processing application; issuance of permit. 
(a)  After the application for the permit required by this division has been filed, the department of police shall determine whether the applicant has been convicted of a violation of a criminal law or section of this Code or other ordinance involving larceny, burglary or theft of any description as defined in the Criminal Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.). The application, together with the report of the department of police, shall be forwarded by the department of police to the license review board within 20 days after the initial filing, after which time the license review board shall hold a public hearing on the application. 
(b)  The license review board shall thereafter report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(c)  Upon the issuance of a permit to engage in business as a precious metals dealer, the permit holder shall submit an annual permit fee in the amount of $750.00 
(Code 1977, § 14-6503; Ord. No. 1999-12, § 2, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-35, § 2, 3-9-99; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 25, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 122-128. - Suspension or revocation. 
Any permits issued pursuant to this division may be suspended or revoked upon the following grounds: 
(1)  The holder of the permit misrepresents any information in the original or renewal application for any permit authorized by this division; 
(2)  The violation of a conviction of the holder of the permit of any criminal law involving larceny, burglary or theft of any description as defined in state law; or 
(3)  The violation of a conviction of the holder of the permit of any part of section 122-112(a). 
(Code 1977, § 14-6509) 
Sec. 122-129. - Notice and hearing on suspension or revocation. 
(a)  No permit which has been issued to any person pursuant to this division shall be suspended or revoked except upon one or more of the grounds stated in section 122-128 and until after the holder of the permit has been afforded a hearing. 
(b)  No hearing as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be held unless the holder of the permit has been given at least five days' notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a written statement of the charge upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(c)  Charges upon which any permit issued pursuant to this division may be initiated by the license review board or the police chief. 
(d)  The license review board has the authority to conduct such hearings and report its findings and recommendations to the mayor, who shall make the final decision with regard thereto. The mayor may suspend any such permit. The suspension may be made effective immediately and be in force until the next regular meeting of the license review board. Nothing in this section limits the powers of the mayor to suspend the permit for a time expiring prior to its next regular meeting. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6510) 
Sec. 122-130. - Background checks. 
All persons or businesses licensed by the city to deal in precious metals ("dealer") shall perform criminal background checks on all employees hired after the date of passage of the ordinance. The dealer shall maintain such background check records for a minimum period of at least five years after an employee leaves the dealer's employ. The dealer shall provide all information relevant to the criminal background checks on all new employees to the Atlanta Police Department Licenses and Permits Unit within 30 days of the date of hire of said employee. 
(Ord. No. 1999-12, § 3, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-35, § 3, 3-9-99) 
Secs. 122-131—122-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SECONDARY METAL RECYCLERS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Secondary metals recyclers, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-350 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 122-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief means the police chief or any member of the department of police designated by the chief. 
Department means the department of police. 
Ferrous metals means any metals containing significant quantities of iron or steel. 
Fixed location means any site occupied by a secondary metals recycler as owner of the site or as lessee of the site under a lease or other rental agreement providing for occupation of the site by the secondary metals recycler for a total duration of not less than 364 days. 
License review board means the city license review board. 
Money means a medium of exchange authorized or adopted by a domestic or foreign government as part of its currency. 
Nonferrous metals means metals not containing significant quantities of iron or steel, including, without limitation, copper, brass, aluminum, bronze, lead, zinc, nickel and alloys thereof, excluding precious metals subject to regulation under article IV of this chapter. 
Personal identification card means a driver's license or identification card issued by the department of police or a similar card issued by another state, a military identification card, a passport or an appropriate work authorization issued by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
Purchase transaction means a transaction in which a secondary metals recycler gives consideration having a value in excess of $5.00 in exchange for regulated metals property. 
Regulated metals property means any item composed primarily of any nonferrous metals, but does not include aluminum beverage containers, used beverage containers or similar beverage containers. 
Secondary metals recycler means any person who is engaged, from a fixed location or otherwise, in the business of paying compensation for ferrous or nonferrous metals that have served their original economic purpose, whether or not such person is engaged in the business of performing the manufacturing process by which ferrous metals or nonferrous metals are converted into raw material products consisting of prepared grades and having an existing or potential economic value. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6341) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 122-152. - Records required. 
(a)  A secondary metals recycler shall maintain a legible record of all purchase transactions to which such secondary metals recycler is party. 
(b)  The following information must be maintained for each purchase transaction: 
(1)  The name and address of the secondary metals recycler. 
(2)  The name, initials or other identification of the individual entering the information on the ticket. 
(3)  The date of the transaction. 
(4)  The weight, quantity or volume and a description of the type of regulated metals property purchased in a purchase transaction. 
(5)  The amount of consideration given in a purchase transaction for the regulated metals property. 
(6)  The distinctive number from and type of the personal identification card of the person delivering the regulated metals property to the secondary metals recycler and that person's name, address and signature. 
(c)  A secondary metals recycler shall maintain or cause to be maintained the information required by this section for not less than three years from the date of the purchase transaction. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6344) 
Sec. 122-153. - Inspection of regulated metals property and records. 
During the usual and customary business hours of a secondary metals recycler, a law enforcement officer shall, after properly presenting identification as a law enforcement officer, have the right to inspect any and all: 
(1)  Purchased regulated metals property in the possession of the secondary metals recycler; and 
(2)  Records required to be maintained under section 122-153. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6345) 
Sec. 122-154. - Hold notice. 
(a)  Whenever a law enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that certain items or regulated metals property in the possession of a secondary metals recycler have been stolen, the law enforcement officer may issue a hold notice to the secondary metals recycler. 
(b)  The hold notice shall be in writing, shall be delivered to the secondary metals recycler, shall specifically identify those items of regulated metals property that are believed to have been stolen and that are subject to the notice and shall inform the secondary metals recycler of the information contained in this section. The hold notice may be delivered via facsimile transmission; however, a hold notice delivered in such manner shall be valid for a period not to exceed 24 hours from such transmission. The hold notice may be extended to the full period of time allowed in subsection (c) of this section by hand delivery to the secondary metals recycler by a law enforcement officer of the hold notice. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the notice issued in accordance with this section, the secondary metals recycler receiving the notice may not process or remove the items or regulated metals property identified in the notice or any portion thereof from the place of business of the secondary metals recycler for 15 calendar days after receipt of the notice by the secondary metals recycler, unless sooner released by a law enforcement officer. 
(d)  At the expiration of the hold period the hold is automatically released, and the secondary metals recycler may dispose of the regulated metals property unless other disposition has been ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6346) 
Sec. 122-155. - Applicability of certain sections. 
Sections 122-152, 122-153 and 122-154 shall not apply to any regulated metals property purchased or received from any public utility; any industrial or manufacturing plant; any other commercial vendor that generates regulated metals property in the ordinary course of business; the United States or any agency thereof; any state, county or municipality or any department thereof; or any public authority or any scrap purchased at any judicial sale. However, all of such sections shall apply to any regulated metals property which is delivered to a secondary metals recycler by any agent or employee of any of the entities named in this section. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6347) 
Sec. 122-156. - Identification of vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any secondary metals recycler to purchase regulated metals property in the city utilizing any vehicle which is owned, operated by or in the custody of such secondary metals recycler unless the vehicle shall have printed upon it, in large letters not less than six inches in height, the name of the secondary metals recycler. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6348) 
Sec. 122-157. - Unlawful acts. 
It is unlawful for a secondary metals recycler to do or allow any of the following acts: 
(1)  Purchase regulated metals property between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  Purchase regulated metals property at a location other than the place of business set forth in the license. 
(3)  Purchase regulated metals property in return for money from a trailer, a vehicle or any location other than a fixed location. However, regulated metals may be purchased from a nonfixed location with any negotiable or nonnegotiable instrument, including a check or draft or any other type of instrument purchased with money, and sold for the purpose of making payments or transfers to others. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6351) 
Secs. 122-158—122-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 122-171. - Required; application. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "applicant" means the following: 
(1)  If a corporation, the chief executive officer or some other person with written authority from the corporation to bind the corporation as to its business operations within the city; 
(2)  If a partnership, the partner with the greatest proprietary interest; 
(3)  If an individual, that individual; or 
(4)  If a firm or association, the person with the greatest proprietary interest. 
(b)  No person shall engage in business as a secondary metals recycler at any location without first obtaining a license to engage in the business. 
(c)  A license for a secondary metals recycler shall authorize the licensee to engage in the business of paying compensation for ferrous or nonferrous metals that have served their original economic purpose. 
(d)  Application for the license shall be made to the department of police. 
(e)  The application for any such license shall be in writing and shall be sworn to or affirmed by the applicant. 
(f)  A fee of $100.00 shall be charged. 
(g)  The application shall contain the name, age and address of the applicant, together with the names, ages and addresses of all other persons having an interest in the business. For a publicly held corporation, only those owners holding at least 40 percent of the shares shall be required to be named. The application shall also contain a statement that the applicant will comply with the sections of this Code and other ordinances of the city relating to the business for which the applicant seeks a license. If the applicant is a corporation, the application must include the name and address of such corporation's registered agent for service of process in the state and a certified copy of statement from the secretary of state that the corporation is duly organized in the state or, if the corporation is organized in a state other than this state, a certified copy of the statement that the corporation is duly qualified to do business in this state. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6342) 
Sec. 122-172. - Processing application; issuance of license. 
(a)  After the application for the license required by this division is filed with the department of police, a criminal record check will be done. During the investigation by the police, the application shall be transmitted to the department of planning and development for review as to compliance with applicable sections of this Code and the Ordinances. This department shall send its report to the license review board. 
(b)  The license review board shall hold a public hearing and shall report its recommendation, together with the recommendation of the department of planning and development and of the department of police, to the mayor. 
(c)  The mayor, upon receiving the recommendations described in subparagraph (b) above, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendations, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(d)  If final action on the application is favorable, the applicant shall be issued an initial annual license for a fee of $500.00. The initial annual license will allow the licensee to engage in business as a secondary metals recycled or scrap processor and shall be valid until December 31 of the initial year of issuance, unless the license is suspended or revoked for violations of the Charter or related state laws or this code or other ordinances of the city. Thereafter, the applicant shall be required to obtain a renewal license for each succeeding year. A renewal application shall be accompanied by a fee of $500.00. A renewal license shall be issued by the licenses and permits unit of the police department if the applicant for renewal continues to meet all of the prerequisites for obtaining an initial license and no action to deny, suspend or revoke the license is pending against the applicant. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6343; Ord. No. 1999-19, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 26, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 122-173. - Grounds for denial, suspension or revocation. 
Any license issued pursuant to this division may be denied, suspended or revoked upon the following grounds: 
(1)  For the holder of the license to state any untrue or false information in any original, renewal of transfer application for any license authorized by this division, notwithstanding the fact that the untrue and false information may have been discovered by the department after the applicant has been granted the license; 
(2)  For any three violations within a 12-month period by the holder of the license or an applicant for a license, of any laws or sections of this Code, or other ordinances regulating the business licensed pursuant to this article, for the violation of any laws, rules or regulations of the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) or any successor agency with the same or similar regulatory function or of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or any successor agency with the same or similar regulatory function. 
(3)  For the conviction of the license holder of any criminal offense relating to theft. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6349; Ord. No. 2007-30(07-O-0971), § 1, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 122-174. - Notice and hearing on denial, suspension or revocation. 
(a)  No license issued to any person pursuant to this division shall be denied, suspended or revoked except upon one or more of the grounds stated in section 122-174 and until after the holder of the license has been afforded a hearing. 
(b)  No hearing as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be held unless the holder of the license has been given at least ten days' notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a written statement of the charge upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(c)  Action to deny, suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this division shall be initiated by the chief. 
(d)  The license review board is delegated that authority to conduct the hearings in this section and report its findings and recommendations to the mayor, who shall take final action. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6350) 
Chapter 126 - SOCIAL SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Office of citizen employment and training, § 2-231; office of human services, § 2-236; budgets for and rental of neighborhood centers, § 2-921; mayor's committee on drug control, § 2-1956 et seq.; free burial permits for paupers, § 38-28; health and sanitation, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; social services generally, O.C.G.A. § 49-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 126-1—126-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CHARITABLE INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 126-26. - Monthly appropriations; effect of institution's refusal to receive charitable cases. 
The amounts appropriated to charitable institutions shall be paid to these institutions in monthly installments. On failure of an institution to receive persons sent to it, as provided in section 126-28, the officer who shall have designated the institution shall report it to the chief financial officer, and it shall be unlawful for the chief financial officer to draw any further check or warrant for that institution or to approve any vouchers in its behalf. In that case, the appropriation set apart to that institution shall be stricken, and the amount appropriated for it shall be transferred to the department of contingent and grants. 
(Code 1977, § 14-7031) 
Sec. 126-27. - Reception by institution of persons claiming injury on streets, public places. 
(a)  Notice required. The officers and agents in charge of all institutions of public charity to whose maintenance the city contributes shall notify the department of law at once of the reception of any person claiming to have received an injury upon the streets, avenues or public places of the city, in order that the claim may be promptly investigated and the evidence attending it ascertained for the information of the council or for defense, if suit follows. 
(b)  Investigation. Inquiries shall be made by those officers and agents to ascertain the cause of injury, if the patient fails voluntarily to reveal it or if the circumstances suggest that injury. 
(Code 1977, § 14-7032) 
Sec. 126-28. - Duty of institutions to receive objects of charity when sent by heads of departments, mayor. 
All organizations, bodies and homes organized for charitable and beneficent purposes to which the city may make appropriations, annually or otherwise, shall receive any objects of charity or persons in need of protection or aid sent to them by the head of any department of the city in the course of whose duty it may become necessary to provide for any of those persons, the institution selected each time to be the one appropriate to the particular case in hand. If there is no head of a department to give this direction, the mayor shall direct which institution shall receive and care for those persons. 
(Code 1977, § 14-7033) 
Chapter 130 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to provide for collection and disposal of solid waste, § 1-102(c)(25). 
Cross reference— Department of public works, § 2-461 et seq.; clean city commission, § 2-1876 et seq.; solid waste disposal at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, § 22-106; littering by vendors, § 30-1412; environment, ch. 74; health and sanitation, ch. 86; property to be maintained free of unhealthful conditions, including solid waste, junk, weeds and exterior storage, § 86-6; utilities, ch. 154. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; specific grant of constitutional authority relative to garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 130-1. - Statement of purpose and definitions. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. 
(1)  It is the stated policy of the City of Atlanta to protect the health, safety and welfare of its residents. Furthermore, the City of Atlanta recognizes environmental protection as a right of the people living within the city. So that the objectives of these policies might be achieved, it is also essential to take necessary measures to preserve and protect the environment of the city for its inhabitants. 
(2)  Therefore, it is declared to be the purpose of this chapter to provide an effective solid waste management program within the city to better protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of City of Atlanta and its residents. Furthermore, the City of Atlanta must work to maintain an effective solid waste management program to ensure that the City of Atlanta remains an effective steward of the environment and its natural resources. 
(b)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Brown goods means any discarded appliances including but not limited to electronic equipment such as stereos, televisions, computers, and VCRs and other similar items. 
Building of public worship means any lot upon which is located one or more buildings used for the purpose of public worship. 
Bulk yard trimmings means oversized yard trimmings such as tree trunks and branches exceeding two feet in diameter and four feet in length that are biodegradable. 
Bulky items means discarded non-putrescible waste of a size and form which cannot be easily deposited in, or removed by city personnel from, containers provided by the city for the disposal and collection of solid waste from residences, including but not limited to the following items: furniture; carpets; mattresses; clothing; and tires. Bulky items does not include any motor vehicle or any subassembly, component or part thereof (except tires). 
Chief of staff means the Chief of Staff to the Mayor of the City of Atlanta, or authorized designee. 
City means City of Atlanta. 
Collector means a person who, under verbal or written agreements, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and transporting solid waste, from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions and similar locations or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and transporting waste from such individual's own single-family dwelling unit. 
Commercial and industrial property means any lot that is used wholly or predominantly, according to the total square footage of building structure on all stories devoted to a particular use, for business, commercial or industrial purposes or for the purposes of boardinghouses or mobile home parks and any other lot which is excluded from any other categories set forth in this section or the definitions contained in this section. 
Commercial waste means waste materials generated in commercial operations. 
Commissioner means the commissioner of public works or any duly authorized assistant, agent or representative of the commissioner. 
Commissioner of public works means the commissioner of the department of public works or any duly authorized deputy, assistant, agent or representative of the commissioner. 
Compostable material means any organic materials that are source separated for processing or composting, such as yard trimmings and food waste. 
Construction and demolition waste : 
A.  Construction and demolition waste means discarded waste building materials and rubble generally resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of buildings and pavements, including but not limited to processed wood, metal, bricks, concrete, wallboard, paper and cardboard. 
B.  Construction and demolition waste does not include materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition or buildings and pavements, that contain or have been contaminated by hazardous materials which must be handled and disposed of separately. 
Container means any receptacle used to accumulate solid waste from residential, commercial and industrial waste generators. Containers vary in size and type according to the needs of the customer. 
Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal and includes administration, personnel, land, equipment, design and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Disposal site means the location or land area where the final disposition of solid waste occurs. 
Extra garbage means garbage placed outside the city provided container. 
Garbage : 
A.  Garbage means putrescible wastes including kitchen and table food wastes; animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the storage, preparation, cooking, processing or handling of foodstuffs; nonputrescible wastes that are mixed in the same container with or contaminated by putrescible wastes; small dead animals not exceeding five pounds in weight; and any putrefactive or easily decomposable waste material that is likely to attract flies, vermin, birds or rodents. 
B.  Garbage does not include materials that are separated and set aside for recycling or composting and does not include hazardous material, household hazardous material, or sewage or sewage sludge or human or animal excrement or yard waste. 
Generator means any person or business responsible for the creation, generation, or production of solid waste upon any premises. 
Hazardous material as defined in Section 1004(5) of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA), means a solid waste, or combination of solid wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may: 1) cause, or contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or 2) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed. The owner or operator of a facility which treats, stores, manages, or disposes of such materials is required by Section 312 of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act (EPCRA) to submit an emergency and hazardous chemical inventory form to the State and to the Local Emergency Planning Commission, and is required to submit a MSDS per RCRA. Hazardous material includes all household hazardous materials in single containerized volumes of five gallons or greater, or uncontainerized improper discharges or deposits of volumes of two or more gallons. 
Hazardous material disposal facility means any facility where final disposal of any hazardous material occurs; including any facility classified Subtitle C under Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). 
Household hazardous materials means any discarded liquid, solid, contained gas, or sludge, including any material, substance, product, commodity or waste used or generated in the household or similar source that is either ignitable, corrosive, reactive or toxic, in single containerized volumes under five gallons. Household hazardous materials also includes any item, product or material containing or contaminated by any household hazardous material. 
Incinerator means any device intended or used for the reduction or destruction of solid waste by burning. 
Industrial waste means waste materials generated in industrial operations. 
Landfill means a method of disposing of solid wastes, other than putrescible wastes or hazardous wastes, on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Litter means uncontrolled or uncontainerized solid waste. 
Multi-family dwelling means any permanent premises on a single parcel of land designed for or occupied by more than six residential dwelling units where the residential units do not receive separate or individual solid waste collection service. 
Municipal solid waste (MSW) means any solid waste derived from commercial and residential properties, including garbage, trash, yard trimmings and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multi-family residences, hotels and motels, picnic grounds, parks, and day use recreation areas. 
Nuisance means any improper deposit or disposal of refuse as defined in this section. 
Outdoor event means any gathering of 2,000 people or more, including but not limited to a Class A, B, C, or D outdoor festival, and events such as sporting events, circuses, concerts, or exhibitions, and other events that may or may not qualify as an outdoor festival. 
Outdoor event property means any property located in the city, including but not limited to a parking lot, where the property has been used for or in conjunction with an outdoor event. 
Owner means the person holding the legal title to any real property located in the city. 
Paper bags means biodegradable, unlined paper or paperboard (cardboard) produced from chemical pulp produced in the kraft process. 
Permit holder means the individual who is the named recipient of a city permit that authorizes an outdoor event to occur on city-owned property. 
Plastic #1 means Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) which include soft drink, water, and other beverage bottles, detergent and cleaning containers, condiments such as ketchup, salad dressing, peanut butter and other food containers and bottles. 
Plastic #2 means High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) which include milk and water jugs, laundry detergents, shampoo bottles. 
Plastic #3 means Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC or V) which include clear food packaging, detergents and window cleaner bottles, some plastic squeeze bottles, cooking oil, peanut butter jars. 
Plastic #4 means Low Density Polyethylene (LDPE) which include most bottles. 
Plastic #5 means Polypropylene (PP) which include deli soups, syrup, yogurt and margarine containers, clouded plastic containers. 
Plastic #6 means Polystyrene (PS) which include egg [cartons]. 
Plastic #7 means mixed plastics (other) which include lids five-gallon water bottles, and "sport" water bottles. 
Private contractor means any business or person operating under a contract for the collection and removal of solid waste from any multi-family residential, commercial, or industrial premises within the city. 
Property owner means the owner, or agent of the owner, of any property located in the city, where the city does not own the property. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include but are not necessarily limited to kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes and garbage. 
Recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recovered materials processing facility means a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials. Such term shall not include a solid waste handling facility; provided, however, any solid waste generated by such facility shall be subject to all applicable city, State of Georgia and federal laws and regulations relating to such solid waste. 
Recycling contamination means any garbage, bagged recyclables, food, liquids, plastic bags, clothes hangers, Styrofoam, batteries, light bulbs, human waste, animal waste, medical waste, clothes, electronics, cords, hoses, chains, tanks, wood, plastic furniture, metal or such other items as determined by the commissioner that is placed in a recycling container provided by the city. 
Recyclable materials means: 
(a)  Those materials, including but not limited to metal containers, plastic bottles and jars, glass containers and paper, which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential, and can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and 
(b)  Those materials limited to metal; plastics numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 7; glass; paper; and cardboard, which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential, and can be feasibly used, reused or recycled. This term does not include: food, liquids, plastic bags, clothes hangers, Styrofoam, batteries, light bulbs, and medical waste, or such other items as determined by the commissioner. 
Residence means any lot that is used exclusively for residential purposes, but not lots upon which are located licensed hotels or motels or apartments. 
Residential composting means any composting of yard trimmings generated on the residential premises for use on the residential property on which it was generated. 
Residential property means any property that is used exclusively for residential purposes, but not properties upon which are located licensed hotels or motels. 
Residential vacant land charge means a flat charge for right-of-way maintenance assessed to residential parcels with the Class Code of 100 
Rubbish means all uncontainerized, discarded, nonputrescible waste matter excluding yard trimmings that cannot be easily deposited in, or removed by city personnel from containers provided by the city for disposal and collection of solid waste from residences. 
Salvage means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid wastes for future use as approved by the commissioner. 
Sanitary landfill means a method of disposing of putrescible waste and hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Scavenging means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
Single-family dwelling means any permanent premises used for or designated as a single-family residential dwelling. Single-family dwelling includes each part of a condominium project, duplex, triplex, townhouse project or apartment building which has been approved by the commissioner of solid waste services for separate or individual solid waste collection service. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plan, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923). 
Solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs and includes but is not limited to landfills, sanitary landfills, municipal solid waste landfill and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposing of solid wastes or any combination thereof. Special pickup means a pickup of bulky items, bulk material or extra garbage requested by the customer at a time other than the regularly scheduled service time, which involves the dispatch of a truck. 
Solid waste handling facility means any facility or location, the primary purpose of which is storage, collection, sorting, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste. Such facility shall include any facility engaged in the handling, as described above, of compostable waste, other than a facility engaged solely in the handling of yard trimmings, as defined herein. 
Tenant means any person or persons, other than the owner, occupying or in possession of a premises. 
Transfer station means a supplemental transportation facility used to transfer solid waste or facilitate the transfer of solid waste from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to another facility for further processing or disposal. 
Transporter means any person or business moving, relocating or transporting any solid waste upon the public streets, highways and public right-of-way within the city. 
Trash means nonputrescible solid waste, of a size and form which can be easily deposited in, and removed by city personnel, from containers provided by the city for the disposal and collection of solid waste from residences, and which includes paper, cardboard, small metal items or containers and packaging materials, and similar items normally accumulated in the care and maintenance of residential or commercial property. 
Vegetative overgrowth means any and all uncultivated vegetative growth exceeding a height of 18 inches, as measured vertically from the surface of the ground, and covering a continuous area of 400 square feet or 25 percent, whichever is less, of that portion of any lot, tract or parcel of land which is not occupied by buildings, other structures or trees. 
Weeds means all rank, vegetative growth, including kudzu, poison ivy, plants of obnoxious odors, weeds and grasses causing hay fever or those which serve as a breeding place for mosquitoes and other unhealthy or undesirable insects or as a refuge for snakes, rats or other rodents or as a hiding place for filth, litter or trash or that create a fire or traffic hazard or provide a hiding place for persons. 
White goods means discarded household appliances including but not limited to refrigerators, ranges, washers, dryers, water heaters, and dishwashers and other similar items. 
Yard trimmings means plant material (leaves, grass clippings, branches, brush, flowers, roots, wood waste, etc.); debris commonly thrown away in the course of maintaining yards and gardens, including sod; and biodegradable or compostable waste approved for the yard trimmings programs. It excludes loose soils; food waste; plastics and synthetic fibers; lumber; any wood or tree limbs over four inches in diameter or four feet in length; human or animal excrement; soil contaminated with hazardous materials; and all matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance by a professional contractor. 
Yard trimmings bag means lawn-and-leaf paper bags designed to contain yard trimmings that is no larger than 34 gallons and no heavier than 35 pounds. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1, 3-9-04; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 7, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2015-08(15-O-1045), § 1, 2-26-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 2, 11-14-18 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 14, provided for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2007. 
Sec. 130-2. - Maintenance and inspection of property. 
(a)  Required. Every person owning or occupying public or private property in the city shall maintain the property free of any condition that may render the premises or property to be unhealthy, unsanitary, unsightly or unaesthetic to the occupants thereof, the neighborhood or the community at large. 
(b)  Conditions in violation. Because they are deemed to be conducive to breeding or harboring of harmful germs or to the breeding or harboring of insects, snakes, rodents, lizards or similar or undesirable living pests and carriers of harmful germs or poisons or to the harboring of undesirable persons or illicit activities and are in violation of the general public health, safety, welfare and well-being, the existence of any one of the following conditions on property within the city shall be in violation of this section and this Code: 
(1)  Uncontainerized garbage or uncovered garbage containers of all kinds and types. 
(2)  Trapped litter or any other improperly containerized solid waste. 
(3)  Exterior storage of solid waste or other unsightly materials. 
(4)  The existence of weeds and vegetative overgrowth. 
(5)  The existence, storage or accumulation of garbage, hazardous, putrescible solid waste or rubbish. 
(c)  Inspect ion of premises. The commissioner of public works or any duly authorized agent of the department of public works or other city departments may enter on and inspect any and all public and private property in the city to determine by inspection that those properties are or are not free of any condition which may be in violation of this section or chapter. For the purpose of this duty, the sanitation code enforcement officer, including code enforcement officers, route supervisors, assistant sanitary area supervisors, sanitary area supervisors or subsequent classification titles performing the same duties, are eligible to apply for status as code enforcement agents under section 98-1. In order to enforce code provisions and issue citations, these employees must apply for and receive status as a code enforcement agent. 
(d)  Notice of unsanitary conditions. Upon the determination through inspection by the commissioner of public works or any duly authorized agent of the department of public works or any other duly authorized agent of the city that any property within the city is in violation of this section, the commissioner shall give written notice to the owner or agent of the owner of the property of the condition found. 
(1)  Such notice shall set forth the condition of the property, the specific violation of this section and the Code and the remedial action to be taken. 
(2)  The notice to the owner or agent shall include a time certain in which the nuisance is to be abated, but not more than ten days from date of receipt of the notice by the owner or agent. All notices shall be sent by personal service or sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address as listed in the official tax register of the county or records of the secretary of state. The nuisance shall be processed and abated in accordance with section 74-161. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2006-76, § 1, 10-11-06; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Sec. 130-3. - Deposit of solid waste on streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall deposit in any street, sidewalk or other public place in the city any solid waste of any type; provided, however, that earth and rubbish or building debris caused by construction may be allowed to lie in those places subject to permit by the department of public works. In compliance with this section, it shall be lawful to place bulk yard trimmings, such as branches and similar matter, in the parkway between the sidewalk and the curbstone, provided the debris does not extend over the sidewalk so as to block pedestrian traffic or fall into or extend over the street so as to block pedestrian traffic or fall into or extend over the street so as to hinder vehicular traffic or make it difficult to use motor-driven sweepers. 
(b)  Tree services. All persons engaged in the business of trimming or removing trees, shrubbery or similar growth shall not allow any sawdust, branches, stumps and all portions of the byproduct generated by any tree service to accumulate on any adjacent public way and shall remove all debris from the public way at least once a day. Any property owner shall be responsible for ensuring that such persons or businesses shall properly remove, transport and dispose of the debris in conformity with the requirements of this Code and in a manner that does not cause any debris to be washed, drained, discarded or otherwise allowed to flow into the city sewer system. 
(c)  Landscaping, nurseries or yard maintenance services. All persons engaged in the business of landscaping, nurseries or yard maintenance and who shall contract with a property owner, the owner's agent or the occupant to improve the property, trim or remove shrubbery and trees or maintain yards shall remove from the property all solid waste and rubbish, including rocks, dirt, glass, trimmings and other byproducts generated by such service. Any property owner shall be responsible for ensuring that such persons or businesses shall properly remove, transport and dispose of the debris in conformity with the requirements of this code and in a manner that does not cause or allow any debris to be washed, drained, discarded or otherwise allowed to flow into the city sewer system. 
(d)  Construction and demolition waste. All persons engaged in the business of construction or demolition who shall contract with a property owner, the owner's agent or the occupant to improve the property shall remove from the property all solid waste and other byproducts generated by such service. Any property owner shall be responsible for ensuring that such person or businesses shall properly remove, transport and dispose of the debris in conformity with any requirements of the State of Georgia, and the requirements of this Code and in a manner that does not cause or allow any debris to be washed, drained, discarded or otherwise allowed to flow into the city sewer system. 
(e)  Damage to the public right-of-way. If the public right-of-way is damaged during the removal of any solid waste from any property, such person, business or commercial entity shall restore the public right-of-way to the condition that it was in before the damage occurred or shall pay the city in full for any costs and expenses which the city incurs in connection with the performance of that work. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Sec. 130-4. - Cleanliness of sidewalks. 
It shall be the duty of all occupants and owners of property and owners of vacant property, in front of which the sidewalk area is paved or unpaved, to keep that area clean and to do such sweeping and scraping and cutting of grass or weeds and watering, pruning and maintaining planted material and planters as may be necessary to remove clay, dirt and trash therefrom and to render it passable, comfortable and sightly. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-5. - Decaying animal matter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person having the ownership or control of any animal matter within the city which is in process of decay so as to be offensive or dangerous to the public health and welfare to permit the same to remain within the city, while in such condition, more than 12 hours after such animal matter shall have come into such offensive or dangerous condition, whether it be at an establishment for the rendering or changing the character thereof or not. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any decaying animal matter through the curbside collection program of the city. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than $25.00 and not more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Every day on which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-6. - Throwing, depositing, or disposing of garbage, trash, yard trimmings or other solid waste upon streets, sidewalks, public places, public property and public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Throw, deposit or discard debris, uncontainerized garbage, litter, trash, solid waste; uncontainerized recyclable materials; or uncontainerized yard trimmings upon the streets, sidewalks, public places, public property and public rights-of-way within the city. 
(2)  Place, throw, deposit or discard nails, tacks, glass or any similar substance, object or objects which would be likely to injure the feet of persons or animals or cut, puncture or otherwise damage tires or vehicles, upon the streets, sidewalks, public places, public property and public rights-of-way within the city. 
(b)  Signs in rights-of-way. The commissioner of public works or authorized designee shall be responsible for installing "No Littering" signage within the right-of-way as deemed appropriate. These signs shall be highly visible and placed strategically throughout the entire city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2015-08(15-O-1045), § 2, 2-26-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 3, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-7. - Disposal of garbage and other solid waste on private property; uncontainerized garbage on private property. 
(a)  Garbage on private property. It shall be unlawful for any owner within the city to have upon the owner's property any containerized or uncontainerized garbage, trash or other materials or substances which may catch and retain rainwater or anything which will furnish food for or attract or harbor rats or which will attract flies or breed mosquitoes or otherwise become a fire hazard or health menace. 
(b)  Improper dumping or disposal. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or otherwise place, or allow to be dumped, deposited or otherwise placed on any public or private property within the city, with or without the consent of the owner or the owner's agent, any solid waste that is not prepared and placed according to the provisions of this code, unless otherwise permitted according to the provisions of section 130-63. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Sec. 130-8. - Transporting garbage, trash, solid waste, or other material in open motor vehicles; spills from motor vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated upon any public street in the city any open truck, wagon or other motor vehicle in and upon which garbage, trash, manure, solid waste material, other debris, or other materials are transported, unless the vehicle shall be equipped with a cover or other securing device that will prevent the garbage, trash, waste material, other debris or other material from falling from the truck onto the streets of the city. 
(b)  In the event that spillage does occur in spite of the appropriate use of said devices, the person responsible for the operation of the vehicle shall take immediate action to remove the material from the street or sidewalk. Shoveling, sweeping, or vacuuming the material and removing it from the roadway is an appropriate response. Failure to properly remove spilled material from a public street or sidewalk, or washing spilled material into any storm sewer, sanitary sewer, catch-basin, manholes, or other drainage-way is not an acceptable response, and is a violation of City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Sec. 130-9. - Spills from vehicles; concrete, cement, gravel, sand, dirt, and asphalt hauling. 
(a)  Any person engaged in hauling concrete, cement, gravel, sand, dirt, or asphalt on any public street within the corporate limits of the city shall load or fill vehicles so as to not allow spillage of any material onto the city streets or sidewalks. All vehicles hauling wet concrete, cement or loose material, arc required to use suitable covers, spill prevention and capture devices to prevent materials from blowing, spilling, or dripping from the vehicle. 
(b)  In the event that spillage does occur in spite of the appropriate use of said devices, the person responsible for the operation of the vehicle shall remove the material from the street or sidewalk. Shoveling, sweeping, or vacuuming the material and removing it from the roadway is an appropriate response. Failure to properly remove spilled material from a public street or sidewalk, or washing spilled material into any storm sewer, sanitary sewer, catch-basin, manholes, or other drainage-way is not an acceptable response, and is a violation of city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Sec. 130-10. - Hazardous materials. 
(a)  Prohibited conduct. 
(1)  No person shall dispose of any hazardous materials at any of the solid waste disposal facilities or transfer stations within the limits of the city. 
(2)  No person shall store or accumulate any hazardous materials in any container used for storage or accumulation of garbage, rubbish, recovered materials, or solid wastes. 
(3)  No person shall store or accumulate any hazardous materials in any container not designed, intended or permitted for storage or accumulation of hazardous materials. 
(4)  No person shall deposit or discard on any public or private property any type or kind of hazardous material within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Sec. 130-11. - Household hazardous materials. 
(a)  Prohibited conduct. 
(1)  No household hazardous materials shall be disposed through the curbside collection service of the city in a matter different from the procedures for the proper disposal of household hazardous wastes established by the commissioner of public works or authorized designee. 
(2)  No person shall deposit or discard on any public or private property any type or kind of household hazardous material within the city. 
(3)  Specific household hazardous materials. Specific household hazardous materials which require special handling for disposal through the curbside collection program of the city include but are not limited to the following materials: 
a.  Automotive . Specific automotive materials considered household hazardous materials which are prohibited from disposal as municipal solid waste include but are not limited to antifreeze; batteries and battery fluids; gasoline, motor oil and other petroleum products; solvents; and transmission fluid. 
b.  Cleaners . Specific cleaners considered household hazardous materials which are prohibited from disposal as municipal solid waste include but are not limited to bleach; disinfectants; drain openers; mold and mildew stain removers; oven cleaners; toilet bowl cleaners; and tub and tile cleaners. 
c.  Hobby products . Specific hobby products considered household hazardous materials that are prohibited from disposal as municipal solid waste include but are not limited to chemistry sets; artists' paint; photography chemicals; and picric acid. 
d.  Home maintenance . Specific home maintenance materials considered household hazardous materials which are prohibited from disposal as municipal solid waste include but are not limited to metal polishes; latex paint; solvent-based paint; paint strippers; paint thinners; and wood polishes and waxes. 
e.  Pesticides . Materials and substances used for the control of pests, vermin and rodents are considered household hazardous materials that are prohibited from disposal as municipal solid waste. 
f.  Lawn care products . Herbicides, insecticides, fungicides and fertilizers containing pesticides are considered household hazardous materials that are prohibited from disposal as municipal solid waste. 
g.  Miscellaneous home products . Other specific materials considered household hazardous materials that are prohibited from disposal as municipal solid waste include but are not limited to aerosol air fresheners; any explosives; fluorescent lamps; freon; household batteries; kerosene; pool chemicals; smoke detectors; thermometers; and thermostats. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 4, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-12. - Enforcement, violations, and penalties. 
(a)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Chapter, the City of Atlanta Municipal Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of the provisions of this Chapter, is authorized to impose a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, work on the public streets or on public works of the city for not more than six months, or any combination thereof as set out in Section 1-8 of the Atlanta City Code of Ordinances. With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each calendar day the violation exists is considered a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties prescribed above, the following penalties may be imposed: 
(1)  Recovery of costs. Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be liable to the city for the total amount of all costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating any violation of this chapter. 
(2)  If any person or business performing work under any contract with the city is found guilty of violating this chapter, the city may terminate the contract by giving written notice of the termination to the person or business, according to the terms of the contract. 
(3)  Impounding of motor vehicles. 
a.  A motor vehicle that is used in any violation of this chapter shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under this subsection. The owner of record of such vehicle shall be liable to the city for an administrative penalty equal to the total cost incurred by the city for the towing and storage of the vehicle and in addition to any other penalties imposed under this section. 
b.  Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing. 
(4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  The remedies listed in this section are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the department may seek cumulative remedies. 
(d)  Each day a separate offense. Each day any violation of any section of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Secs. 130-13—130-27. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SCRAP TIRE ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, approved December 12, 2012, effective April 1, 2013, added provisions designated as a new Art. II, §§ 130-28—130-35.1. It should also be noted that § 5 of said ordinance provides, "This Ordinance shall take effect on April 1, 2013." 

Sec. 130-28. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "The City of Atlanta Scrap Tire Enforcement Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13) 
Sec. 130-29. - Intent and purpose. 
The City of Atlanta finds that protection of the environment is vital to the health, welfare and economic progress of the City of Atlanta and its citizens. Therefore, it is the intent of this article to establish a regulatory and procedural process that prohibits the unlawful dumping of scrap tires from the point of generation to the point of disposal. 
(Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13) 
Sec. 130-30. - Georgia Solid Waste Management Code and Scrap Tire Management Regulations incorporated by reference. 
The provisions of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, at Title 12, Chapter 8, Article 20 (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20, et seq.) and the Rules for Solid Waste Management, Georgia Rules and Regulations Chapter 391-3-4 are hereby incorporated by reference into this article and made a part of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13) 
Sec. 130-31. - Definitions. 
(a)  Dumping means to abandon, dispose of, throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, or burn. 
(b)  End user means the last person who uses the scrap tires, chips, crumb rubber, or similar materials to make a product with economic value, or in the case of energy recovery, the person who utilizes the heat content or other forms of energy from the incineration or decomposition of scrap tires, chips, or similar materials. 
(c)  Financial assurance means a mechanism designed to demonstrate that funds will be available to ensure compliance with statutory/regulatory and permit requirements of scrap tire carriers. The financial assurance mechanisms must be either performance bonds or letters of credit. 
(d)  Manifest means a form or document used for identifying the quantity and composition and the origin, routing, and destination of scrap tires during transportation from the point of generation through any intermediate points to an end user, scrap tire processor, sorter, or disposal facility approved by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources ("EPD"). 
(e)  New replacement tires include, but are not limited to, tires for automobiles, trucks, heavy equipment, motorbikes, boats and other trailers, aircraft, and recreational vehicles. 
(f)  Recycled means any process by which materials that would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed to be reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
(g)  Retail tire dealer means a person or business entity actively engaged in the business of selling new and/or used tires and may also be, but is not limited to, manufacturers, wholesalers, and others who sell new and/or used tires to the ultimate consumer. 
(h)  Retreadable casing means a tire that retains such quality and soundness of the tire structure that it can accept a retread or repair and provide additional service, and that is destined for retreading. It is a rebuttable presumption that non-new tires are scrap tires and not retreadable casings. 
(i)  Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 
(j)  Scrap tire carrier means any person or business entity that is engaged in picking up or transporting scrap and/or used tires for the purpose of removal to an end user, scrap tire processor, sorter, or disposal facility, and that is currently required under Georgia state law to obtain and possess an EPD scrap tire carrier permit. 
(k)  Scrap tire generator means any person or business entity that generates scrap tires and that is required under Georgia state law to obtain and possess an EPD scrap tire generator permit. Scrap tire generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, and service stations. 
(l)  Scrap tire processing means any method, system, or other treatment designed to change the physical form, size, or chemical content of scrap tires and includes all aspects of its management (administration, personnel, land, equipment, building, and other elements). Scrap tire processing includes, but is not limited to, shredding, chopping, chipping, baling, splitting, recycling, and sorting of scrap tires. 
(m)  Scrap tire processor means any person or business entity that receives scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing. 
(n)  Storage means the act of storing tires or the state of being stored on private property. 
(o)  Store means to accumulate, amass, garner, hive, layup, or stockpile. 
(p)  Tire means a continuous solid or pneumatic rubber covering designed for encircling the wheel of a motor vehicle that is neither attached to the motor vehicle nor a part of the motor vehicle as original equipment. 
(q)  Tire handling business means any person or business entity whose income is at least partially derived from the sale, processing, transporting, or disposal of tires. 
(r)  Tire retreader means any person or business entity actively engaged in the business of retreading scrap tires by scarifying the surface to remove the old surface tread and attaching a new tread to make a usable tire. 
(s)  Ultimate consumer means the last person who receives and uses a new or used replacement tire. Ultimate consumers may be, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Individuals, 
(2)  Leasing companies purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleet; 
(3)  Private companies purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleet; or 
(4)  Governmental agencies. 
(t)  Used tire means a tire which has a minimum of 2/32 -inch of road tread and which is still suitable for its original purpose but is no longer new. A tire retailer shall inventory and market used tires in substantially the same fashion as a new tire and be; able to provide satisfactory evidence to the EPD that a market for the tire exists and the tire is in fact being marketed as a used tire. A used tire shall not be considered solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13; Ord. No. 2014-33(14-O-1329), § 1, 7-16-14 ) 
Sec. 130-32. - Dumping of scrap tires. 
It is unlawful to cause, suffer, or allow the dumping of scrap tires within the City of Atlanta including, and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right of way thereof, or on any other public or private property unless: 
(a)  The person or business entity carrying out the disposal is an EPD approved scrap tire processor or disposal facility with a valid scrap tire processor permit and/or a valid solid waste handling permit or other applicable identification number, and the disposal is carried out on the property of the scrap tire processor; or 
(b)  The activity constitutes storage as defined in this article and is conducted in a manner consistent with the provisions of section 130-32(c) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13) 
Sec. 130-33. - Scrap tire management. 
This section is intended to apply to all persons presently engaged in or proposing to be engaged in the retail sale of new tires, used tires, and/or handling of scrap tires. 
(a)  Scrap tire generator enforcement. 
(1)  Scrap tire generators shall have the necessary licenses and specifications as required by Georgia state law. 
(2)  Scrap tire generators shall maintain, pursuant to Georgia state law, accurate records and reports detailing the number of new and/or used replacement tires sold and the amount of fees collected, as well as receipts indicating the disposition of scrap tires. These records shall be maintained on file at the facility in question for three years and shall be made available for inspection by the City of Atlanta during normal business hours. 
(3)  Scrap tire generators shall, pursuant to Georgia state law, initiate a manifest to transport scrap tires from the point of generation to an EPD approved end user, scrap tire processor, sorter, or disposal facility. The manifest shall include the following information: 
a.  Name and identification number of the scrap tire generator; 
b.  Number of' scrap tires or total tons [accurate to within ten percent of actual number] of scrap tires to be transported; 
c.  Name and permit number of the scrap tire carrier; 
d.  Date of transport; and 
e.  Destination of scrap tires. 
(4)  Scrap tire generators shall ensure that all scrap tires are transported to an EPD approved end user, scrap tire processor, sorter, or disposal facility, as evidenced by a completed manifest. 
(5)  Unless otherwise approved in writing by the EPD, scrap tire generators shall ensure that any person collecting and transporting their scrap tires holds a valid scrap tire carrier permit issued by the EPD. However a person or business entity that generates less than 100 tires per month and that transports only its own scrap tires to EPD approved end users, scrap tire processors, sorters, or disposal facilities is not required to have a scrap tire carrier permit, but must comply with all other provisions required of scrap tire generators and scrap tire carriers. 
(6)  Scrap tire generators shall maintain copies of completed manifest records for three years. Such documentation shall be made available for inspection by the City of Atlanta during normal business hours. 
(7)  Scrap tire generators may choose to determine whether a tire, because of wear, damage or defect, is not suitable for classification as a used tire or retreadable casing as defined in this article. However, if a scrap tire generator fails to sort or delineate which tires are used tires, retreadable casings or scrap tires, then all tires transported shall be considered scrap tires and must be thusly indicated on the shipment manifest. It is a rebuttable presumption that non-new tires are scrap tires. 
(8)  Scrap tire generators shall mark scrap tires with their EPD issued scrap tire generator number within 24 hours of receipt of the scrap tires. Each scrap tire shall be marked on the outside of the tire in a manner sufficient to provide notice of ownership. Said marking shall be at least one inch in height and shall be permanent and waterproof. 
(9)  The Atlanta Police Department and/or its designee shall coordinate to conduct annual random inspections of all scrap tire generators in the City of Atlanta to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Scrap tire carrier enforcement. 
(1)  Scrap tire carriers shall transport used and scrap tires, properly manifested, only to EPD approved end users, scrap tire processors, sorters, or disposal facilities. 
(2)  No scrap tire carrier permit and no decal to be displayed on any vehicle transporting tires is required to transport used tires when the tires are transported: 
a.  By a common carrier that collects tires exclusively from outside the State of Georgia and transports them directly to a scrap tire processor or end user with the State of Georgia; 
b.  By a municipal solid waste collector holding a valid solid waste collection permit issued by the EPD whose primary business is the collection of municipal solid waste; 
c.  By a private individual transporting no more than ten of the individual's own tires or a private individual transporting more than ten tires if such individual can provide proof of purchase with receipt for such tires; 
d.  By a company transporting the company's own tires to a scrap tire processor or end user or for proper disposal; 
e.  By a tire retailer transporting its own used tires if such dealer can provide proof of purchase with receipt for all used tires being transported and a document verifying the origin, route, and destination of such used tires; 
f.  By any person transporting tires collected as part of an organized site cleanup activity; and 
g.  By the United States, the State of Georgia, any Georgia county, municipality, or public authority. 
(3)  The City of Atlanta may inspect scrap tire carriers to determine if they have been issued a scrap tire carrier permit by EPD and are in compliance with the requirements for scrap tire carriers prescribed in this article. 
(4)  Scrap tire carriers shall produce to the City of Atlanta upon demand a valid scrap tire carrier permit issued by the EPD and a manifest indicating that the scrap tires have been properly manifested and are being transported, or have been delivered, to an EPD approved end user, scrap tire processor, sorter, or disposal facility. 
(5)  Scrap tire carriers and scrap tire processors shall maintain financial assurance in the form of a surety bond in compliance with requirements imposed by the EPD pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 12-8-40.1(l)(1). 
(6)  The City of Atlanta shall review documentation maintained by scrap tire carriers to ensure that the quarterly reports required by the EPD include the number of scrap tires transported and the manner of scrap tire disposition. 
(7)  The City of Atlanta shall review scrap tire carrier records to determine if the scrap tire carriers have returned a completed copy of the manifest to the scrap tire generators, which shall be indicated on the manifest. 
(c)  Scrap tire storage enforcement. 
(1)  No person may store more than 25 scrap tires anywhere in the City. Any person storing in excess of 25 scrap tires shall be deemed to be in violation of this Article. This section, however, shall not apply to any of the following: 
a.  A permitted solid waste disposal site if the permit authorizes the storage of scrap tires prior to their disposal; 
b.  A tire retailer or a publicly owned vehicle maintenance facility with not more than 1,500 scrap tires in storage; 
c.  A tire retreader with not more than 3,000 scrap tires in storage as long as the scrap tires are of the type the retreader is actively retreading; 
d.  A licensed used motor vehicle parts dealer, a registered secondary metals recycler, or a privately owned vehicle maintenance facility that operates solely for the purpose of servicing a commercial vehicle fleet with not more than 500 scrap tires in storage; and 
e.  A Georgia EPD approved scrap tire processor so long as the number of scrap tires in storage do not exceed the quantity approved by the EPD if all of the scrap tires are secured in a locked enclosure or are otherwise adequately secured in a manner suitable to prevent unauthorized access. This requirement may be waived by the EPD in cases of significant and unique economic hardship which impairs a person's ability to continue operating his or her business. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person or business entity, including scrap tire generators, to store scrap tires outside of an enclosed building except in a single secured, covered, and locked container. 
(3)  Where scrap tires are stored inside of an enclosed building, said building must be maintained and operated in a manner reasonably sufficient to prevent theft or the potential for scrap tires to be removed from the facility and improperly disposed of. 
(Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13; Ord. No. 2014-33(14-O-1329), §§ 2—4, 7-16-14 ) 
Sec. 130-34. - Authority. 
The primary authority and responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this article is vested in the Atlanta Police Department and/or its designees. 
(a)  Investigations. Authorized agents from the City of Atlanta shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article. This is including but not limited to the power to enter upon any property public or private at reasonable times, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting facilities conducting scrap tire generation, storage, transportation, or disposal activities. The city's authorized agent, upon presentation of proper identification to the owner, agent, or tenant in charge is authorized to enter any such premises during the hours of operation. 
(b)  Right of entry. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for the purpose of inspection and who presents appropriate identification, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process or carrying out his/her official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13) 
Sec. 130-35. - Violations. 
Any person found in violation of any provision of this article may be issued a citation by the City of Atlanta and may be prosecuted and punished as provided by law for the violation of an ordinance. It is also a violation of this article for any person to violate state law and regulations regarding scrap tire management as prescribed in the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. and Georgia Rules and Regulations Chapter 391-3-4. 
(Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13) 
Sec. 130-35.1. - Penalties. 
(a)  Assessment of penalties. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the City of Atlanta Municipal Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of the provisions of this article, is authorized to impose a fine not to exceed $1.000,00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, work on the public streets or on public works of the city for not more than six months, or any combination thereof as set out at section 1-8 of the Atlanta City Code. With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each calendar day the violation exists is considered a separate offense. 
The penalty provisions set out immediately above shall take precedence over the penalty provisions set out at section 130-12 of this chapter which shall not apply to the provisions contained herein in Article II of Chapter 130 (the "City of Atlanta Scrap Tire Enforcement Ordinance"). 
(b)  Impoundment of vehicles. A motor vehicle that is used in any violation of this article is subject to seizure and impoundment under this subsection. The owner of record of such vehicle shall be liable to the city for an administrative penalty equal to the total cost incurred by the city for the towing and storage of the vehicle and in addition to any other penalties imposed under this section. 
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing. 
(c)  Recovery of costs. In addition to the other penalties provided in this section, any person found in violation of this article shall be liable to the city for the total amount of all costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 2, 12-12-12, eff. 4-1-13) 
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-53(12-O-0357), § 4, approved December 12, 2012, effective April 1, 2012, renumbered former Art. II as Art. III. See also the Code Comparative Table. It should also be noted that § 5 of said ordinance provides, "This Ordinance shall take effect on April 1, 2013." 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 130-36. - Removal of yard trimmings. 
(a)  Generally . No collection of yard trimmings shall be made by the department of public works from any residence, business or dwelling where the yard trimmings are the result of or includes: 
(1)  Business or service conducted by others working under contract or agreement with the occupant; 
a.  The department of public works will not collect tree trunks, stumps, limbs and trimmings generated by tree surgeons and/or any commercial entity engaged in tree trimming or removal. The removal and proper disposal of any and all such tree trunks, stumps, limbs and trimmings generated by tree surgeons and/or any commercial entity engaged in tree trimming or removal shall be the responsibility of the said commercial entity. 
b.  The department of public works will not collect any matter generated by any landscaping development or landscaping maintenance and/or any commercial entity engaged in landscaping development or maintenance. The removal and proper disposal of any and all such matter generated by any landscaping development or landscaping maintenance and/or any commercial entity engaged in landscaping development or maintenance shall be the responsibility of the said commercial entity. 
(2)  Yard trimmings not generated at the dwelling. 
(b)  Curbside yard trimmings collection . It shall be mandatory for each occupier of single-family residential, property in the city to prepare and place any yard trimmings intended for removal by city personnel through the city's curbside program, separately and distinguishable from rubbish, trash and garbage, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Removal by city . The department of public works may remove yard trimmings from the premises of residents, if such yard trimmings are prepared for removal in accordance with subsection (d), and is separately placed for removal in accordance with subsection (g). 
(d)  Authorized containers . Yard trimmings shall be placed in proper, separate yard trimmings bags, the adequacy of which for identification of contents and the facilitation of removal by city personnel must be approved by the commissioner. The department of public works may collect up to 20 yard trimmings paper bags per collection period placed for yard trimmings collection, when full, are not to exceed 35 pounds in weight. Reusable containers or receptacles used for the disposal of yard trimmings may not exceed a volume of 32 gallons visibly marked with YARD TRIMMING on four sides. 
(1)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any premises, to maintain all yard trimming containers serving the owner's property in a clean and healthful manner, free of obnoxious odors, maggots, insects and rodents or any other conditions which may render them unhealthy to those upon the premises or to the surrounding community. 
(2)  It shall further be the responsibility of the owner of any premises, to see that all containers serving the owner's property are kept in good repair at all times and that the doors and lids of the containers be properly closed when not in use. 
(e)  Extra yard trimmings . The department of public works may collect yard trimmings paper bags in excess of 20 per collection period in accordance with the fee for excess yard trimmings established under section 130-84, Rates and Charges. 
(f)  Uncontainerized yard trimmings . The department of public works will not be required to collect any uncontainerized yard trimmings over four inches in diameter or four feet in length, human or animal excrement, nor yard trimmings or soil contaminated with household hazardous materials or hazardous materials. 
(g)  Placement . All yard trimmings intended for removal by the City of Atlanta through its curbside service shall be placed either between the sidewalk and curb or in a place approved by the commissioner or his designee as accessible for removal by city personnel. 
(h)  Collection schedule . The commissioner of public works or authorized designee shall establish a schedule for the collection and removal of yard trimmings. 
(i)  Exempted circumstances . The commissioner is authorized to waive the requirements for preparation of yard trimmings and to provide collection service for organized community clean-up programs which are coordinated with the department of public works, for events that include but are not limited to the clean-up of massive property destruction resulting from fires and the like, and following natural disasters, such as storms, hurricanes, and tornadoes. 
(j)  Preparation prior to pickup . It shall be unlawful for any person to place yard trimmings for removal by city personnel that is not prepared, placed and separated as required by this chapter. It shall be the duty of the commissioner or authorized designee to notify the property owner or occupant, in writing, to remove all yard trimmings not prepared and placed as required by this section, at the property owner's or occupant's expense, or to prepare it in accordance with this article. 
(k)  Residential composting . Residents not placing yard trimmings for disposal through the curbside collection may use residential composting provided that the composting: 
(1)  Occurs on the residential premises where the waste organic matter was generated; 
(2)  Is conducted in accordance with accepted composting practices; 
(3)  Is conducted in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations; 
(4)  Does not generate offensive odors or provide a source of food or harborage for vermin and other pests; and 
(5)  Does not create a public or private nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2015-08(15-O-1045), § 3, 2-26-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 5, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-37. - Removal of residential garbage and recyclable materials from single-family dwellings. 
(a)  Generally . No collection of garbage, recyclable materials, or other refuse matter shall be made by the department of public works from any residence where the refuse matter is the result of: 
(1)  Business or manufacturing in which the occupant may be engaged; 
(2)  A lot that has been cleaned for the erection of a building; or 
(3)  Material that is the result of repairs or rebuilding by a contractor or any admixture that contains construction and demolition wastes; and 
(4)  Yard trimmings may be stored in containers on the premises and set out for separate curbside collection, subject to the provisions of section 130-36 of this Code, but shall not be mixed with or in the containers designated for garbage or recyclable materials. 
(b)  Collection containers for garbage and recyclable materials. 
(1)  Required . Any and all garbage or recyclable materials generated within or upon any single-family residential premises in the city shall be separated and placed in the appropriately designated collection containers supplied by the city or as otherwise authorized by this section. Garbage shall be bagged and shall be placed only in containers designated for the disposal of garbage and recyclable materials shall be placed only in containers designated for recycling loose and not bagged. All garbage and recyclable materials shall be stored in such containers on the premises where generated until disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this section and this chapter. 
(2)  Ownership . Ownership of the containers will be retained by the city, and the containers shall not be removed from the residence to which they are assigned. 
(3)  Reasonable care . All persons shall use reasonable care in the handling of the containers supplied by the City of Atlanta and shall be responsible for the repair or replacement of containers the damage or destroy through their own negligence. The City of Atlanta shall be responsible for ordinary wear and tear. Any residential container provided by the city that becomes lost or stolen shall be replaced by the city. 
(4)  Identification . Where one or more family occupies a dwelling, the collection containers shall be marked to indicate the family using the particular collection container. The collection containers may be identified by putting the dwelling number thereon having control of the disposal of the garbage and recycling in the household. When containers are so identified, the container may be used only by the identification thereon. 
(5)  General requirements . 
a.  All collection containers used in the city shall be non-absorbent, water-tight, durable, easily cleanable, and designed for safe handling. In any case where the provisions of this section permit the storage of garbage in plastic bags, the bags shall have sufficient size and strength to hold the garbage and shall be designed for the containment of solid waste. 
b.  Except when garbage or recyclable materials is being placed into or removed from the container, the garbage and recyclable materials generator shall keep every collection container closed or sealed to prevent leakage from the container of any garbage, recyclable materials, or other solid waste or of any offensive vapors, gases or odors. 
c.  The garbage and recyclable materials generator shall not cause or permit any garbage or recyclable materials container to be filled in any manner that causes or allows contents to overflow from the container. Containers shall not be overfilled in a manner that prevents closure of a lid or allows spillage of contents. If a lid cannot be closed, the material will be collected at a fee established under section 130-84, Rates and charges. If an overfilled bin is set out for pick up more than four times within a 12-month period, resident will be provided with an additional refuse bin at an annual service fee established under section 130-84, Rates and charges. 
d.  The garbage and recyclable materials generator shall not mix garbage or recyclable materials, or deposit residential garbage or recyclable materials in a container it is not designated for. 
e.  The garbage and recyclable materials generator shall keep the collection containers clean and sanitary, shall treat the containers in such manner and to such extent and with such substance as may be necessary to repel and keep away flies and rodents, and shall keep the containers odor-proof. Garbage shall be bagged before deposited in garbage containers. Recyclable materials shall not be bagged when deposited in recycling containers. 
f.  The garbage and recyclable materials generator shall not cause or permit garbage or recyclable materials to be so compacted or otherwise placed, kept or accumulated in any collection container in a manner that does not allow the contents of the container to fall out, by their own weight, upon the container being lifted and turned upside down. 
(6)  Location . Collection containers provided to residences as provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be placed in the area between the sidewalk and curb or in an accessible place approved by the commissioner, which shall be no more than ten feet from the curb. Containers not located within this area will be considered as "not set out" and the city will not be required to collect. 
a.  No person shall place any garbage or recyclable materials container in any place or in any manner such that the container impedes normal vehicular traffic, public transportation, or pedestrian or wheelchair access to public rights-of-way. 
b.  Containers shall not be placed at the curbside before 7:00 p.m. on the day preceding the collection day and shall be removed from the curbside before 9:00 a.m. the day following the collection day. 
c.  Exceptions to this subsection may be granted by the commissioner or authorized designee for persons with physical limitations that prevent placement of the collection containers at the curb, provided these persons submit a written request for the collection. 
d.  The department of public works will collect bagged extra garbage placed outside of the enclosed, city-provided container. Any bagged, extra garbage must be placed within a 32-gallon or smaller plastic bags. If bags are set out more than four times within a 12-month period, resident will be provided with an additional bin at no charge but will be subject to an additional annual service fee established under section 130-84, Rates and charges. 
e.  Extra recyclable materials shall not be placed for collection in plastic bags of any kind, but may be placed in reusable containers not larger than 32 gallons or 35 pounds in weight in a linear area not to extend beyond a total often feet and four feet wide. 
(7)  Contamination of recyclable material . Inspections will be conducted at random on recyclable materials containers through the "tag" program. The city will randomly select a route to inspect. Inspectors will be looking inside the recyclable material containers for contaminates that will limit the ability to market recyclables, such as food, diapers, and household trash, that are not acceptable inside the container. The containers will be emptied if the contamination visual inspection determines that contaminants do not represent a significant risk or detriment to the collection and processing of material. If contaminants are determined to represent significant risk or detriment, the container will be "tagged" and will not be emptied. After a container has been "tagged" three times, the customer will be charged the rates as set forth in section 130-84. 
(8)  Time of collection . The commissioner of public works or authorized designee shall provide a schedule to each residence receiving garbage, recyclable materials and yard trimmings collection services from the city that shall indicate the days on which collection will be made. 
(c)  Back yard collection service . 
(1)  Application . Within the month of December of each year, citizens may make written application to receive back yard garbage and recycling removal service to commence in the first week of the month succeeding that in which application is made. Individual citizens may arrange for this back yard garbage and recycling removal service by making written application to: 
Office of Solid Waste Services 
55 Trinity Avenue 
Suite 4800 
Atlanta, Georgia 30303 
(2)  Payment . Any application for back yard garbage and recycling removal service shall be accompanied with the payment in conformity with section 130-84(d) which shall cover the cost of such service to be rendered for a one-year period until the following December 30. 
(3)  Exception . All persons having physical limitations which prevent placement of garbage and recyclable materials containers at the curb are entitled to receive back yard garbage and recycling collection service without charge, provided the following requirements are met: 
a.  Age only criteria. Any residence where there are no persons between the ages of 12 and 70 capable of placing garbage or recycling at the curbside. 
b.  Physical condition criteria. Each person between the ages of 12 and 70 at a residence not capable of placing garbage or recycling at the curbside must present a certificate from a physician licensed to practice medicine by the State of Georgia stating that such person is physically incapable of placing garbage or recycling at the curbside. 
(4)  Waiver of fee . Those persons qualifying under subsection (c)(3) of this section will not be required to pay the fee otherwise required for back yard garbage and recycling collection. 
(5)  Recertification . Annually, all persons qualifying for back yard garbage and recycling collection service under subsection (c)(3) of this section must be recertified as to physical condition preventing the placing of garbage or recycling at the curbside. 
(d)  Dangerous accumulation prohibited . No person shall keep or accumulate, or permit to be kept or accumulated, any solid waste in or upon any premises or location in the city owned, leased or rented by such person or in such person's possession or control, in such manner that: 
(1)  Creates a fire hazard dangerous to person or property; 
(2)  Becomes unreasonably offensive or dangerous to the public peace, health or safety; 
(3)  Promotes the propagation, harborage, or attraction of rodents, vermin or pests; or 
(4)  Becomes a public or private nuisance. 
(e)  Improper placement of garbage or other non-recyclable materials in recycling receptacles and containers. It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent of the owner of any single family residential property to improperly place or allow any tenant to improperly place contaminating materials, such as garbage, debris or other solid waste that is not recyclable in collection receptacles and containers designated for recycling collection by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 18, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 2015-08(15-O-1045), § 4, 2-26-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-40(18-O-1514), § 1, 9-13-18 ; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 6, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-38. - Removal of residential garbage and recyclable materials from multi-family dwellings. 
(a)  Generally . No collection of garbage, recyclable materials or other refuse matter shall be made by the department of public works from any premises where the refuse matter is the result of: 
(1)  Business or manufacturing in which the occupant may be engaged; 
(2)  A lot that has been cleaned for the erection of a building; or 
(3)  Material that is the result of repairs or rebuilding or any admixture that contains building material. 
(4)  Yard trimmings may be stored in containers on the premises and set out for separate curbside collection, but shall not be mixed with garbage for disposal. 
(b)  Limitation on multifamily dwellings . The department of public works shall not be required to collect garbage or other solid waste from multi-family dwellings, including public housing, containing six or more residential units, Exceptions shall be approved and permitted by the commissioner of public works or his designee. 
(c)  Collection containers for garbage and recyclable materials . 
(1)  Required . Any and all garbage generated within or upon any multi-family residential premises in the city shall be placed in garbage receptacles or containers authorized by this section or those supplied by the city through the curbside collection service of the city, and shall be stored in such containers on the premises where generated until disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Ownership . Ownership of any containers provided by the City of Atlanta as a part of its municipal solid waste collection will be retained by the city, and the containers shall not be removed from the residence to which they are assigned. 
(3)  Reasonable care . All persons shall use reasonable care in the handling of the containers supplied by the City of Atlanta and shall be responsible for the repair or replacement of containers they damage or destroy through their own negligence. The City of Atlanta shall be responsible for ordinary wear and tear. Any residential container provided by the city that becomes lost or stolen shall be replaced by the city and shall be paid for by the owner of the residence to which the container is assigned. 
(4)  Identification . Where more than one family occupies a dwelling, any garbage and recyclables containers provided by the city shall be marked so as to indicate the family using the particular garbage container. The container may be identified by putting the dwelling number on the container for the garbage in the household. When containers are so identified, the container may be used only by the person whose name or other identification is shown thereon. 
(5)  General requirements . 
a.  All garbage and recyclable material containers used in the city shall be non-absorbent, water-tight, durable, easily cleanable, and designed for safe handling. In any case where the provisions of this section permit the storage of garbage in plastic bags, the bags shall have sufficient size and strength to hold the garbage and shall be designed for the containment of solid waste. 
b.  Except when garbage or recyclables material is being placed into or removed from the container, the garbage generator shall keep every garbage container closed or sealed so as to prevent leakage from the container of any garbage or other solid waste or of any offensive vapors, gases or odors. 
c.  The garbage and recyclable material generator shall not cause or permit any garbage container to be filled in any manner that causes or allows garbage to overflow from the container. 
d.  The garbage generator shall keep the garbage container clean and sanitary, shall treat the garbage container in such manner and to such extent and with such substance as may be necessary to repel and keep away flies and rodents, and shall keep the garbage container odor proof. 
e.  The garbage generator shall not cause or permit garbage to be so compacted or otherwise placed, kept or accumulated in any garbage container in a manner which does not allow the contents of the garbage container to fall out, by their own weight, upon the container being lifted and turned upside down. 
(6)  Extra garbage prohibited . Any containerized or uncontainerized extra garbage must be contained within the enclosed container provided for the collection of garbage through the curbside collection program of the City of Atlanta. The department of public works shall not be required to collect any containerized or uncontainerized extra garbage placed outside of the enclosed container provided for the collection of garbage through the curbside collection program of the City of Atlanta. 
(7)  Location . Containers provided to residences as provided in subsection (b) of this section shall be placed in the area between the sidewalk and curb or in an accessible place approved by the commissioner. 
a.  No person shall place any garbage container in any place or in any manner such that the container impedes normal vehicular traffic, public transportation, or pedestrian or wheelchair access to public rights-of-way. 
b.  Containers shall not be placed at the curbside before 7:00 p.m. on the day preceding the collection day and shall be removed from the curbside before 9:00 a.m. the day following the collection day. 
c.  Exceptions to this subsection may be granted by the commissioner for persons with physical limitations which prevent placement of the garbage receptacles at the curb, provided these persons submit a written request for the collection. 
(8)  Time of collection . The commissioner of public works or his designee shall provide a schedule to each residence receiving garbage collection service from the city that shall indicate the days on which collection will be made. 
(d)  Containers provided by the city for use at multi-family dwellings including apartment houses, townhouses, condominiums and public housing. 
(1)  Sufficient number required . Upon the premises of any multi-family dwelling not permitted for collection by the City of Atlanta, the owners of any multi-family dwelling, including public housing, condominiums and townhouses consisting of six or more living units, shall furnish commercial containers in sufficient number to adequately contain the garbage and refuse disposal at the location. The type, size, number and location of these containers required shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner, but in no instance shall a container be less than a four-yard commercial container. 
(2)  General requirements for solid waste disposal and recyclable material containers privately operated solid waste contractors . All garbage and recyclable material containers used and maintained in the city shall be non-absorbent, water-tight, durable, easily cleanable, and designed for safe handling. In any case where the provisions of this section permit the storage of garbage in plastic bags, the bags shall have sufficient size and strength to hold the garbage and shall be designed for the containment of solid waste. Recycling material shall not be in plastic bags when deposited in recycling containers. 
(3)  Maintenance of containers used at multi-family dwellings . 
a.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any multi-family dwelling, including public housing management, to maintain all garbage and recyclable material containers serving the owner's property in a clean and sanitary manner. All garbage and recyclable material containers serving the owner's property must be kept free of obnoxious odors, maggots, insects and rodents or any other conditions which may render them unhealthy to the occupants of the apartments or to the neighborhood or to the surrounding community. 
b.  It shall further be the responsibility of the apartment house owner, including public housing management, to see that all containers serving the owner's property are kept in good repair at all times and that the doors and lids of the containers be properly closed when not in use. Except when garbage is being placed into or removed from the container, the garbage generator shall keep every garbage container closed or sealed so as to prevent leakage from the container of any garbage or other solid waste or of any offensive vapors, gases or odors. 
c.  The garbage generator shall not cause or permit any garbage container to be filled in any manner that causes or allows garbage to overflow from the container. It shall further be the responsibility of the apartment house owner, including public housing management, to see that the area surrounding all containers serving the owner's property is kept free of garbage and trash. 
d.  Any dumpster located on the premises of any multi-family residential premises shall be screened on three sides by planting materials, a fence or wall of a height not less than six feet tall and not more than eight feet, from the public view of any public right-of-way and any abutting properties. Any variance to the requirements of this subsection shall be approved by the commissioner of public works or authorized designee. 
(e)  Recycling containers provided for use at apartment houses, townhouses, condominiums, public housing, and other multifamily dwellings. 
(1)  The owners of any multi-family dwelling, including public housing, consisting of six or more living units, or the owners' association of condominiums or townhouses consisting of six or more living units, shall use containers for the collection of recyclables, including, at a minimum, glass, plastics, paper and metal cans. The capacity of the containers shall be adequate to hold the recyclable material of residents of the multi-family dwelling and shall be of a size not less than three gallons multiplied by the number of living units. 
(f)  Plans of apartment houses to show locations of containers . Plans and specifications for the construction of all multi-family dwelling permitted after the passage of this ordinance shall be required to set aside space for solid waste containers and recycling containers used for the collection of solid waste and recyclable materials on the premises. Any applicant for a non-residential building permit shall submit plans to the commissioner of public works or his designee, providing the locations of all space designated for solid waste containers and recycling containers. The approval of the commissioner shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit by the director of the bureau of buildings. 
(1)  The location of any space for each of these containers must be indicated on any submitted plans even if containers are not proposed as the primary method of solid waste collection. 
(2)  As a condition for the approval of any building permit for any new multi-family dwelling, all plans submitted by the applicant to the commissioner of public works must demonstrate that the space allocated for any proposed development shall be of a size necessary to locate and service containers to contain any solid waste as prescribed in section 130-38(d)(1) and recyclable materials as prescribed in section 130-38(e)(1) generated on the premises. 
(3)  The location of any solid waste container and/or recycling container cannot in any way impede normal vehicular traffic, public transportation, or pedestrian or wheelchair access to public rights-of-way. 
(4)  Each owner or association shall be required to submit, or cause to be submitted on their behalf by a management company or other representative, an annual report to document the amount of recyclable materials collected, as well as any other reports reasonably requested by the city. Reports shall contain at a minimum the following information: 
a.  Name of owner, association or person or entity responsible for the supervision of the recycling program; 
b.  Address of building(s); 
c.  Number of living units; 
d.  Name and address of company providing collection services; 
e.  The frequency of collection and the size and average number of recycling containers located on the property. 
f.  The report shall be delivered on or before January 30 of the following year to: 
Office of Solid Waste Services 
55 Trinity Avenue 
Suite 4800 
Atlanta, Georgia 30303 
(5)  In the case of conversions of existing apartment complexes to condominiums pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-3-87 et seq. and retrofits of other existing buildings into multi-family living units a request can be made to the commissioner of public works for a waiver from the recycling requirements in section 130-38(e)(1). No waiver shall be granted unless an applicant can prove that it is physically impossible or economically unreasonable to add additional space on the site that could hold containers required by section 130-38(e)(1). 
(g)  Enforcement and penalties . The commissioner of public works, or authorized designee, shall give written notice to the owner or the owner's association in the case of condominiums and townhouses if the owner or agent of the owner of any multi-family dwelling, including an owner of public housing, is found in violation of any provisions of this section. The written notice shall state that the owner or owner's association shall abate the violation within 90 calendar days of the date of the notice. The commissioner of public works shall provide a written report of such notices to the city utilities committee each quarter. 
(1)  Each day's failure or refusal to comply with the order, after expiration of the time allowed in which to remove or abate the nuisance, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Removal of tenant property . Owners or agents of the owner shall be responsible for items removed from real properties rented or leased to others and placed in residential yards, rights-of-way, or adjacent commercial structures. 
(1)  Any such items remaining on or within the public right-of-way for a period of three days or more following removal from any real property rented or leased to others may be removed by the department of public works. 
(2)  Recovery of costs . Any owner or agent of the owner of any multi-family residential dwelling within the City of Atlanta shall be liable to the city for the total amount of all costs and expenses incurred by the city in removing such items placed in the right-of-way or otherwise abating any violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2007-70(07-O-1335), §§ 1—6, 11-13-07; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-40(18-O-1514), § 2, 9-13-18 ; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 7, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-39. - Containers left on streets. 
(a)  Prohibited . Containers containing garbage or other refuse shall not be left for collection upon any street, sidewalk, avenue or other public place, except as specifically provided in section 130-36, 130-37 or 130-38. 
(b)  Any solid waste or recycling container shall not: 
(1)  Obstruct any portion of the storm drain system of the City of Atlanta; or 
(2)  Obstruct the flow of stormwater into the storm drain system of the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 8, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-40. - Removal of bulky items, mixed debris piles and rubbish. 
(a)  Generally . No collection of bulky items, mixed debris piles and rubbish shall be made by the department of public works from any resident, business or dwelling where the bulky items, bulk yard trimmings or rubbish is the result of or includes: 
(1)  Business or manufacturing in which the occupant may be engaged; 
(2)  A lot that has been cleaned for the erection of a building; or 
(3)  Material that is the result of repairs or rebuilding or any admixture that contains and construction and demolition waste. 
(4)  Debris or items that have been removed from any real property rented or leased to others by any owner or the agent of any owner. 
(b)  It shall be mandatory for each occupier of residential property in the city to prepare and place any bulky items, bulk yard trimmings or rubbish for removal by city personnel in accordance with the following provisions of this article: 
(1)  tree waste and junk waste should be placed adjacent to the front curb in a location easily accessible to the collection vehicle after the hours of 7:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled collection day; 
(2)  tree waste and junk waste should not be stacked under low overhead electrical wires or other cabling, signs or mailboxes; next to fences or posts; or on top of water meters, gas meters, fire hydrants or other exposed utility components; 
(3)  materials should not be placed in the street, on the sidewalk, or other rights-of-way, or in any manner which would interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(4)  tree waste or junk waste collection is limited to occupied residential units and residential vacant land only if the waste generated is in connection with the maintenance of the property. 
(c)  The commissioner of public works or authorized designee may determine items eligible for pickup under the City of Atlanta's program for collection of bulky items, mixed debris piles and rubbish. The office of solid waste services may decline to accept such items that contain or have been contaminated by hazardous wastes, household hazardous wastes or other materials not defined here. The following restrictions are associated with items authorized for pickup: 
(1)  No more than eight cubic yards (about the size of a minivan) of junk waste or tree waste may be placed at the curb for collection; 
(2)  A maximum of four cubic yards of building material (not to include roofing shingles, brick, plaster, or concrete) generated by the resident in connection with the maintenance of the residential property may be collected by the department of public works; 
(3)  Appliances containing refrigerant must have a tag attached to them certifying a qualified technician has removed the refrigerant; 
(4)  The department of public works is not allowed to collect any material generated by contractors who were retained by a resident to perform work on his or her residential property. It is the responsibility of the contractor to remove all debris that may arise from the contractor's activities. These contractor-related activities include, but are not limited to: trimming and removal of trees, remodeling, new construction and roofing. 
(5)  If authorized items placed for collection are mixed with restricted items, department personnel shall not be obligated to sort the materials and may refuse the entire load; 
(6)  Department personnel collection services are not available to multi-residential structures of more than six units. 
(d)  Collection schedules . The commissioner of public works or an authorized designee will establish a procedure by which residents may contact the department of public works to request the pickup and removal of bulky items, mixed debris piles, and rubbish. Twelve times per year call-in scheduling service is provided to single-family residential customers. Requests by single-family residential customers for collection of bulk materials for disposal that exceed the 12 times per year call-in scheduling service shall be charged the fee established under section 130-84 for additional bulk material disposal. Setting out bulk materials without scheduling a pick-up will be considered illegal dumping and a violation of city Code. 
(e)  Bulky items, mixed debris piles and rubbish shall not be placed at the curbside before 7:00 p.m. on the day preceding the appointed pick-up period. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place bulky items, mixed debris piles and/or rubbish for removal by city personnel which are not prepared, placed and separated as required by this ordinance. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner or his designee to notify the property owner or occupant, in writing, to remove all bulky items, mixed debris piles and/or rubbish not prepared and placed as required by this section, at the property owner's or occupant's expense, or to prepare them in accordance with this article. 
(2)  Upon failure of the property owner or occupant to remove or prepare such bulky items, mixed debris piles and/or rubbish within the time set forth in the notice, the property owner or occupant shall be subject to penalties 
(g)  Requirements for outdoor events . Under certain conditions, the City of Atlanta may offer special collection for neighborhood and community cleanup events. A neighborhood or community recognized by the Planning Department of the City of Atlanta may apply to the commissioner to be approved for special collection if the event: 
(1)  Is the only such request from the neighborhood or community for the calendar year; 
(2)  Supports the goals of the city for cleaner neighborhoods and a cleaner environment; 
(3)  Does not supplant any current or existing agency responsibilities or activities; 
(4)  Provides a benefit to the community or neighborhood and the city; and 
(5)  Complies with any other guidelines established by the commissioner of public works or authorized designee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 7, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 17, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 9, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-41. - Cardboard containers and similar articles. 
Pasteboard boxes, cardboard boxes or other similar containers desired to be collected for recycling shall be prepared in the following manner: 
(1)  Cardboard boxes or other similar containers shall be flattened, cut if necessary and tied in bundles not exceeding 35 pounds and having no dimension exceeding 36 inches; 
(2)  The bundles shall be stacked in a manner that would permit convenient removal and placed in a location designated by the commissioner; 
(3)  Garbage, bits of paper and other debris shall not be placed in such containers or bundles. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 10, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-42. - Night garbage collection. 
(a)  Authority. Whenever the commissioner shall decide that the best interest of the public will be served by collection of garbage or refuse from certain areas in the city at night, the commissioner shall order the department of public works to make those collections. 
(b)  Notice. The commissioner at the same time shall notify the occupants of all places of business within the designated area to place their refuse bags and bundles on the margin of the sidewalks between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 7:30 p.m. each day or in an assigned area and according to a time schedule as determined necessary by the commissioner. All persons so notified shall comply with the order of the commissioner and shall place the bags and bundles as designated within these hours. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-43. - Removal of solid waste from commercial or industrial properties. 
(a)  Permit for collection by the city. No collection of garbage or other refuse matter shall be made by the City of Atlanta through its curbside collection program from any commercial or industrial premises without a special permit from the commissioner of public works. All garbage to be collected by the city from permitted commercial and industrial service units shall be contained and placed according to any provisions provided by the special permit issued by the commissioner of public works. 
(b)  Dangerous accumulation prohibited. No person shall keep or accumulate, or permit to be kept or accumulated, any solid waste in or upon any commercial or industrial premises or location within the city owned, leased or rented by such person or in such person's possession or control, in such manner that: 
(1)  Creates a fire hazard dangerous to person or property; 
(2)  Becomes unreasonably offensive or dangerous to the public peace, health or safety; 
(3)  Promotes the propagation, harborage, or attraction of rodents, vermin or pests; or 
(4)  Becomes a public or private nuisance. 
(c)  Private collection required. The owner or agent of the owner of any commercial and industrial premises not permitted to receive garbage collection service from the City of Atlanta shall contract with a private contractor for the collection, transportation and disposal of all solid waste generated upon the premises. 
(d)  Acceptable containers. Garbage to be collected by private garbage collection firms operating under a permit granted by the City of Atlanta shall be placed in plastic or other impervious containers subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  General requirements. 
a.  All garbage containers used in the city shall be non-absorbent, water-tight, durable, easily cleanable, and designed for safe handling. In any case where the provisions of this section permit the storage of garbage in plastic bags, the bags shall have sufficient size and strength to hold the garbage and shall be designed for the containment of solid waste. 
b.  Except when garbage is being placed into or removed from the container, the garbage generator shall keep every garbage container closed or sealed so as to prevent the escape or leakage from the container of any garbage or other solid waste or of any offensive vapors, gases or odors. 
c.  The garbage generator shall not cause or permit any garbage container to be filled in any manner that causes or allows garbage to overflow from the container. 
d.  The garbage generator shall keep the garbage container clean and sanitary, shall treat the garbage container in such manner and to such extent and with such substance as may be necessary to repel and keep away flies and rodents, and shall keep the garbage container odor proof. 
e.  The garbage generator shall not cause or permit garbage to be so compacted or otherwise placed, kept or accumulated in any garbage container in a manner which does not allow the contents of the garbage container to fall out, by their own weight, upon the container being lifted and turned upside down. 
(2)  Maintenance of containers used at commercial and industrial premises. 
a.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any commercial or industrial premises, to maintain all garbage and trash containers serving the owner's property in a clean and healthful manner, free of obnoxious odors, maggots, insects and rodents or any other conditions which may render them unhealthy to those upon the premises or to the surrounding community. 
b.  It shall further be the responsibility of the owner of any commercial or industrial premises, to see that all containers serving the owner's property are kept in good repair at all times and that the doors and lids of the containers be properly closed when not in use. 
c.  It shall further be the responsibility of the owner of any commercial or industrial premises, to see that the area surrounding all containers serving the owner's property is kept free of garbage and trash. 
d.  After January 1, 2004, any dumpster or solid waste container and any such accessory use or structure located on the premises of any commercial or industrial premises shall be screened on three sides by planting materials, or a fence or wall of a height not less than six feet tall and not more than eight feet, from the public view of any public right-of-way and any abutting properties. Any variance to the provisions of this subsection shall approved by the commissioner of public works or his designee. 
(3)  Number of receptacles. Stores, restaurants, hotels, warehouses, institutions, manufacturing and processing plants and all other commercial and residential premises within the limits of the city shall provide a sufficient number of containers, rooms or refrigerators to contain any accumulation of solid waste generated on the property. 
(4)  Location of containers. All new commercial or industrial construction permitted after the passage of this ordinance shall be required to set aside space for solid waste containers and recycling containers used for the collection of solid waste. Any applicant for a non-residential building permit shall submit plans to the commissioner of public works or his designee, providing the locations of all space designated for solid waste containers. 
a.  The location of any space for each of these containers must be indicated on any submitted plans even if containers are not proposed as the primary method of solid waste collection. 
b.  As a condition for the approval of any commercial or industrial building permit, all plans submitted by the applicant must demonstrate that the space allocated for any proposed development shall be of a size necessary to locate and service a sufficient volume of containers to contain any solid waste generated on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Sec. 130-44. - Removal of solid waste and recyclable materials at outdoor events. 
(a)  Outdoor events on private property . The owner of any outdoor event property shall clear and remove all solid waste from the outdoor event property after the outdoor event ends, to the satisfaction of the chief of staff, in consultation with the commissioner of planning. 
(1)  If the outdoor event had fewer than 20,000 attendees, the property owner shall clear and remove all solid waste within 24 hours of the conclusion of the outdoor event. 
(2)  If the outdoor event had 20,000 or more attendees but fewer than 49,999 attendees, the property owner shall clear and remove all solid waste within 48 hours of the conclusion of the outdoor event. 
(3)  If the outdoor event had 50,000 attendees or more, the property owner shall clear and remove all solid waste within 72 hours of the conclusion of the outdoor event. 
(b)  Outdoor events on public property . 
(1)  The permit holder for any outdoor event on public property shall clear and remove all solid waste from the outdoor event property after the outdoor event ends, according to the following guidelines: 
a.  If the outdoor event had fewer than 20,000 attendees, the permit holder shall clear and remove all solid waste within 24 hours of the conclusion of the outdoor event. 
b.  If the outdoor event had 20,000 or more attendees but fewer than 49,999 attendees, the permit holder shall clear and remove all solid waste within 48 hours of the conclusion of the outdoor event. 
c.  If the outdoor event had 50,000 attendees or more, the permit holder shall clear and remove all solid waste within 72 hours of the conclusion of the outdoor event. 
(2)  Following any outdoor event on property belonging to the city, solid waste shall be cleared and removed from the outdoor event property according to the following provisions: 
a.  Where property belonging to the city has been used as a outdoor event property, and said property is a designated city park, the permit holder shall clear and remove all solid waste from the outdoor event property after the outdoor event ends, to the satisfaction of the chief of staff, in consultation with the commissioner of parks. 
b.  Where property belonging to the city has been used as outdoor event property, and said property is not a designated city park, the permit holder shall clear and remove all solid waste from the outdoor event property after the outdoor event ends, to the satisfaction of the chief of staff, in consultation with the commissioner of public works. 
(c)  The chief of staff may grant an extension of time in which to clear and remove solid waste, pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) above, where the property owner or the permit holder applies for an extension of time in writing, providing a detailed reason for the request, and where the chief of staff determines that inclement weather or other circumstances outside of the property owner's or permit holder's control make enforcement of the timeframes set forth in sections (b) and (c) above unreasonable or unrealistic. The chief of staff shall provide his response to the property owner's or permit holder's request in writing, and shall provide the reasoning for his or her decision therein. 
(d)  Recycling required . As a part of requirements to clear and remove all solid waste from a outdoor event property, recycling shall be provided at all outdoor events according to the following provisions: 
(1)  A property owner of any outdoor event property shall provide a sufficient number of containers for the separate recovery, collection, and removal of recyclable materials, including, but not limited to metal containers, glass, and plastics #1 through #5 and #7, during any outdoor event. At a minimum, the property owner shall have recyclable material containers next to each and every trashcan located on the outdoor event property during the outdoor event. Separate recovery, collection, and removal of glass shall not be required where glass is prohibited on the outdoor event property during the outdoor event, but only if said prohibition is established in writing prior to and at the entrance to the outdoor event and is enforced. 
(2)  Where property belonging to the city has been used as outdoor event property, the permit holder shall provide a sufficient number of containers for the separate recovery, collection, and removal of recyclable materials, including, but not limited to metal containers, glass, and plastics #1 through #5 and #7, during the outdoor event. At a minimum, the permit holder shall have recycle containers next to each and every trashcan located on the outdoor event property during the outdoor event. Separate recovery, collection, and removal of glass shall not be required where glass is prohibited on the outdoor event property during the outdoor event pursuant to the City Code of Ordinances or other city legislation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 3-9-04; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 7, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 11, 11-14-18 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 14, provided for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2007. 
Sec. 130-45. - Same—Construction and demolition wastes. 
(a)  Disposal procedures. The commissioner of public works or his designee shall establish and publicize standards and guidelines for the proper disposal of construction and demolition wastes generated by residents, through the curbside collection program of the City of Atlanta. 
(b)  Specifically prohibited. It is specifically prohibited to improperly dispose of any construction and demolition waste through the municipal curbside collection system except for small projects performed by a homeowner that results in project debris capable of fitting into a 96 gallon garbage container without protruding out of the top. Alternatively, small project debris may be placed in a personal container no more than 32 gallons and no heavier than 35 pounds. 
(c)  Removal and disposal. The generator of construction and demolition waste shall be responsible for the proper removal and legal disposal of all construction and demolition waste. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Sec. 130-46. - Household hazardous materials. 
(a)  Generally . No person or business shall improperly dispose of any household hazardous materials through the municipal curbside collection system. 
(b)  The generator of household hazardous waste shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of all household hazardous materials. 
(c)  Disposal procedures . The commissioner of public works or authorized designee shall establish and publicize standards and guidelines for the proper disposal of household hazardous materials through the curbside collection program of the City of Atlanta. 
(d)  City disposal events . The commissioner of public works or authorized designee may establish and publicize drop-off events for household hazardous materials that will allow City of Atlanta residents with proper proof of residency to properly dispose or discard household hazardous materials. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 12, 11-14-18 ) 
Secs. 130-47—130-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION OR TRANSPORTATION 

Sec. 130-51. - Collection and transportation of residential garbage and other solid waste. 
(a)  Single-family residential garbage. No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of single-family residential garbage and other solid waste generated by another person within the City of Atlanta without first obtaining a permit to do so, unless considered a self-hauler according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Multi-family residential garbage. 
(1)  No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of multi-family residential garbage and other solid waste generated upon any multi-family premises containing less than six (6) residential units, or other multi-family residential premises permitted by the city for service by the curbside collection service of the City of Atlanta, without first obtaining a permit to do so, unless considered a self-hauler according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  The owner or agent of the owner of any multi-family dwellings containing six (6) or more residential units shall contract with a private contractor, permitted according to the provisions of section 130-52(a), for the collection, transportation and disposal of all solid waste generated upon the premises, unless an exception has been permitted by the commissioner for service by the curbside collection program of the City of Atlanta. 
(3)  All vehicles and equipment used by any private contractor for the collection and transportation of solid waste from any multi-family residential premises shall be operated and maintained according to the provisions of section 130-52(b), (c) and (d). 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-52. - Collection and transportation of commercial and non-residential solid waste. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall engage in the collection or transportation of multi-family residential and non-residential solid waste without having applied for permission therefor and received the approval of the commissioner, in the form of a written permit. Every person or business obtaining permission shall conform to the rules of the department of public works and the provisions of this article. Upon violation of the rules, the permit shall be revoked by the commissioner. 
(b)  Vehicles and equipment. Vehicles and equipment used by any private contractor for solid waste collection and disposal within the City of Atlanta shall be maintained to prevent a sanitary nuisance or safety hazard according to but not limited to the following provisions: 
(1)  Vehicles and equipment shall be frequently washed thoroughly with suitable disinfectant and deodorant, and all vehicles shall be washed on the outside. 
(2)  Any waste collection vehicles used by a private contractor for solid waste collection and disposal within the city shall not be allowed to stand unattended on a public or private street. The equipment shall be operated so as to minimize interference with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(3)  Collection shall be made and the equipment operated and maintained in a manner so as to prevent the dropping or scattering of solid or liquid wastes anywhere except in a lawful solid waste management or disposal site. All waste spilled or scattered from vehicles or equipment shall be immediately picked up or collected by the operator of the vehicle or equipment. Collection vehicles used by any private contractor within the city shall consist of trucks with leak-resistant packer or enclosed bodies and dumpsters shall be covered and leak-resistant, all in good repair. 
(4)  All vehicles used for solid waste collection by a private contractor within the city shall be operated and maintained in such condition that the vehicle does not exceed a noise level, during stationary compaction, where it is plainly audible at a distance of 200 or more feet from the vehicle. 
(5)  All vehicles used for non-residential solid waste collection shall be prominently marked with the name of the business and vehicle number on driver and passenger sides. The vehicle number shall also be marked on the front and rear of the vehicle. 
(c)  Collection times. Collection of non-residential solid waste shall be scheduled by agreement between the private contractor and the commercial or industrial customer, subject to any rules of the bureau of solid waste services and section 74-187(b)(4) of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  Provision of service. Every private contractor may provide collection services to any customer who requests the services of the private contractor and agrees to the terms and conditions of the service agreement between the private contractor and the customer. 
a.  Any private contractor may refuse service to any customer for failure to pay a just bill or for any substantial refusal to comply with any rules of the bureau of solid waste services applicable to the customer. 
b.  Any private contractor refusing service to any customer shall remove any solid waste and solid waste container no more than seven days following the cancellation, interruption, or refusal of service. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2016-24(16-O-1382) , § 1, 7-27-16) 
Secs. 130-53—130-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOLID WASTE PROCESSING AND DISPOSAL FACILITIES 

Sec. 130-59. - Statement of policy. 
The City of Atlanta, in exercising the powers granted to it by the State of Georgia, reserves the right to define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental, to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. Furthermore, it is the right of the city to regulate or restrict through permits, fees, codes, review boards, or otherwise the construction, use, and maintenance of real or personal property and the emission and disposal thereon or therefrom of any substance that tends to pollute land, water, or air. Therefore, it is the purpose of this division to provide in part the regulation necessary to achieve these policy objectives. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-60. - Permit for use. 
Any person or business shall be allowed to dispose of solid waste at one of the disposal facilities or transfer stations operated by the city, provided the person: 
(1)  Applies for a permit to dispose of solid waste at one of the disposal facilities or transfer stations; 
(2)  Meets the standards established by the commissioner; 
(3)  Is issued a permit; and 
(4)  Pays the fee established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-61. - Use without permit. 
Any person who is a resident of the city shall be allowed to dispose of solid waste, generated upon the residential property of the person, at any transfer stations operated by the city, without permit, subject to the charges established by the City of Atlanta and any restriction set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-62. - Hazardous material disposal. 
(a)  No person shall make final disposal or disposition of any hazardous material within the limits of the city. 
(b)  No person shall operate or maintain any hazardous material disposal facility within the limits of the city. 
(c)  Any person or business found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  A fine of $1,000.00 and period of imprisonment in the city jail not to exceed six months, and a probationary period not to exceed one year. 
(2)  In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(3)  Recovery of costs. In addition to the other penalties provided in this section, any person found in violation of this section shall be liable to the city for up to three times the amount of all costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating a nuisance. 
(4)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this section are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the City of Atlanta may seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-63. - Privately operated solid waste disposal facilities. 
(a)  Permit required . Any person desiring to establish and operate a solid waste disposal facility within the limits of the city must first obtain an annual solid waste disposal facility operating permit from the commissioner of public works, with the approval of the city council. 
(1)  The permit shall be renewable annually and must be obtained prior to the issuance of a business license. An annual permitting fee of $6,500.00, for the purpose of ensuring that a solid waste disposal facility meets the applicable rules as set forth in this section and as set forth by federal and state authorities. 
(2)  Inspections of solid waste disposal facilities shall be performed quarterly at a minimum and additionally as determined necessary by the commissioner of public works. 
(b)  Permitted locations . Within the limits of the City of Atlanta, solid waste disposal facilities are permitted only in areas with a Zoning Classification of I-1 or I-2, subject to the development standards listed below. The establishment and operation of any solid waste disposal facility must comply with any and all standards and provisions provided by the Environmental Protection Division of the State of Georgia. Prior to the issuance of any solid waste disposal facility operating permit as required in subsection (a) of this section, all applications must first receive approval from the commissioner of the department of planning and community development. 
(1)  Proposed land use and mitigation plan. Prior to the issuance of a solid waste disposal facility operating permit, there must be a proposed land use and mitigation plan (hereinafter referred to as "the plan") submitted to the commissioner of the department of planning and community development that specifies the anticipated future use of the property upon the cessation or termination of garbage disposal activities, which anticipated use must not be inconsistent with comprehensive development plan as adopted by the city council. 
a.  The plan must include provisions for the property owner to create a reserve fund, to be held by the property owner, to finance the initial capital expenses of mitigation and establishing the anticipated future use of the property. 
b.  The plan shall include estimates of the amount of such capital expenses, based upon the present costs of such capital expenses and a presumed annual inflationary rate of five percent, and a timetable showing the expected life of the solid waste disposal facility. 
1.  The commissioner of the department of planning and community development and the commissioner of public works must determine that the cost estimates presented by the applicant are reasonable estimates of the present cost of any proposed capital expenses. 
2.  The applicant must estimate present capital expenses in an amount no less than $1,000.00 times the number of acres in the proposed solid waste disposal facility site. 
(2)  For each property, the proposed land use and mitigation plan shall include a site compatibility report containing information including but not limited to the following: 
a.  A description, survey, ownership and present zoning of the land involved. 
b.  An engineering plan prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia, which shall contain: 
1.  Operation plan. An operation plan shall provide written instructions for the daily operation of the facility. The plan shall be revised when operational procedures change and such revisions shall be filed with the commissioner of public works no less than 30 days before taking effect. The plan shall include detailed procedures where applicable: 
i.  Identification of persons responsible for operation and maintenance of the facility, including ownership of facility and corporate structure; 
ii.  Contingency operations, alternate waste handling and disposal methods in case of emergency such as a natural disaster or equipment failure; 
iii.  Methods for controlling the type of waste received at the site. The report shall specify inspection procedures, number and location of spotters if applicable, and procedures to be followed in prohibited wastes are discovered; 
iv.  Weighing incoming waste; 
v.  Vehicle traffic control and unloading; 
vi.  Method and sequence of filling waste; 
vii.  Waste compaction and application of cover; 
viii.  Operations of gas, leachate, and storm water controls; 
ix.  Groundwater monitoring. 
2.  The availability of and equipment for use of a water supply. 
3.  The type and capacity of equipment to be used. 
4.  Plans for fire, nuisance, water pollution, odor and vermin control. 
5.  A diagram and written description of the locations and extent of dikes, earthwork and fill operations. 
6.  A hydrological survey. 
c.  Such other information as the commissioner of public works may reasonably require including but not limited to the business address of the applicant. 
d.  A processing fee of $2,000.00 shall accompany the report of each applicant. 
e.  Proof of financial ability to perform under the terms and conditions of the proposed permit. 
(3)  Generally. Any applicant for a solid waste disposal facility operating permit shall demonstrate compliance with the following site limitation provisions: 
a.  Operations impact buffer zone . An operations impact buffer zone (hereinafter referred to as the impact buffer) shall be maintained upon the premises to minimize the impact of landfilling and disposal operations on surrounding neighborhoods and communities. 
1.  Office uses must be a minimum of 100 feet from any abutting property line. 
2.  All other activities on the solid waste disposal facility site must be located a minimum of 250 feet from any abutting real property lines and a minimum of 500 feet from the real property line of either any existing residence, or any residence under construction at the time landfilling or disposal operations begin anywhere on the landfill site. 
3.  Roads for access to the site may cross the impact buffer so long as roads are located a minimum of 100 feet from the real property line of either any existing residence, or any residence under construction at the time landfilling or disposal operations begin anywhere on the solid waste disposal facility site. 
4.  Monitoring wells may be located within the impact buffer, so long as monitoring wells are located a minimum of 250 feet from the real property line of either any existing residence, or any residence under construction at the time landfilling or disposal operations begin anywhere on the solid waste disposal facility site. 
b.  Vegetative buffer . A vegetative buffer must be provided between the solid waste disposal facility and any abutting real property line or public street right-of-way. Existing trees and vegetation must be maintained and preserved within 100 feet of any abutting real property lines and any public street right-of-way. Where the natural growth within 100 feet of the abutting real property line or public right-of-way does not effectively screen the solid waste disposal facility site from the view from abutting properties or right-of-way, then screening must be provided. 
c.  Vehicular access . All applicants for a solid waste disposal facility operating permit must demonstrate compliance with the following traffic and vehicular access provisions: 
1.  Vehicular access to the facility must be paved and may be provided from any street that is not a residential local or residential collector street. Any access point to the facility must be a minimum of 500 feet from the real property line of any residential property. 
2.  A metal fence and gate must be constructed at the entrance to the facility and must be closed and locked when the solid waste disposal facility is not in operation. The entrance to the facility must have an operator or attendant in attendance at all times when the facility is in use. 
3.  All driveways which serve the site must be wide enough to accommodate two-way traffic at all times and an area on the site must be provided to accommodate vehicles entering the site so that no traffic waiting to enter the site will be backed up on any public right-of-way. 
4.  Vehicular access to the facility must be of a nature sufficient enough so as to ensure that the normal flow traffic on any street or public right-of-way will not be obstructed or impacted by vehicles entering and exiting the facility. 
d.  Fences . All solid waste disposal facilities shall be enclosed with a fence not less than eight feet tall and no more than ten feet tall, with openings therein not less than those in two-inch mesh wire or some other similar fencing material or device, which shall first be approved by the commissioner of public works and the commissioner of the department of planning and neighborhood development. The fencing shall be adequate to prevent paper and similar or related refuse or waste from blowing from the solid waste disposal facility onto neighboring or nearby property. 
(c)  Host fee reserve fund . There is established the host fee reserve fund (hereinafter referred to as "the fund"). This fund shall be administered by the chief financial officer and the commissioner of public works. 
(1)  The owner must place funds in a reserve fund annually, in amounts equal to (a) the estimate of the present costs of the capital expenses increased by the presumed annual inflationary rate of five percent, divided by (b) the number of years the solid waste disposal facility is anticipated to be open. 
(2)  The first such annual payment into the fund must be made by the property owner prior to commencement of solid waste disposal facility operations, and evidence of such payment in the form of a notarized statement by the property owner, must be presented to the commissioner of public works prior to the commencement of solid waste disposal facility operations. 
(3)  On or before each subsequent anniversary date of such notarized statement, the property owner must make the required annual payment into the reserve fund and present to the commissioner of public works a notarized statement from the property owner showing that the payment has been made for the next year of operations of the solid waste disposal facility, and showing the total amount held in the reserve fund. In addition, if the property owner prepares annual financial statements, a copy of the annual financial statement, showing the amount held in the reserve fund, must be sent annually to the commissioner of public works and the chief financial officer during each year the solid waste disposal facility is in operation. 
(4)  In the event that the landfill and disposal operations at the site cease prior to the estimated number of years of operation as shown on the submitted timetable, prior to ceasing operations, the property owner must pay all remaining amounts into the fund and present to the commissioner of public works and the chief financial officer a notarized statement showing that such payment has been made and showing the total amount in the fund. 
(5)  With the cessation of landfill and disposal operations at any solid waste disposal facility permitted under this section, and following the final deposit of all mandatory funds, the entire balance of the host fee reserve fund shall be assigned to the City of Atlanta for the express purpose of financing all expenses associated with the mitigation and establishment of any future use of the property. 
(d)  Authority of the commissioner; revocation of permits . All other phases of the operation of a solid waste disposal facility not specifically mentioned in this section shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner. 
(1)  Any and all permits to establish and maintain solid waste disposal facility granted under this section shall be subject to revocation in the discretion of the commissioner, with the approval of the mayor. 
(2)  With the cessation of landfill and disposal operations at any solid waste disposal facility due to the revocation of any solid waste disposal facility operating permit, the operator of the facility shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (c)(4) and (5) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 13, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-64. - Privately operated solid waste transfer stations, processing and handling facilities. 
(a)  A solid waste transfer station is a facility that receives and temporarily stores solid waste as defined by this ordinance at a location other than the generation site, and which facilitates the transfer of accumulated solid waste to another facility for further processing or disposal. This term includes any solid waste handling facility, but does not include recovered materials processing facilities, nor portable storage containers used for the collection of municipal solid waste. 
(b)  Permit required. Any business or person desiring to establish and operate a solid waste transfer station or processing facility within the limits of the city must first obtain a solid waste transfer station operating permit from the commissioner of public works. 
(1)  The permit shall be renewable annually, subject to the approval of the city council, and must be obtained prior to the issuance of a business license. An annual permitting fee of $6,500.00, for the purpose of ensuring that a transfer station or processing facility meets the applicable rules as set forth in this section and as set forth by federal and state authorities, shall be paid by the applicant. 
(2)  Inspections of solid waste transfer stations and processing facilities may be performed quarterly, or as determined necessary by the commissioner of public works or authorized designee. 
(c)  Permitted locations. Within the limits of the City of Atlanta, solid waste transfer stations and processing facilities are permitted only in areas with a Zoning Classification of I-1 or I-2, subject to the development standards listed below. The establishment and operation of any transfer station or processing facility must comply with any and all standards and provisions provided by the Environmental Protection Division of the State of Georgia. 
(d)  A solid waste transfer station operating permit shall be issued by the commissioner of public works when an application meets all requirements of this code section. Prior to the issuance of any solid waste transfer station operating permit (hereinafter referred to as "the permit") as required in subsection (a) of this section, all applicants must first receive approval of a special land use permit from the commissioner of the department of planning and community development, according to the procedures established by the City of Atlanta. 
(1)  For each property, a site compatibility report shall accompany each permit application. The site compatibility report shall contain information including but not limited to the following: 
a.  A description, survey, ownership and present zoning of the land involved. 
b.  An engineering plan prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia, which shall contain: 
1.  Operation plan. An operation plan shall provide written instructions for the daily operation of the facility. The plan shall be revised when operational procedures change and such revisions shall be filed with the commissioner of public works no less than 30 days before taking effect. The plan shall include detailed procedures where applicable: 
i.  Identification of persons responsible for operation and maintenance of the facility, including ownership of facility and corporate structure; 
ii.  Contingency operations, alternate waste handling and disposal methods in case of emergency such as a natural disaster or equipment failure; 
iii.  Methods for controlling the type of waste received at the site. The report shall specify inspection procedures, number and location of spotters if applicable, and procedures to be followed in prohibited wastes are discovered; 
iv.  Weighing incoming waste; 
v.  Vehicle traffic control and unloading; 
vi.  Vehicle traffic control and loading; 
vii.  Operations of odor controls; 
viii.  Operations of storm water controls; 
ix.  Groundwater and wastewater discharge monitoring. 
2.  The availability of and equipment for use of a water supply. 
3.  The type and capacity of equipment to be used. 
4.  Plans for fire, nuisance, water pollution, odor and vermin control. 
5.  A diagram and written description of any supplemental or accessory transportation operations, 
6.  A hydrological survey. 
c.  Such other information as the commissioner of public works may reasonably require including but not limited to the business address of the applicant. 
d.  A processing fee of $2,000.00 shall accompany the report of each applicant. 
e.  Proof of financial ability to perform under the terms and conditions of the proposed permit. 
(2)  Generally. Any applicant for a solid waste transfer station operating permit shall demonstrate compliance with the following site limitation provisions: 
a.  All on-site processing and transferring of solid waste will be conducted entirely within an enclosed building or buildings. 
1.  An enclosed building for these purposes is one in which the walls, doors and roof are made of solid materials but may contain accessory structural elements such as windows, properly filtered and controlled ventilation openings, and skylights, each element not exceeding an area of 100 square feet. 
2.  Doors to any building shall remain closed except to temporarily allow transport vehicles to enter and exit the building. 
3.  All solid waste transfer stations and processing facilities shall have an operator in attendance at all times when the facility is in operation. 
b.  Operations impact buffer zone. An operations impact buffer zone (hereinafter referred to as the impact buffer) shall be maintained upon the premises to minimize the impact of transfer and processing operations on surrounding neighborhoods and communities. 
1.  The structure within which solid waste transfer or processing operation occur shall be located a minimum of 250 feet from any abutting real property lines and a minimum of 250 feet from the real property line of any residential property existing at the time the initial application for a permit, as required by section 130-64(b), is received by the commissioner of public works. 
2.  All other activities and structures shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any abutting real property line, and a minimum of 250 feet from the real property line of any residential property existing at the time the initial application for a permit, as required by section 130-64(b), is received by the commissioner of public works. 
3.  Access roads upon or within the site may cross the impact buffer so long as any roads are located a minimum of 100 feet from the real property line of any residential property existing at the time the initial application for a permit, as required by section 130-64(b), is received by the commissioner of public works. 
4.  Rail lines and railways upon or within the site may cross the impact buffer so long as any such rail lines and railways upon or within the site are located a minimum of 100 feet from the real property line of any residential property existing at the time the initial application for a permit, as required by section 130-64(b), is received by the commissioner of public works. 
c.  Vegetative buffer. A vegetative buffer must be provided between solid waste transfer station or processing facility and any abutting real property line or public street right-of-way. 
1.  Existing trees and vegetation must be maintained and preserved within 50 feet of any abutting property line of any real property lines of any property zoned industrial and any public street or right-of-way, and within 75 feet of any abutting real property lines of any property not zoned industrial. 
2.  Where any portion of any property line of a lot containing a solid waste transfer station or handling facility is within 250 feet of any residential property, any existing trees and vegetation must be maintained and preserved within 50 feet of the real property line. 
3.  Where the natural growth within the proscribed distance of the abutting real property line or public right-of-way does not effectively screen the site from the view from abutting properties or right-of-way, then screening shall be provided, subject to the approval of the commissioner of public works or authorized designee. 
d.  Vehicular access. All applicants for a solid waste transfer station operating permit must demonstrate compliance with the following traffic and vehicular access provisions: 
1.  Access for motor vehicles to the facility must be paved and may be provided from any street that is not a residential local or residential collector street. Any access point to the facility must be a minimum of 250 feet from the real property line of any residential property. 
2.  A metal gate shall be installed on the site to prevent unauthorized motor vehicles from entering the facility, and shall be closed and locked when the facility is not in operation. The entrance to the facility must have an operator or attendant in attendance at all times when the facility is in operation. 
3.  All driveways which serve the site must be wide enough to accommodate two-way traffic at all times and an area on the site must be provided to accommodate vehicles entering the site so that no traffic waiting to enter the site will be backed up on any public right-of-way. 
4.  Vehicular access to the facility must be of a nature sufficient enough so as to ensure that the normal flow traffic on any street or public right-of-way will not be obstructed or impacted by vehicles entering and exiting the facility. 
e.  Fences. All solid waste transfer stations or processing facilities shall be enclosed with a fence not less than eight feet tall and no more than ten feet tall, with openings therein not less than those in two-inch mesh wire or some other similar fencing material or device, which shall first be approved by the commissioner of public works and the commissioner of the department of planning and neighborhood development. The fencing shall be adequate to prevent paper and similar or related refuse or waste from blowing from the facility onto neighboring or nearby property. 
f.  Solid waste transfer stations and processing facilities must be served by public water and sewer facilities. 
g.  Where a lot containing a solid waste transfer station or processing facility is within 500 feet of any residential property, the facility may not accept waste earlier than 7:00 a.m. or later than 6:00 p.m. on any day. 
(e)  Authority of the commissioner; suspension or revocation of permits. 
(1)  All other phases of the operation of a solid waste transfer station or processing facility not specifically mentioned in this section shall be subject to the authorization of the commissioner of public works. Such authorization shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(2)  Any and all permits to establish and maintain solid waste transfer stations or processing facilities granted under this section shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the commissioner for violations of the operations plan submitted in support of the application, or for a violation of other provisions of this code section when such violation poses an imminent danger to the health and safety of the occupants of adjoining properties. 
(3)  Any proposed suspension or revocation of a permit issued under this code section shall be provided in writing by certified mail to the operator of the facility, who shall be provided no less than ten business days to remedy the violation. 
(4)  In the event the permit is suspended or revoked, the operator of the facility shall have the right to appeal such suspension or revocation to the license review board and mayor. 
(5)  During the pendency of such appeal, the facility may continue to operate, provided any conditions the commissioner determines reasonably pose an imminent threat to human health and safety are abated. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 14, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-65. - Environmental damage insurance policy. 
(a)  Required for private landfill facilities and transfer stations. The commissioner of public works shall require, as a pre-condition of an annual operating permit required under sections 130-63 and 130-64 of this Code, all solid waste sanitary landfill facilities and all solid waste transfer stations or processing facilities which are not operated by governmental agencies to obtain and maintain in force an environmental damage insurance policy, a security bond, a self-insurance certificate or a trust fund certificate in the amount of $1,000,000.00. 
(b)  Indemnification. The owners of solid waste sanitary landfill facilities, solid waste transfer stations or processing facilities shall indemnify the city against all claims of damages and responsibilities for cleanup due to environmental degradation of the air, land, surface water and groundwater within the jurisdiction of the city caused by the facility during the period which such owner owned the solid waste landfill, solid waste transfer station or processing facilities. 
(c)  Proof of insurance. The owner of a solid waste transfer station or processing facility shall show proof of insurance, self-insurance, a trust fund certificate or a security bond before the owner is issued the annual operating permit by the city. 
(d)  Conflict with federal or state requirements. The requirement for obtaining and maintaining in force an environmental damage insurance policy, a security bond, a trust fund certificate or a self-insurance certificate shall not be construed as usurping the financial requirements established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the state environmental protection division for closure and postclosure care of the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Secs. 130-66—130-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 130-76. - Annual review. 
(a)  Annual review . All fees and charges levied in conjunction with the delivery of services by the City of Atlanta through its solid waste management system shall be reviewed by the commissioner of public works or authorized designee. 
(b)  Annual solid waste services report . No later than the first city council meeting in January of each year, the commissioner shall file with the municipal clerk an annual report of solid waste services in the City of Atlanta. The report shall include information including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Any information required by the Atlanta City Council, including, but not limited to the following: 
a.  The amount of solid waste collected, processed, and disposed of in the City of Atlanta; 
b.  The progress on the reduction in solid waste, as evidenced by the amount of solid waste disposed at disposal facilities, in the previous year; 
c.  Recycling and composting activities in existence; and 
d.  Public information and education activities during the previous year. 
(2)  Any recommended change to the fees and charge levied in conjunction with the delivery of services by the City of Atlanta through its solid waste management system, determined according to the provisions of section 130-77; 
(3)  Specific information regarding the curbside collection program of the City of Atlanta: 
a.  The number of single-family residential, multi-family residential units, commercial, and industrial serviced by the City of Atlanta; 
b.  The volume of recovered materials collected by the City of Atlanta through its curbside collection program; 
c.  The volume of yard trimmings collected and disposed from customers by the City of Atlanta; 
d.  The number of service calls delivered by the bureau of solid waste services for the collection of bulky items, mixed debris piles, and rubbish; 
(4)  Any other information deemed necessary by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 15, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 130-77. - Solid waste service fees. 
(a)  Established. It is determined necessary for the protection of public health, welfare and convenience of the city to fix and collect solid waste service charges upon the owner of each lot within the city. 
(b)  Determination of amounts. For the purposes provided in subsection (c) of this section, there is charged and assessed to the owner of each lot within the city a solid waste service charge and assessment payable as provided in this subsection and in the amount determinable as follows: 
(1)  The solid waste service charge shall be recommended annually by the commissioner, subject to the approval of the council, to provide sufficient revenue for operation of the solid waste collection and disposal system, to pay debt requirements and to provide necessary reserves for debt and improvements as set forth in the annual budget. The solid waste service charge shall be made effective January 1 of each year. 
(2)  No person disposing of waste materials at any solid waste disposal facilities or transfer stations operated by the city, either under a permit or without a permit, shall be relieved from any solid waste service charge assessed by the city. 
(3)  Senior citizen discount. The solid waste services charge made effective January 1 of each year shall provide for a 30 percent exemption from solid waste services fees for residential customers who are 65 years of age or over and who have an annual household income of $39,000.00 or less. 
(c)  Uses of proceeds. The revenue received from the collection of the charges as authorized in this section, together with all such other revenue derived from the operation of the city's solid waste collection and disposal system, shall be deposited with the chief financial officer and credited to the solid waste enterprise fund and shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  The operation and maintenance of the solid waste collection and disposal system and incidental expenses connected therewith; 
(2)  To pay debt requirements on revenue bonds issued to provide funds for the construction, improvement or repair of the solid waste collection and disposal system facilities used in connection with the operation of the system; 
(3)  To purchase or lease property; and 
(4)  To provide funds for the necessary reserves for debt and improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-78. - Commercial and industrial surcharge. 
(a)  Established. All owners of commercial and industrial property or occupants, tenants or lessees when not owner-occupied receiving solid waste collection service from the city shall be charged and assessed a surcharge in addition to any other solid waste service charge if the amounts of these wastes are greater than normal residential amounts. 
(b)  Determination of amounts. The rates of surcharge established in subsection (a) of this section shall be determined annually by the commissioner and shall be based on the current cost of collection and disposal. A schedule of the surcharges shall be filed with the municipal clerk by the commissioner not later than the second week following adoption of the annual budget and shall be made effective January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-79. - Junked automobile removal charge. 
(a)  Established. Any owner of a junked automobile removed by the city shall be charged and assessed a fee for the removal of the automobile. 
(b)  Determination of amounts. The charge established in subsection (a) of this section shall be determined annually by the commissioner based on the current cost of removal of junked automobiles. The charge for removal of automobiles shall be filed with the municipal clerk by the commissioner not later than two weeks following adoption of the annual budget and shall be made effective January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-80. - Charges for disposal of solid waste at city facilities. 
(a)  Established. Any person disposing of solid waste at one of the city's solid waste disposal facilities, except those specifically exempt by section 130-57, will be charged a fee for disposal of solid waste. 
(b)  Determination of amounts. The charge established in subsection (a) of this section shall be determined annually by the commissioner based on the current costs of disposal of solid waste. The schedule of charges for disposal of solid waste shall be filed with the municipal clerk by the commissioner not later than two weeks following adoption of the annual budget. A schedule of these charges will also be posted at the city disposal facilities and shall be made effective January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04) 
Sec. 130-81. - Reserved. 
Sec. 130-82. - Fees for recycling. 
(a)  A fee of $88.00 per year is established for the provision of recycling services for each single-family residence and for each unit of duplex, triplex and quadruplex residences. 
(b)  All citizens who have less than $8,000.00 of income per year are exempted from this fee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2010-36(10-O-0905), § 1, 6-29-10) 
Sec. 130-83. - Billing and collection. 
(a)  Solid waste service charge. 
(1)  The assessment of solid waste service charges as set forth in this division shall be made by the city and collection of the assessments may be undertaken by the city or through intergovernmental agreements or contracts with private entities as approved by applicable law. 
(2)  The assessment of solid waste charges shall be made on July 1 of each year at the rates then in place and such assessment shall be for 12 months of service and shall be payable not more than 90 days from the date of mailing of the assessment. 
(3)  All assessments paid after the due date shall bear interest at the rate of 1 percent per month from the date the assessment is due until the date the assessment is paid. For the purposes of this subsection, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one month. 
(4)  Assessments for properties beginning service after January 1 shall be charged a prorated fee based on the number of days between the date that service begins and the date of the next annual assessment. The due date of such prorated assessments shall be the later of 90 days from the date that service begins or 90 days from the date of mailing of the prorated assessment. All prorated assessments paid after the due date shall bear interest at the same rate as annual assessments. 
(5)  A minimum assessment of $5.00 shall be applied to all billable residential units receiving solid waste services. 
(b)  Commercial and industrial surcharge. 
(1)  The assessment and collection of commercial and industrial surcharges as set forth in this division shall be made by the city. The assessment and collection of annual charges shall be made quarterly with the first installment due and payable on January 1. The first installment shall be based on charges established for the previous year. If the charges are revised as provided for in this division, the remaining installments will be revised to reflect the revised annual rate. 
(2)  The tenant occupying or the owner of the commercial and industrial property, as the case may be, shall submit to the city on forms furnished by the city an estimate of the volume of solid waste, either bags or industrial containers with cubic yard sizes, required to be removed during a one-week period and an estimate of the number of collections per week required to remove that waste. The estimates shall be submitted to the city at least 1½ months prior to the quarterly billing period. The quarterly surcharge shall be based on the estimate so furnished. 
(3)  At any one time during any calendar quarter, if a revised estimate is received by the city on a date which is at least 17 days before the end of the quarter, each industrial and commercial occupant or owner shall have the right to revise the estimate previously submitted to the city so as to amend, modify or change the estimate as to the type of service, the number of pickups per week or the volume of service per pickup. 
(4)  Solid waste collection service by the city may be instituted at any time during the calendar quarter upon the industrial and commercial occupant or owner submitting to the commissioner of public works the estimate as provided in this subsection and a requested date of the commencement of the service. 
(5)  Upon the cessation of any industrial or commercial business, by written notice, any industrial and commercial occupant or owner may discontinue solid waste collection service by the city upon giving written notice of the date the service is to be terminated, provided that the notice is received by the bureau of solid waste services not later than the 15th day of the calendar month preceding the next calendar quarter billing period. The termination date of the service must be subsequent to the date the notice is received by the city. 
(6)  The commissioner of public works shall from time to time, for periods of one week or longer, audit the volume of solid waste being removed from these properties and the number of pickups required for removal and shall thereafter adjust by decreasing or increasing the amount of the surcharge for the property audited so that the surcharge shall conform and be based upon the results of the audit. 
(c)  Junked automobile removal charge. The assessment and collection of junked automobile removal charges as set forth in this division shall be made by the city. The assessment of these charges for the removal of these automobiles shall be made when the automobile is removed by the city. Payment shall be due and payable within 14 days of the assessment. 
(d)  Charges for disposal of solid waste at city facilities. The assessment and collection of charges for disposal of solid waste at city facilities as set forth in this division shall be made by the city. Payment of disposal charges shall be made by coupons purchased from the city before the waste is dumped at the disposal facility. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2009-28(09-O-0797), § 1, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2009-34(09-O-0847), § 1, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 130-84. - Rates and charges. 
The following rates and charges are hereby established for solid waste collection and shall become effective April 1, 2019: 
(1)  Residential rate : $365.81 per year 
(2)  Duplex or triplex rate : $365.81 per year for each separate living unit in excess of one. 
(3)  Apartments, condominiums, townhouse, public housing or any other multi-family dwelling rates: A flat charge of $400.00 per year per parcel or one of the following charges, as appropriate. 
a.  $365.81 per year, for each dwelling unit where the garbage from apartments, condominiums, townhomes, public housing or any other multi-family dwellings (less than six units) is collected from individual containers, garbage cans or bags; 
b.  $281.53 per year for each dwelling unit where the garbage from apartments, condominiums, townhomes, public housing or any other multi-family dwellings (less than six units) is collected from industrial containers; 
c.  Where the multi-family dwelling units or apartments are located in building structures with incinerator[s], duly installed and operating therein in accordance with all laws and regulations applicable to incinerators, depositing only incinerator refuse, and if the collection is from industrial containers grouped together, as hereinafter defined, the amount shall be $53.82 per year for each dwelling unit; if such containers are not grouped together, then the amount shall be $122.79 per year for each dwelling unit; for the purpose of this section, industrial containers are grouped together when such containers are located physically adjacent with only sufficient space between such containers to permit access and pickup by the city collection equipment without the movement or shifting of any of said containers in order to gain access to any other of said containers; 
d.  $54.87 per year for each dwelling unit to which collection and removal services are made available to collect garbage from apartments, condominiums, townhomes, public housing or any other multi-family dwelling units. 
(4)  Residential backyard removal : $1,145.69 per year. 
(5)  Mobile home parks: 
a.  Individual garbage cans: $193.35 per year. 
b.  Installed industrial containers: $479.42 per year. See subsection (7). 
(6)  Commercial and industrial rates : 
a.  For commercial and industrial establishments located within high-density commercial, high-density mixed use, low-density commercial, low-density mixed use, medium-density mixed use, mixed-use, mixed use - high density, mixed use - low density, industrial, office/institutional and office/institutional/residential land use zones, the following Tier 1 rates shall apply: 
1.  Commercial parcels from 1—100 feet: $1,000.00 
2.  Commercial parcels from 101—200 feet: $2,000.00 
3.  Commercial parcels from 201—450 feet: $4,500.00 
4.  Commercial parcels from 451—700 feet: $7,000.00 
5.  Commercial parcels from 701—850 feet: $8,500.00 
6.  Commercial parcel greater than 850 feet: $12,000.00 
b.  For commercial and industrial establishments located outside of the above-listed land use zones, the following Tier 2 rates shall apply: 
1.  Commercial parcels from 1—100 feet: $500.00 
2.  Commercial parcels from 101—200 feet: $1,000.00 
3.  Commercial parcels from 201—450 feet: $2,250.00 
4.  Commercial parcels from 451—700 feet: $3,500.00 
5.  Commercial parcels from 701—850 feet: $4,250.00 
6.  Commercial parcel greater than 850 feet: $6,000.00 
(7)  Public property charge for services that have been contracted : A flat charge of $479.42 per year for each parcel. For public housing charges, see subsection (3)a.—d. For government buildings garbage collection, see surcharges, subsection (6). 
(8)  Residential vacant land : A flat charge of $500.00 per year per parcel. A vacant lot adjacent to a primary residence upon which an owner receive a homestead exemption shall be entitled to an annual charge of $150.00 per parcel in lieu of the $500.00 per parcel charge, provided the owner submits the proper documentation to the commissioner of public works. All vacant parcels with an outstanding housing code violation shall be charged a flat charge of $100.00 per year. 
(9)  Building of public worship rate : A flat charge of $400.00 per year per parcel. In addition to the levy listed above, there shall be a charge of $208.59 per year for solid waste collection from individual containers, garbage cans or bags, or a charge of $183.37 per year if the solid waste collection is from industrial containers. 
(10)  Minimum; private landfill site and transfer station operations : A minimum of $1.10 per ton payable to the city by all private landfill site operations and transfer station operations and transfer station operation located within the city for refuse disposed, collected, handled, processed or reclaimed within the jurisdiction of the city. Fees must correspond with tonnage handled and will be payable quarterly and prior to issuance of annual permits. 
As required by O.C.G.A § 12-8-39, all user fees collected in accordance with this subsection shall be deposited in a local restricted account and used solely for solid waste management purposes. 
(11)  Special collections : Any property otherwise addressed in subsections (1) through (9) of this section, either requesting or requiring special collection equipment or methods where normal curbside collection or backyard collection of solid waste or recyclables is not feasible, shall be subject to an additional fee of $200.00 annually. 
(12)  Excess bagged garbage, excess yard trimmings and/or overfilled bins : $12.00 per bag/occurrence, 
(13)  Bulky waste : $325.00 per address for a one (1) truck capacity load for all calls exceeding the established maximum scheduled calls per year. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2009-28(09-O-0797), § 2, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 18, 11-14-18 ) 
Secs. 130-85—130-100. - Reserved. 
Chapter 134 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-906 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 138; sewer construction and assessments, § 154-141 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 134-1. - Assessment and collection. 
All matters related to the assessment and collection of all special assessments and liens related thereto as provided by law and assessed against any property within the city shall be done on behalf of the city by the revenue collection administrator duly designated by the chief financial officer, all in conformity with and as provided by the laws of this state relating to the assessment and collection of taxes due the city and the enforcement of liens relating thereto; provided, however, all sales related to such special assessments, collections and liens shall be conducted on the steps of the city hall at the time and in the manner otherwise specified by law. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4053) 
Secs. 134-2—134-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 134-26. - Petitions. 
(a)  Generally. If the owners of the majority of the frontage of the land liable to assessment for street improvements shall petition the council for improvements, citing this section and designating by general description the improvement to be undertaken and the street or part thereof to be improved, and if after a public hearing as provided by the Charter and this Code or other ordinances of the city such improvements are approved, it shall thereafter be the duty of the council to proceed to cause such improvement to be made in accordance with the prayers of the petition and the best judgment of the council. All petitions for street improvements must be signed in ink by the owners of the property signed for or by their duly authorized agents. The petition shall state that property owners may be assessed for the cost of the improvement. 
(b)  Execution when city owns property. When the city owns property along the street whereon an improvement is desired, the mayor may sign the petition in the name of the city for the full frontage of the property owned by the city along the street. 
(c)  Right to withdraw signature. Any person shall have the right to withdraw such person's signature from a petition for the pavement or other improvement of a street or portion thereof, but the withdrawal must be in the handwriting of the withdrawing petitioner and shall state that it is the petitioner's own act, uninfluenced by persuasion. 
(d)  Effect of withdrawal of signature. Any person who has signed a petition for the pavement of a street or portion thereof or other improvement and withdraws such person's signature therefrom prior to adoption of an ordinance authorizing the pavement of the street or portion thereof will not thereafter be permitted to resign the same petition for pavement of that street or portion thereof. The person withdrawing the signature may sign any other paving petition, but the city will not approve the other petition unless the owners of the majority of frontage on the street, including the party who had withdrawn such party's signature from a previous petition, sign the petition. 
(e)  Misrepresentation to induce withdrawal of signers. Any person who appeals personally to signers of such petitions for the pavement of a street or a portion thereof or other street improvement to withdraw their names and in making such appeals misrepresents the facts, either as to the cost of the respective pavements or any other facts connected therewith, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and on conviction thereof shall be punished as provided by law. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3054) 
Sec. 134-27. - Authority of council for improvements not petitioned for. 
(a)  The council may cause improvements to be made, including paving or surfacing, sanitary sewers, sidewalks, curbs, curbs and gutters and driveways, to any one or more streets, alleys or public ways, including those designated, accepted or otherwise created, anywhere within the corporate limits of the city and assess the full cost of these improvements upon the real property abutting on each side of the street, alley or public way so improved. The improvements can be caused to be made by the council solely within its discretion and in the absence of a petition from abutting property owners for the improvements. 
(b)  The chief financial officer is authorized to permit deferred or installment payments of assessments and liens by the persons owning and living on property abutting those streets where improvements are made when financial circumstances of all or certain of those persons invite relief. Determination of eligibility for the deferred or installment payments shall be in accordance with standards and guidelines set forth in this section and subject to amendment by the council. 
(c)  The chief financial officer is authorized, upon council authorization for the work, to accept application and payment from property owners assessed for those improvements and to permit deferred or installment payments by an owner or occupier of property abutting the street, public alley or public way. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3055(a)—(c)) 
Sec. 134-28. - Completion of work; entering information in lien book. 
The commissioner of public works shall immediately notify the chief financial officer of the completion of any street improvements which constitute a lien against abutting property, and this information shall be immediately entered in the lien book which shall be kept by the chief financial officer. A copy of the lien book shall be maintained in the appropriate county property records room. The date of entry of this completed work shall be deemed the date when the lien attaches to the abutting property. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3056(b)) 
Secs. 134-29—134-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS OR CURBING 

Sec. 134-51. - Council action; cash payment for work. 
Council action shall be required for the construction of sidewalks or curbing in and along streets and portions of streets and the resolution or ordinance shall be sufficient authority for the construction of sidewalks or curbing, except the commissioner of public works is authorized to construct sidewalks or curbing after receiving cash payment in advance for the construction work. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3081) 
Sec. 134-52. - Assessment against and collection of costs from abutting owners. 
The entire expense of construction of sidewalks and curbing shall be assessed against the property abutting on the streets where sidewalks are constructed and shall be collected from the owners thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3083) 
Sec. 134-53. - Method of assessment. 
(a)  All assessments for construction of sidewalks and curbing shall be made on a property frontage basis by dividing the total cost of the construction by the total frontage abutting the construction to ascertain the cost per front foot and assessing each lot or parcel of abutting property according to its frontage on construction. 
(b)  When private alleys between adjoining lots intersect with sidewalks, the assessment for curbing and sidewalks at the point where the alley intersects with the sidewalk shall be divided between the lots on each side of the alley, treating the private alley as belonging equally to the two adjoining lots. Private alleys belonging to only one of the adjoining lots shall be treated as part of that lot in making the assessment for curbing and sidewalk. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9-3084, 9-3085) 
Sec. 134-54. - Collection of assessments. 
(a)  Billing. When curbing and sidewalks are laid under resolution or ordinance, an assessment schedule shall be made by the commissioner of public works, showing in detail the properties against which the assessments are made. When the assessment schedule is passed by the council, it shall then be transmitted to the chief financial officer, who shall make out bills against the persons liable and notify them of the assessments. 
(b)  Grants to qualified property owners. Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the mayor or the mayor's designee is authorized to make grants to city residents owning property abutting on the streets where sidewalks are constructed when the income and other circumstances of such persons falls within established guidelines certified to by the committee on city utilities of the council for the purpose of paying for the costs of the improvements. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3082(a), (c)) 
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY ASSESSMENTS 

Sec. 134-55. - Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Program. 
(a)  The city adopted a Climate Action Plan, which provides a comprehensive plan for climate change mitigation through reducing the city's carbon footprint and greenhouse gas emissions 20 percent by 2020 and 40 percent by 2030, along with pledging to reduce energy and water use in commercial and residential buildings 20 percent by 2020 and 40 percent by 2030, using a 2009 baseline. To help reduce energy and water use in commercial and residential buildings within the city, the city has established the Clean Energy Atlanta PACE Program ("PACE program") to facilitate funding to commercial and residential property owners who desire to install energy efficiency, water conservation, and renewable energy improvements within the city. 
(b)  The PACE Program will provide for the imposition of non-ad valorem property assessments to be levied upon participating properties as may be agreed to by the property owner, the downtown development authority for the city and its program administrator. 
(c)  Each property owner choosing to participate in the PACE Program shall execute a PACE Assessment Contract with the downtown development authority, which shall be administratively acknowledged by a designated representative of the city's finance department and governed by the PACE program guidelines. 
( Ord. No. 2017-46(16-O-1430), § 12, 6-12-17 ) 
Sec. 134-56. - PACE assessment roll. 
The city's office of resilience and department of finance shall periodically file with the municipal clerk a report of the PACE assessment contracts which have been entered into with property owners, which report shall include the following, and such other information as required by the council including: 
(1)  The tax-parcel ID number(s) corresponding to the property on which eligible PACE improvements are to be installed; 
(2)  The principal component of each assessment contract entered into in the preceding 12 months; 
(3)  The term of the related assessment contracts; and 
(4)  A general description of the eligible PACE improvements financed during the preceding 12 month period. 
( Ord. No. 2017-46(16-O-1430), § 12, 6-12-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-45(17-O-1424), § 5, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 134-57. - Levy of PACE assessment. 
PACE Assessments shall be levied in the amount, and for the term specified in the PACE assessment roll by parcel as directed by the city's chief financial officer and as specified in individual assessment contracts. PACE assessments shall be billed and be payable in the same manner and on the same day as assessments for solid waste charges. 
( Ord. No. 2017-46(16-O-1430), § 12, 6-12-17 ) 
Sec. 134-58. - Lien for PACE assessment and interest. 
PACE assessments and each installment thereof, along with interest thereon and the expense of collection, are declared to be a lien against the parcel so assessed, from the date the amount of such assessment or any installment thereof shall become due and unpaid, co-equal and on a parity basis with other municipal taxes. A penalty for the payment of delinquent PACE assessments shall be assessed in the same manner as delinquent municipal taxes. 
( Ord. No. 2017-46(16-O-1430), § 12, 6-12-17 ) 
Sec. 134-59. - Execution, levy and enforcement. 
The city's chief financial officer shall cooperate with the applicable tax commissioner or such other entity designated to collect the assessments and shall direct and cause to be issued an execution against any property for the amount of the assessment, interest and any applicable penalty, in the same manner as the enforcement of a lien for municipal taxes. 
( Ord. No. 2017-46(16-O-1430), § 12, 6-12-17 ) 
Sec. 134-60. - Transmittal of PACE assessment Information. 
The city shall annually adopt a resolution authorizing the transmittal of information, including in electron format, to the applicable tax commissioner for the billing and collection of the PACE assessments. 
( Ord. No. 2017-46(16-O-1430), § 12, 6-12-17 ) 
Chapter 138 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General powers relative to streets and other public ways, § 1-102(c)(11), (c)(13)—(c)(15), (c)(20). 
Cross reference— Naming of public facilities and streets in honor of persons, § 2-2; vending machines on city property and in city facilities, § 2-3; abandonment of streets, § 2-1578; abandonment of easements, § 2-1579; restrictions on advertising structures near freeways or expressway systems, § 6-27; sidewalk photographers, § 30-1316 et seq.; special assessments, ch. 134; traffic, ch. 150. 
Land development code reference— Transportation impact fee, § 9-1001 et seq. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; specific grant of constitutional authority relative to streets, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; municipal street systems generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90.2 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, adopted March 14, 2001, amended article I in its entirety. Formerly, article I pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
To the extent permitted by law, the city may determine to apply all or certain provisions of this ordinance [Ord. No. 2001-22] to agreements, franchises, and licenses existing on the effective date of this ordinance [March 5, 2001]. This ordinance shall apply to all telecommunications providers, persons seeking to use the streets in the manner described in section 138-127 herein, and franchisees, permittees, and licensees after its adoption. 

Sec. 138-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. 
Sec. 138-1.1. "Abutting property owner" means the owner(s) of property abutting and contiguous to the street or right-of-way in question. 
Sec. 138-1.2. "Affected persons or groups" means any property owner, person or group that may presently use or may reasonably expect to make future use of the right-of-way in question for transportation or other standard purpose which shall constitute greater interest than that of the general public including all persons described in section 138-68 and any persons that have facilities located in such right-of-way. 
Sec. 138-[1].3. "Bridge agreement" means an agreement arranging the terms for constructing, operating and maintaining a privately owned bridge in the public right-of-way. 
Sec. 138-1.4. "Decorative sidewalk agreement" means an agreement arranging the terms for construction and maintenance of a decorative sidewalk in the public right-of-way. 
Sec. 138-1.5. "Encroachment agreement" means an agreement arranging the terms under which an encroachment shall be allowed to exist within the public right-of-way. 
Sec. 138-1.6. "Licensee" means any person which is a party to a revocable license issued by the city. 
Sec. 138-1.7. "Permit" means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which is subject to the conditions set forth in chapter 138 of this Code. 
Sec. 138-1.8. "Permittee" means any person who holds a permit issued by the city. 
Sec. 138-1.9. "Person" means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
Sec. 138-1.10. "Petitioner" means the person requesting the abandonment and providing the required submittals. Only abutting property owners or their agents shall qualify as a petitioner to initiate the abandonment of any street or right-of-way. 
Sec. 138-1.10.[1.] "Public right-of-way" or "right-of-way" means generally property of any interest therein, whether or not in the form of a strip, for or devoted to (a) public transportation purposes; or (b) the placement of utility easements and other traditional uses along a transportation route, whether by dedication, prescription or otherwise, as well as the spaces above and below. 
Sec. 138-1.11. "Street" means the surface of, as well as the spaces below, any and all paved or unpaved public roads consistent with GA. Code Ann. § 32-1-3(24) 1998."Street" shall include the land area set aside for public uses as a travel way for vehicular traffic, pedestrian access, public utilities and other uses. 
Sec. 138-1.12. "Tie-back agreement" means an agreement arranging the terms for placing and removing tie-back cables in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-2. - Interest of city. 
Any work conducted in, on, or along any street, or public right-of-way in the city limits of Atlanta must be permitted by the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-3. - Authority to regulate assigned to commissioner of public works. 
The authority and responsibility to regulate activities within public right-of-way is hereby assigned to the commissioner of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-4. - Enforcement, penalties, violations. 
(a)  Authority. The primary authority and responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be vested in the commissioner of public works. Upon a determination that a person is in violation of this chapter, the commissioner of public works or his designee shall give notice or issue a citation that indicates they are in violation of a section in this chapter. Should the violation continue after receiving notice of violation, the commissioner of public works or his designee may cite the violator to appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing on the charge of violation of this chapter. Upon a finding that a section of this chapter has been violated, the violator shall be subject to one or more of the penalties: 
(1)  The revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise agreement for access to the public right-of-way after written notice and reasonable opportunity to cure. 
(2)  The issuance of a stop work order by the department of public works preventing work on the public streets, public right-of-way or any associated private projects of the city until the conditions outlined in the stop work order are met. 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $1,000.00 a day for a violation of a provision of this chapter. 
(4)  Imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months. 
(b)  Additional penalties. The imposition of any of the foregoing penalties shall not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit, franchise, other administrative sanctions or any other relief that may be granted under law. 
(c)  Continuous and repeated violations. 
(1)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this chapter that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues, it is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-5. - Alleys. 
(a)  The city is not and shall not be responsible for the maintenance of alleys, with the exception of three alleys (sometimes referred to as "public alleys") which have been historically maintained by the city. These three alleys are located in the central business district, connect major thoroughfares, are paved, and serve general transportation and public purpose. The alleys thus excepted are: 
(1)  Mortgage Place, N.W., from Carnegie Way to Ellis Street. 
(2)  Equitable Place, N.E., from Auburn Avenue to Edgewood Avenue. 
(3)  Cain Place, N.W., from International Boulevard to Harris Street. 
(b)  The city has no interest in, and shall not be responsible for any other alley within the city limits. Public service vehicles such as garbage trucks, fire safety vehicles, or police vehicles may make use of alleys in the provision of their service. However, none of these or other historic or present uses shall constitute public ownership of, interest in, or responsibility for said alleys. 
(c)  The city shall not maintain or improve any private alley provided however the city is an abutting property owner or the alley serves as access to a city facility. 
(d)  When the city shall need to acquire real property, right-of-way, or, easements within an alley, the city has and will, barring evidence to the contrary, assume the centerline of the alley to be the property line between abutting private properties, and shall consider the area within the alley to belong in equal proportions to the abutting property owners. Calculations as to the value of such property or property rights to be acquired shall be made accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-6. - Standard specifications adopted. 
The street, sidewalk and concrete curb specifications, latest revision, copies of which are on file in the offices of the municipal clerk and commissioner of public works, are adopted. The commissioner of public works is authorized to perform updates and revisions, from time to time, in order to reflect changes in acceptable design standards and materials, and to reflect current construction costs. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3017; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-7. - Approval of design, construction, repair, maintenance or modification of subdivisions. 
When design, construction, repair, maintenance or modification of subdivisions or the infrastructure under the jurisdiction of the commissioner of public works is proposed, the design, construction, repair, maintenance or modification shall be approved in writing by the commissioner of public works or the commissioner's designee pursuant to the standards and requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3001; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-8. - Street name changes; dedication of certain public places. 
(a)  Recognition of public interest. The city recognizes that, from time to time, a certain individual or organization may make historical, cultural or other important contributions to the city, the State of Georgia or the United States that merit recognition by renaming a Street or naming or dedicating a public place, such as a cross-walk, building, park, or other similar public place ("public place" or "public places") within the city in their honor. The city also recognizes that certain streets or public places within the city have already been named in honor of certain individuals or organizations that have made historical, cultural or other important contributions to the city, the State of Georgia or the United States. This section prescribes the procedures by which existing streets or public places within the city may be named or dedicated in honor of individuals and organizations, while preserving the integrity of those streets and public places that have already been historically connected or dedicated with the name of an individual or organization. 
(b)  Application procedure. 
(1)  Submission of application. If a citizen of the city desires to submit to the city a request to rename a street (a "street renaming") or name or dedicate ("dedication") a public place to a noteworthy individual or organization, that citizen must submit to the city's commissioner of its department of public works an application for the street renaming or dedication. The number of individuals required by this section must sign the application. 
(2)  Dedication proposals. Dedications may be proposed by an applicant in either of two manners. First, the applicant may select a dedication package ("package") offered by the city. Specific packages may be obtained by an applicant in the city's department of public works. Second, an applicant may design and propose to the city in an application a dedication, the amenities of which are not included in a package. If this option is pursued, the application must contain a detailed cost estimate for the implementation of the specific dedication. 
(3)  Street renaming. If an applicant proposes to rename an existing street, the application must contain a detailed cost estimate for the implementation of the street renaming, including all costs associated with producing and installing appropriate signage to effectuate the street renaming. 
(4)  Initial application fee; cost of available city packages; cost to implement dedication. 
a.  An initial $2,500.00 deposit to cover administrative and other associated costs concerning the city's consideration of the application for the street renaming or dedication, including advertising the proposed street renaming or dedication, must also accompany the application. Funds received will be deposited into the general fund of the city. 
b.  The city recognizes that street renamings often impose a significant hardship on residences and businesses located on the street in that maps, banking information, driver's license information, billing information, websites, yellow page information and other advertising information, letterheads and other stationary or residential/business materials, and other information relative to the affected residences or businesses will need to be changed as a result of a street renaming. Accordingly, applications for dedications, rather than street renamings, encouraged by the city and will receive priority in consideration. 
c.  If the street renaming or dedication is accepted by the city pursuant to legislation adopted by the city's council and approved by the mayor, in accordance with the City's Code of Ordinances, then the applicant will be further required to submit payment to the city in the amount of the cost of the installation of signage and/or other amenities associated with the street renaming or dedication. 
d.  All payments, other than the initial $2,500.00 application fee submitted by the applicant to the city concerning an accepted dedication will be deposited into a dedicated fund, account and Center Number 3P02 4xxxxx B00001. All payments, other than the initial $2,500.00 application fee, submitted by the applicant to the city concerning an accepted street renaming will be deposited into fund, account and Center Number 3P02 4xxxxx B00001. 
e.  The costs to implement an accepted street renaming or dedication will be determined by the city as follows: 
1.  If the application involves a dedication and the applicant chooses to utilize one of the packages offered by the city for dedications, the cost will be that attributable to the specific package chosen; 
2.  If the applicant proposes a dedication, the amenities of which are not included in a package, the cost will be either the cost set forth in the application (plus any additional costs estimated by the city not set forth in the application or the cost estimated by the city, as noticed to the applicant; 
3.  If the application proposes a street renaming, the cost will be either the cost set forth in the application (plus any additional costs estimated by the city not set forth in the application) or the cost estimated by the city, as noticed to the applicant. 
f.  Costs to implement a street renaming or dedication must be paid to the city within three days of the applicant's receipt of notice from the city that the application has been accepted by the city and further setting forth the cost of the street renaming or dedication to be remitted to the city. 
(5)  Application form and additional contents of application. The application must be provided on forms furnished by the commissioner of the department of public works and must contain the following: 
a.  An agreement that the applicant will be responsible for all costs to the city associated with the street renaming or dedication, including, but not limited to signage costs, annual maintenance costs and other costs associated with the street renaming or dedication and their continued maintenance. This agreement will provide that the applicant will remit to the city monies to apply to the additional costs within three days of receiving written notification from the city of the additional costs. The obligation to pay continuing costs will remain in place as long as the street renaming or dedication exists; 
b.  An agreement to provide an appropriate performance bond or other form of security determined by the commissioner of the department of public works, in his/her discretion, to be sufficient to cover the financial responsibility of the applicant for costs associated with a street renaming or dedication; 
c.  If the application concerns a street renaming, it must be accompanied by a list of the names and addresses and signatures of 75 percent of the residents residing or businesses located on the street to which the street renaming applies in favor of the street renaming and whose address will change as a result of the street renaming; and 
d.  Any other terms that the commissioner of the department of public works may deem, from time to time, necessary to include in application forms provided to citizens wishing to implement a street renaming or dedication, including, but not limited to: 
1.  A site plan of any planned improvements contemplated in connection with the street renaming or dedication, sealed by a Georgia registered engineer, architect or landscape architect, meeting the requirements of the city's department of public works; 
2.  Specifications and details of any amenities associated with the street renaming or dedication; 
3.  Narrative biography of individual, or organizational history to which the street renaming or dedication applies; and 
4.  Proposed maintenance schedule for any improvements or amenities associated with the street renaming or dedication and a legal description of the specific property to which the street renaming or dedication applies. 
(c)  Qualification conditions applicable to proposed street renaming or dedication. Individuals or organizations for which a street renaming or dedication is proposed must meet the following minimum qualifications: 
(1)  If a living individual, he or she must have reached the age of 75 at the time of the application; 
(2)  If a deceased individual, the application must be submitted at least 30 days after the date of death; and 
(3)  If an individual or organization, he/it must be of local, national or international reputation. 
(d)  Consideration of application; effectuating the street renaming or dedication. 
(1)  Public works actions required. Upon a determination that the application is complete, the commissioner of public works, or his designee, shall do the following: 
a.  Provide notification of the application for a street renaming or dedication to, and collect and tabulate the responses, if any, from: 
1.  City agencies and other public agencies, including police, fire, planning, traffic and transportation, bureau of buildings, water, MARTA, and the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT), Highways and Streets; 
2.  All affected city public schools and impacted neighborhood planning unit(s) located on or in the vicinity of the proposed street renaming or dedication; and 
3.  Any other persons the commissioner of the department of public works deems, in his/her discretion, should receive notice of the proposed street renaming or dedication. 
b.  Review existing records and make certain the street renamings or dedication's proposed name or similar name does not exist, as well as determine for whom the street or public place is currently named; 
c.  Post appropriate signage notifying the public of the proposed street renaming or dedication; 
d.  Advise the applicant for the street renaming or dedication on the feasibility of the street renaming or dedication; 
e.  Advise the applicant if the proposed street renaming or dedication is not feasible, as well as what the applicant must do to make the street renaming or dedication feasible; 
f.  Refund of the fee paid by the applicant for the street renaming or dedication, if the commissioner of public works does not recommend the street renaming or dedication. If a proposed dedication or street renaming is denied, this refund will be automatic. 
(2)  Submission of ordinance; waiver of street renaming or dedication conditions by council. Upon a determination by the commissioner of public works that the conditions outlined in this section for a street renaming or dedication have been fulfilled and that the street renaming or dedication is in the best interests of the city, the commissioner of public works shall submit to the city's council an ordinance to legislatively implement the street renaming or dedication, which ordinance must specifically indicate that such conditions have been met. 
(3)  City's committee of purview. The city's committee of purview shall not consider an ordinance for a street renaming or dedication unless the conditions outlined in this section have been met. 
(4)  Advertisement; hearing. Prior to considering a street renaming or dedication ordinance, a legal advertisement must be published in at least one of the daily papers circulated for readership in the city, which advertisement will notify the public that a hearing on the proposed street renaming or dedication will be held by the city's committee of purview on a day certain, which date will be not less than seven days from the date of the paper in which the advertisement appears. The advertisement will give notice of the introduction of the ordinance, the street renaming or dedication and the time and place of the hearing on the ordinance before the city's committee of purview. The council staff of the city's committee of purview, through the municipal clerk's office, will be responsible for placing the advertisement in an appropriate publication in a timely manner. The municipal clerk will be authorized to place the required advertisement upon receipt from council staff written notification that the application is complete and that all conditions of this section concerning the specific street renaming or dedication have been satisfied by the applicant. At the hearing, any person opposed to the street renaming or dedication will be allowed a reasonable time within which to present such person's views and opposition to the street renaming or dedication, after which the city's committee of purview will make its recommendation to the council on the ordinance. Thereafter, the council shall have full power and authority to adopt or reject the street renaming or dedication and the ordinance. 
(5)  Final notices of dedication. Upon the adoption of the section by the council after the hearing before the city's committee of purview, and upon approval of the ordinance by the mayor, notice of the street renaming or dedication must be given by the municipal clerk as follows: 
a.  If a street renaming is involved, notice must be provided to all property owners located on the street; 
b.  If a dedication is involved, notice must be given to all property owners within 300 feet of the public place to which the dedication applies; and 
c.  Notice of the street renaming or dedication must be given to the U.S. Postal Service. 
(6)  Implementing a street renaming or dedication; term of street renaming or dedication. The bureau of traffic and transportation or the appropriate city agency must take all actions necessary to fully implement the street renaming or dedication (e.g. fabricating and installing appropriate signage) within 60 days of the effective date of the applicable street renaming or dedication ordinance. 
(7)  Duration of dedication; failure to maintain dedication. A dedication will be valid for a period of three years. Within 90 days of the expiration of a dedication, the applicant may renew the dedication by paying to the city established maintenance costs for the dedication for the next three years. If an applicant fails to maintain a dedication for a period of six months, the dedication will lapse and the city may remove all amenities associated with the dedication. All costs associated with the removal and restoration of a dedication site will be paid by the applicant within three days of receipt of an invoice from the city. 
(8)  Continuity of dedication. Dedications that have not expired and are current in terms of payment of costs may not be withdrawn by the city in favor of a subsequent applicant. 
(9)  Maintenance of dedication by third-party. Costs associated with a street renaming or dedication may be paid by the city to a third party agency with which the city has an agreement for the maintenance of the street renaming or dedication. Accordingly, when calculating costs for a street renaming or dedication, the city may include in those costs any administrative or other fee charged by the third party agency pursuant to its agreement with the city. 
(e)  Urban design commission review and comment. All street renamings and dedications located in the City of Atlanta must be reviewed by the urban design commission and be the subject of a regularly scheduled commission meeting. In advance of such a meeting, neighborhood associations, historical groups, historic preservation groups, and other interested parties will be notified that the street renaming or dedication has been placed on the commission's agenda. After the meeting, written findings regarding the street renaming or dedication must be forwarded to the city's commissioner of its department of public works and must be received by the commissioner before the commissioner is authorized to submit to the city council legislation authorizing the street renaming or dedication. 
(f)  Georgia Department of Transportation street renamings. If the State of Georgia implements a street renaming for a street within the municipal limits of the city, but does not have the appropriate signage installed effectuating the street renaming, the council member of the affected district or post may introduce an ordinance to effectuate the street renaming pursuant to the city's legislative process. 
(g)  Maintenance of street renaming or dedication records. The municipal clerk must maintain a record of all street renamings and dedications and, including records reflecting the prior name of the street or public place, as well as the new name and the effective date of the name change. 
(h)  Street name continuity. All applications for a street renaming must propose the change of the street name for the entire length of the street. An application proposing to change the name of only a portion of a street must be rejected by the commissioner of public works. 
(i)  Maintenance of a street renaming or dedication. If the maintenance of the signage or other street renaming or dedication amenities require a higher standard of maintenance than that provided by the department of public works or other appropriate city department, the applicant will be required to enter into a maintenance agreement with the city, or third party designee of the city, secured by a performance bond issued by a surety authorized to do business in the State of Georgia by the Georgia Insurance Commissioner, in a penal amount to be determined by the commissioner of public works. 
(Code 1977, § 1-202(d); Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2003-12, § 1, 2-12-03; Ord. No. 2007-80(07-O-2503), § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 2017-62(17-O-1612), § 1, 10-16-17 ) 
Sec. 138-9. - Vacating and abandoning streets. 
(a)  In order to initiate a petition for the abandonment of any street or portion of any street, the petitioner or petitioners shall submit a petition to the commissioner of public works, which shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Name and addresses of petitioners; and a statement that the petitioner owns or is the agent of one who owns property that abuts the parcel under consideration. 
(2)  Survey or plat of the area to be abandoned, prepared by a registered surveyor in a manner suitable for filing, and reviewed and approved by the department of public works. The plat shall show the right-of-way divided on a pro-rata basis among the abutting property owners; 
(3)  Legal description and area in square feet of each parcel of the subdivided right-of-way to be abandoned; 
(4)  Name and mailing address of each abutting property owner(s) property tax identification numbers, deed book and page number of all recorded deeds and plats for each abutting property; 
(5)  A fee of $2,500.00 for abandoned streets abutting the development of residential subdivisions or commercial or industrial tracts, or a fee of $2,000.00 for abandoned streets abutting individual residential lots, which fees shall be applied to the cost of the appraisal of the parcel and advertisement of the proposed abandonment which shall be deposited in account number 3P02491102M22F03349999. 
(6)  A signed certification of intent from the petitioners and each abutting property owners that they intend to acquire title and compensate the city for the fee simple fair market value of the pro-rated portion of the right-of-way abutting their property, if abandoned, in exchange for the consideration of the petition and acknowledgment that if the property owner fails to acquire title and complete the transfer after the abandonment, the city may place a lien upon the property in an amount equivalent to the fair market value; and 
(7)  If a property owner is unwilling to acquire his pro-rata share of the right-of-way to be abandoned, that property owner may agree that his share may be paid for and/or acquired by another abutting property owner as long as the right-of-way in question is contiguous to the property to which it is to be joined; and 
(8)  Any other information deemed necessary or appropriate by the commissioner of the department of public works. 
(b)  Upon a determination that the petition is complete or legislation has been introduced by a member of the council, the commissioner of public works or his designee shall do the following: 
(1)  Notify all abutting property owners and others known affected persons or groups by certified mail of the petition to abandon said street and of their right to respond to the petition. Those notified shall be allowed 30 days to respond. 
(2)  Notify of the petition to abandon the street(s) and receive responses from: City agencies and other public agencies, including police, fire, planning, traffic and transportation, water, MARTA, the Georgia Department of Transportation, Highways and Streets, and Grady Hospital; all affected city public schools and neighborhood planning unit(s); all utilities and others with facilities located in the street(s) to be abandoned; and any other persons the commissioner of public works deems, in his discretion, should receive notice of the proposed abandonment. 
(3)  Review existing records and make a site visit. 
(4)  Post appropriate signage notifying the public of the proposed abandonment. 
(5)  Evaluate the responses, documents, and findings from abutting property owner, affected person, and petitioner and determine, based on criteria established by the commissioner, whether the street in question is no longer necessary as a public right-of-way and whether the petition for a street abandonment can be accommodated. 
(6)  Advise the petitioner on the feasibility of abandoning the street and if the petition for abandonment is not feasible, advise the petitioners on what must be done to make it feasible. 
(7)  Request of the refund of the fee paid pursuant to this section if the commissioner of public works does not recommend the street abandonment. 
(c)  Upon a determination by the commissioner of public works that the street is no longer necessary for the public's use and convenience as a public right-of-way, and that the conditions outlined in this section have been fulfilled, the commissioner of public works shall submit an abandonment ordinance to the council for consideration. An ordinance cannot be considered until the provisions outlined in this section have been fulfilled. 
(1)  The fees described in section this section may be waived by ordinance of the council upon recommendation by the purchasing agent; or 
(2)  In the event that the value of the abandoned right-of-way parcels are determined to be equal to or less than the cost of conducting an appraisal, the council may waive the requirement for an appraisal and may declare that the fair market value shall be an amount equal to the square foot unit value of the abutting property as determined by the most recent appraisal by the appropriate county tax commissioner. 
(d)  All legislation related to street abandonments shall originate in the city utilities committee as a committee paper. The city utilities committee shall not consider legislation for abandonment of public right-of-way unless the conditions outlined in this section have been met. 
(e)  In order to vacate or abandon any street or a portion of any street, an ordinance prepared by the department of public works declaring the intent of the city to abandon the street or a portion of the street which, in the judgment of the council, has ceased to be used by the public to the extent that no substantial public purpose is served by it or is no longer needed for public road purposes shall be passed by the council. There shall be attached to the ordinance a plat or sketch showing the street or portion of the street to be vacated or abandoned, and indicating which sections shall be acquired by which affected parties. 
(f)  Prior to consideration of the ordinance shall authorize and require an advertisement shall be published in at least one of the daily papers published in the city, which advertisement shall notify the public that a hearing on the question of the abandoning of the street or a portion of the street will be held by the city utilities committee on a day certain, which date shall be not less than ten days from the date of the paper in which the advertisement appears. The advertisement shall give notice of the introduction of the ordinance, the street or portion of the street proposed to be vacated or abandoned and the time and place of the hearing thereon. The council staff of the city utilities committee through the municipal clerk's office shall be responsible for the advertisement being done in a timely manner. The municipal clerk shall be authorized to place said advertisement upon receipt from the commissioner of public work or his designee that the petition is complete. Written notice of the hearing shall be given by the department of public works to the owners of property located on the street or portion of the street to be vacated or abandoned. At the hearing, any person opposed to the vacation or abandonment shall be allowed a reasonable time within which to present such person's views and opposition thereto, after which the city utilities committee shall make its recommendation to the council on the ordinance. Thereafter, the council shall have full power and authority to adopt or reject the ordinance. 
(g)  If the city utilities committee recommends that the street or right-of-way be abandoned, the owner(s) of each abutting property shall post funds with the clerk of council, within a time limit set by the city utilities committee, in an amount equal to the fair market value of the portion of the right-of-way to be acquired. Upon receiving the recommendation from the committee, and funds being posted for all portions of the right-of-way in question, the council shall have full power and authority to adopt or reject the ordinance. Council shall not act upon the abandonment ordinance until all funds have been received. 
(h)  Upon the adoption of the ordinance by the council after the hearing before the city utilities committee, and upon approval of the ordinance by the mayor, notice of vacation or abandonment shall be given to property owners located on the street or portion of the street vacated or abandoned, and the street or portion of the street shall thereafter cease to be a street for any purpose whatsoever and the rights of the public in and to that section of the street vacated or abandoned shall cease, provided that all easements and rights of the utilities, telecommunications providers and other persons that have facilities located in the street shall continue as governed by state law. 
(i)  Streets or right-of-way having been abandoned shall be divided along the centerline and transferred by quit claim deed to the abutting property owners along each side of the abandoned right-of-way in sections defined by extension of existing property lines. Said transfer shall be conditioned upon the abutting property owner having posted funds as outlined in paragraph (e) above. If the abutting property owner fails to post funds as outlined in paragraph (e), another abutting property owner may post such funds and shall thereby assume the right to acquire that portion of the abandoned right-of-way. Any such quitclaim deed shall not effect utilities located in such street or right-of-way. 
(j)  If, having duly signed a certification of intent as described in this section, the property owner shall fail to complete the transaction to acquire the appropriate pro-rata share of the abandoned right-of-way, the city attorney shall unilaterally file a quit-claim deed and shall simultaneously file a lien against the abutting property in an amount equal to the fair market value of the right-of-way portion in question. 
(1)  No street nor right-of-way shall be abandoned where the abandonment shall result in any parcel of land being left landlocked, nor shall any new unbuildable lot be created. No abandonment shall occur until all portions of the right-of-way are identified and accounted for as to whom shall be the receiving owner, and appropriate funds have been posted. All property boundaries resulting from the abandonment of any street or right-of-way shall be as regular and reasonable as possible. 
(k)  Physical conditions for abandonment. No street or right-of-way shall be abandoned unless the following conditions are met. 
(1)  No abandonment shall result in any parcel of land being left landlocked, nor shall any new lot be created which does not comply with the current applicable zoning and building permitting requirements. 
(2)  No abandonment shall result in the creation of any dead end street without the inclusion of an appropriate turn-around infrastructure to be installed by the petitioner at the petitioner's expense as defined in the department of public works standard details. It shall be a condition of any abandonment that appropriate city standard infrastructure shall be constructed by the petitioner, including the appropriate dedication of any additional land area required by construction of a cul-de-sac. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9-3014, 9-3015; Ord. No. 1999-60, § 2, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2001-46, § 1, 6-25-01; Ord. No. 2013-35(13-O-1121), § 1, 7-24-13) 
State Law reference— Abandonment of roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-7-1 et seq. 
Sec. 138-10. - Dangerous or hazardous conditions near the right-of-way. 
(a)  Fences. 
(1)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any barbed wire fence, electric fence or any other character of fence or object that would endanger the persons or clothing of passersby along the sidewalks on the portion of any lot adjacent to a public right-of-way in the city, unless the fence is amply protected by a barrier approved by the commissioner of public works or unless the fence is placed not less than three feet from the inside edge of the sidewalks of the street, the location being totally on abutting private property. 
(2)  Enforcement. The police chief shall, upon request of any citizen or upon the request of the commissioner of public works, give notice to the owner of the property where the fence may be that the fence violates this section, and, unless removed within three days after notice, the owner shall be cited to appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing on the charge of violation of this section. Upon finding that this section has been violated, the owner may be required by the court to remove the barbed wire within a time prescribed by the court or the commissioner of public works shall be authorized to remove the barbed wire and the cost of removal shall be a lien against the property. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3004; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-11. - Digging up, carrying away gravel, earth and other material from street or sidewalk. 
Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to dig or scrape up and carry away gravel, earth, dirt, rock, sand or other materials which are a part of any street or sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3005; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-12. - Depositing, dumping or storing material in street or sidewalk. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, or store any refuse, waste, garbage or other material of any nature, in or along the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-13. - Affixing signs within right-of-way. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  "Affix" shall mean the act of tacking, nailing, posting, gluing, painting, stapling, marking or writing upon the surface of any structure or directing, authorizing or paying another to do such act. 
(2)  "Public property" within the public right-of-way shall mean the area lying within the dedicated or prescriptive easement of any street or road located within the city, whether improved or not, including sidewalks, ditches, drains, the tree lawn areas between detached sidewalks and streets, roadway medians, parkways, bridges, utility poles and boxes, street signs and sign poles. 
(3)  "Sign" shall mean any material containing printed or written matter in words, symbols, pictures, or any combination thereof, including, but not limited to flyers, handbills, pennants, posters, and streamers. 
(4)  "Special event sign" shall mean any temporary sign which shall advertise or promote any meeting, event, gathering, function, entertainment or other activity scheduled for a particular date or series of consecutive days. 
(b)  Signage prohibited. Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to post or affix signs on public property within the public right-of-way. 
(c)  Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall apply to the installation of the following: 
(1)  Metal plaques or plates commemorating a historical, cultural or artistic event, location or personality; 
(2)  Signage identifying licensed franchisees of the city or indicating the presence of workers of permitted utilities and their facilities or equipment within or immediately adjacent to the right-of-way; 
(3)  Signage identifying or directing vehicular or pedestrian traffic to or from property immediately adjacent to the signage when displayed on structures under the ownership or control of the property owner or lessee; 
(4)  Signage providing public transportation information; 
(5)  Signage providing direction to governmental facilities, hospitals or houses of worship; 
(6)  Signage affixed pursuant to permits issued by governmental entities having authority to do so; 
(7)  Signage used to provide for the safety of individuals using the public right-of-way or immediately adjacent property; 
(8)  Flags, banners, bunting, signs, displays or other forms of decoration which are displayed in conformance with and permitted by section 138-60; or 
(9)  Commercial advertisements which are displayed in and on bus shelters in conformance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51. 
(d)  Removal. Any signs found upon any public property, not in compliance with this section, may be removed by the city. The person(s) responsible for causing the unlawful sign to be placed on any public property may be held responsible for the cost of removal. These persons shall include, but are not limited to, any individuals or businesses whose advertisement, message or information appears on or is contained in any sign or notice unlawfully placed on public property. 
(e)  Special event signage. Any special event signs found upon any public property may be removed by the city. The person(s) responsible for causing the unlawful special event sign to be on public property may be held responsible for the cost of removal. In addition, the person(s) responsible for causing the unlawful special event sign to be on public property shall be subject to a minimum of three days in jail. These persons shall include, but are not limited to, any individuals or business whose special event appears on or is contained in any special event sign or notice unlawfully placed on public property and any individual responsible for authorizing, directing, or paying persons who unlawfully place special event signs on public property. 
(f)  Citations. Any person violating this section shall receive a citation. The citation shall state the date, location, and brief description of the violation. The citation penalty may be paid prior to the assigned court date, in the amount of $100.00 per violation to cover the removal of the unlawfully placed sign. Payment may be made as directed by the citation. Upon a third, and subsequent, violation, the person cited must appear in court. 
(g)  Penalties. Any person violating this section shall be subject to one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  A fine not to exceed $1,000.00 upon appearance before the judge of the municipal court, for each unlawfully placed sign or special event sign; 
(2)  Imprisonment for a term not exceeding five days. 
Fines that remain unpaid after 60 days will automatically trigger a separate violation, resulting in the responsible person(s) being subject to the penalties provided in this chapter, in addition to the original fines and/or jail time. 
(h)  Enforcement. Any person empowered by the City of Atlanta to issue citations may enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3012; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2004-36, § 1, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 2006-77, § 1, 11-14-06) 
Cross reference— Signs generally, § 6-26 et seq. 
Land Development Code Reference— Supplemental zoning provisions pertaining to signs, § 16-28A.001 et seq. 
Sec. 138-14. - Maintenance of sidewalk area. 
(a)  Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks. When there is an accumulation of ice, naturally or by artificial means, or snow sufficient to cover the sidewalks, the occupants or owners of the houses and other establishments fronting the sidewalks shall have the ice or snow cleared from the sidewalks in front of their establishments when an accumulation occurs, within a reasonable time after such accumulation. 
(b)  Maintenance of unpaved portion of sidewalk space. Whenever a sidewalk is paved and not all of the sidewalk space is covered by the pavement, but a space is left between the sidewalk and the curbs or between the sidewalk and property line or both or where there exist planted materials in the ground or in planters within such unpaved portion, the owner of the abutting property shall be responsible for maintenance of that space and for keeping it free of holes and weeds, level with the sidewalk and sodded with grass and for watering, pruning and maintaining the planted materials, whether such materials are planted in the ground or in planters placed in or alongside the sidewalk area. Upon the failure of that person to do so, the commissioner of public works may give written notice to the person to do so within ten days, and upon the failure of that person to comply, the person shall be cited to appear for a hearing to show cause for noncompliance, after which the commissioner shall have the property put in a condition complying with this section and shall notify the chief financial officer of the costs thereof. Execution shall issue against the owner of the property for the full amount of costs, which execution shall be collected by the chief financial officer as are all other executions issued by the city. 
(c)  Paving of grass plots upon repaving sidewalks. Whenever a sidewalk is repaved on a street which has a grass or dirt plot between the curb and the pavement, the commissioner of public works shall be authorized to extend the repavement to the curbline. If the extension to the curbline is repaved, the grass or dirt plot so paved shall be paved with the same material as the new pavement. 
(d)  Damaged sidewalk abutting the right-of-way. When the sidewalk abutting the right-of-way is damaged, it is the obligation of the abutting property owner to repair such sidewalk upon notice from the department of public works. If after receiving such notice, the abutting property owner fails to repair the sidewalk within a reasonable time, the department of public works is authorized to make such repairs and assess the abutting property owner for costs incurred; provided however that where funding is identified, applicable and available for implementation of repairs by the city, such repairs not required due to damage directly attributable to action(s) of the abutting property owner or agents, contractors, or employees of the abutting property owner, shall be undertaken by the city upon a prioritized basis until the funding is exhausted. The absence of city funding shall not excuse the abutting property owner from the requirements of this section. 
(e)  Reporting requirement. The department of public works shall update city council on a quarterly basis as to all sidewalk repairs conducted by location, responsible party, and dollar amount of each repair. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9-3016, 9-3087, 9-3086; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2015-40(14-O-1361), §§ 1, 2, 7-29-15 ) 
Sec. 138-15. - Obstructing sidewalks by display or sale of goods 
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any sidewalk by placing thereon goods, wares, merchandise or other things of value for the purpose of display or advertising or to erect or use thereon any boxes, steps, stands or other structures or contrivances for the purpose of displaying goods, wares, merchandise or other things of value or to sell or offer for sale thereon any goods, wares, merchandise, service or other things of value. However, temporary use of the sidewalks as may be necessary to get merchandise into or away from places of business fronting on any such sidewalk shall not be held to be prohibited by this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit peddling by licensed peddlers. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3018; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Obstruction of roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq. 
Sec. 138-16. - Compliance with noise ordinance. 
All permittees performing construction or other activities in the public right-of-way must comply at all times with chapter 74 which regulates noise within the city. Notwithstanding this section, however, the commissioner of public works shall have the authority to waive noise restrictions for an applicant when doing so is in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-17. - Design objectives for sidewalks. 
Sidewalks installed in the public right-of-way shall be a minimum width of 60 inches, shall be located at the edge of the right-of-way and shall conform with all ADA requirements. Sidewalks shall be designed and installed in such a manner as to protect existing mature trees and to allow for the planting of future trees. In the event that topographical or other conditions do not allow for the installation of a 60-inch minimum sidewalk, the commissioner of public works is authorized to exercise his discretion to determine an appropriate resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-18. - Utility markings. 
(a)  Temporary markings. Prior to any utility construction or repair that may damage other utilities located in the public right-of-way, persons performing construction activities, to the extent permitted by law, shall locate and mark the location of all existing utilities. Upon the completion of all construction activities, all temporary utility location markings shall be removed. 
(b)  Permanent pavement marker. All permanent utility markers in the public right-of-way shall: identify the owner of such facility, be no larger than three inches in diameter, installed flush with the pavement, and constructed with such material that in the event of failure, will not create a public safety hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENCROACHMENTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, adopted March 14, 2001, amended article II in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
To the extent permitted by law, the city may determine to apply all or certain provisions of this ordinance [Ord. No. 2001-22] to agreements, franchises, and licenses existing on the effective date of this ordinance [March 5, 2001]. This ordinance shall apply to all telecommunications providers, persons seeking to use the streets in the manner described in section 138-127 herein, and franchisees, permittees, and licensees after its adoption. 

DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 138-20. - Minimum requirements for changes, excavations or encroachments in right-of-way for any purpose other than its intended use as a public street or highway. 
(a)  When performing construction activities or the erection of a temporary or permanent encroachment, all such persons shall obtain prior approval, including all necessary permits and/or agreements, from the department of public works, and pay a permit fee and annual inspection fee for the issuance of said permit or agreement as set forth in Appendix B of this Code. The commissioner of public works shall require the person conducting activities pursuant to the permit and within the right-of way to provide each abutting property owner or occupant with reasonable and timely notification of any impending construction work that would unreasonably interfere with either egress or ingress onto said owner's or occupant's property. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, encroachments include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Vehicle, pedestrian or utility bridges. 
(2)  Vehicle, pedestrian or utility tunnels. 
(3)  Pipes, wires, conduits or similar facilities. 
(4)  Basements, vaults, elevator shafts, stairs, stairwells, ventilation shafts, gratings or similar facilities. 
(5)  Canopies, ledges, bay windows, balconies, decorative lighting, flagpoles, gargoyles, architectural embellishments, area walks or similar facilities. 
(6)  Any building, parking garage, structure, or part of thereof, including footings, foundations, tie-backs, supports, walls, eves, or projections; which extend into the public right-of-way; whether intended for public or private use; whether new or historic shall be defined as an encroachment. 
(7)  A vault encroaching under the public right-of-way which is covered by the franchised agreements between the city and the various utility companies is excluded, except when that vault is an integral structural part of the building being served, including the basement walls, footings or foundations of the building, in which case the vault will also be subject to an agreement as outlined in this section between the building owner and the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2007-79(07-O-1953), § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 2010-29(10-O-0904), § 1, 6-30-10) 
Sec. 138-21. - [Establishment of administrative rules.] 
The commissioner of public works is authorized to establish and implement such administrative rules and procedures necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-22. - Nonconforming encroachments. 
(a)  Structure or properties that encroach into public right-of-way and for which there is not an applicable agreement shall be considered "nonconforming uses." The city may, at the discretion of the commissioner of public works, permit certain nonconforming encroachments. The city may at any time determine that continued encroachment is not in the public interest and may require the removal of said encroachment. 
(b)  If a nonconforming encroachment ceases to have continuous use, has a change in the type or degree of use, or if the structural or functional soundness of the structure or property deteriorates due to lack of maintenance, damage by fire, flood, wind, or other act of God, it shall no longer be tolerated and shall not be eligible for repair, replacement, or further use until an encroachment agreement has been executed. The city shall have the right and duty to require the removal of any encroachment thus affected. 
(c)  Past tolerance of an encroachment or failure to enforce the prohibition against encroachment shall not be grounds for continued existence of a nonconforming encroachment. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-23. - Obligation to relocate upon notice. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to perform any public works or public improvements necessary to maintain the public right-of-way. The city may therefore, upon written request to the permittee, require relocation of the permittee's facilities existing in the public right-of-way at the permittee's own expense when the relocation is necessary to maintain the health, safety, or welfare of the public or to improve or maintain the public right-of-way for transportation uses. 
(1)  Notification, failure to remove. Upon receiving written notice from the city to remove, or relocate facilities which are using or occupying a public right-of-way which the city has to improve, the permittee shall, within 60 days thereafter, begin arrangements for said removal or relocation in accordance with said written notice from the city. Should the permittee fail to comply with such notice within a reasonable time sufficient to allow for procedures reasonably necessary for the removal and relocation of the facilities, the city may give the permittee a final notice directing that such removal begin not later than ten days from the receipt of such final notice. 
(2)  Removal or relocation of facilities by the city. If the permittee refuses or neglects to relocate said facilities existing in the public right-of-way within ten days of receipt of such final notice, or if an emergency affecting public safety or health exists requiring immediate relocation of the permittee's facilities, to the extent not inconsistent with state and federal law, the city may relocate such facilities and the permittee shall pay to the city the reasonable costs incurred in connection with such relocation. 
(3)  Removal or relocation of facilities for aesthetic purposes. If the relocation of facilities in the right-of-way is for aesthetic purposes or purposes not related to improving the public right-of-way for transportation purposes or to maintain the public right-of-way for health or safety reasons, then the cost of such relocation shall be borne by the requesting third party and not by the city or the permittee. 
(4)  Removal or relocation of facilities by an act of God. If an act of God necessitates the relocation of the permittee's facilities located in the public rights-of-way, the cost of such relocation shall not be borne by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-24. - Conditions of permit. 
(a)  Encroachment agreement. It shall be prohibited and shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any temporary or permanent right-of-way encroachment in the city, unless that encroachment is covered by an encroachment agreement administered by the department of public works. 
(b)  The city will not enter into an encroachment agreement to any owner of property adjacent to any street or roadway that is part of the street system of the city or right-of-way along the limited-access highways of the federal or state aid road system within the city limits or any agent or contractor employed by the owner to make changes to, to alter or to construct an encroachment over, upon or under the right-of-way unless: 
(1)  Changes to benefit public. In the opinion of the commissioner of public works the proposed alteration, excavation or encroachment will constitute a benefit to the public and, except for permitted temporary disruptions of service, will not adversely impact the ability of the right-of-way to handle vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise to perform their intended function. 
(2)  Agreement as a condition of a permit. The owners of the adjacent or connected properties abutting the right-of-way seeking a permit to alter, excavate or encroach on the right-of-way enter an agreement with the city, which agreement shall be binding upon the owners of the property abutting the right-of-way and their successors in title in perpetuity or until the agreement is ended by mutual consent of the city and the agreeing parties and which will provide but is not limited to the following: 
(3)  Submission of plans and technical specifications. All alterations, excavations or encroachments permitted on, in, over, under or within the public right-of-way of the city shall be pursuant to a plan, calculations and technical specifications prepared by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state, which plans, calculations and technical specifications have been approved by the commissioner of public works pursuant to the standards set forth in this chapter or promulgated pursuant to this chapter and, when applicable, the standards of state department of transportation or the federal highway administration or both. Minimally, the plans should show the location of any supports, the height or depth of the structure and the width and volumetric cubic feet of the structure, where applicable. 
(4)  Performance bond as a condition of a permit. When in the opinion of the commissioner of public works it is deemed appropriate and prior to beginning any work on, in, over or under the public right-of-way of the city, the owner of the abutting property or the contractor employed by the owner to perform the work shall present to the city a performance and completion bond for the full value of the work contemplated furnished by a corporate surety satisfactory to the city, the amount of the surety being determined by the city's risk manager to be adequate to either complete the proposed work impacting the public right-of-way in its entirety or to restore the public right-of-way to its condition prior to commencement of the work if the owner or the owner's contracting agent fails to complete the work to the satisfaction of the commissioner of public works. 
(5)  Indemnification insurance as a condition of a permit. Evidence of insurance shall be issued to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers and employees from all claims arising out of any injury to persons or damage to property resulting from the changes to or work on, in, over, under or within the right-of-way by the property owner or the contractor employed by the owner or any of the agents or employees of the owner or contractor. 
(6)  Signatures required of all parties to agreement. All parties required for the execution of such agreement shall be signatories thereto, as evidenced by a title certificate of an attorney licensed to practice law within this state, which title certificate sets forth the names and addresses of the owners of the property or structures to be connected by the bridge or tunnel and the names and addresses of the lessors and lessees of the property or structures, together with sufficient information as to the terms of any leases of the property or structures and the corporate names of any parties. 
(7)  Obligation to replace the area beneath the street. The granting of permission to construct an encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within any public street or public alley within the city shall be contingent upon the agreement of the owner and the lessor of the tracts of land adjacent to the street or alley affected by the encroachment or excavation to remove the encroachment or excavation and to replace any area beneath the street or alley where the encroachment or excavation is constructed to a condition satisfactory to the city within 90 days after being notified to do so by the commissioner of public works without cost to the city and to provide security, if requested to do so by the city, to ensure that the encroachment or excavation will be removed or backfilled and the area returned to a condition satisfactory to the commissioner of public works without the cost to the city. 
(8)  Performance bond required to replace the area beneath the street. The granting of permission for an encroachment or construction of an excavation on, in, over, under or within any public street or public alley within the city shall be contingent upon an agreement by the owner or lessee of the building or property to furnish and maintain a bond, at no expense to the city, with a corporate surety satisfactory to the city, to guarantee the performance of the principal in removing the encroachment or backfill the excavation as provided for in subsection (7) of this section. 
(9)  Annual rental of space. The granting of permission to construct the encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within any public street or public alley within the city shall be contingent upon the agreement of the owners or lessors or lessees of the tracts of land connected by the encroachment or excavation to pay to the city an annual rental for the space occupied by the encroachment or excavation at a rate per cubic foot as determined by the council, computed on the outside dimensions of the encroachment or excavation lying within the bounds of the public right-of-way of the city, which rental shall be collected by the department of finance and shall be subject to change from time to time. For rental of less than 5,000 cubic feet, the commissioner of public works may require one year's rental payments in advance. 
(10)  Public liability insurance requirement as a condition of a permit. The granting of permission to construct an encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within a public street or public alley of the city shall be contingent upon the agreement of the owners or lessors or lessees of the tracts of land permitted by the city to effectuate the encroachment or excavation to hold the city harmless from any and all claims arising out of the construction, operation, use, maintenance or removal of the encroachment or excavation and upon the additional agreement of the owners or lessors or lessees to maintain a policy of public liability insurance, at no expense to the city, satisfactory to the city and naming the city as a named insured, in an amount approved by the city's risk manager. The agreement of the owners or lessors or lessees of the tracts of land to hold the city harmless shall not be limited to the amount of the insurance. 
(11)  Non-waiver of city negligence. The granting of permission to construct an encroachment or excavation shall be contingent upon the agreement of the owners or lessors or lessees of the tracts of land permitted by the city to effectuate the encroachment or excavation that the obligation to hold the city harmless against all claims arising out of the construction, operation, use, maintenance or removal of the encroachment or excavation shall not be waived by the city because of the commissioner of public works having approved by the plans and specifications for the encroachment or excavation or by the requiring or not requiring modifications thereto, even though the city may be found to have been negligent as a matter of law because of its acts or failure to act in regard thereto. 
(12)  Locating all pre-existing public and private utilities. The granting of permission to construct the encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within a public street or public alley of the city shall be contingent upon the parties' seeking permission to construct the encroachment or excavation, determining at their expense the location of all aboveground and below ground public utilities and private utilities of the city in the area where the encroachment or excavation is to be constructed, and making arrangements for the removal or relocation of those utilities, at the expense of the parties seeking permission to construct the encroachment or excavation and at no expense to the city. 
(13)  Compliance with this chapter. The granting of permission to construct the encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within a public street or public alley of the city shall be contingent upon the agreement of the parties seeking permission to construct the encroachment or excavation to comply with all the terms of this chapter and to comply with all other ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(14)  Reimbursement of damages to city. The granting of permission to construct the encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within a public street or public alley of the city shall be contingent upon the agreement of the parties seeking permission therefore to repair any damage to the street or alley resulting from the construction, maintenance or use of the encroachment or excavation and to reimburse the city for any damage to the street or alley beneath, on or above where the encroachment or excavation is constructed, because of that construction and during the construction, use and maintenance of the encroachment or excavation. 
(c)  Enforcement. The police chief shall, upon request of any citizen or upon the request of the commissioner of public works, give notice to the owner of the property which may be encroachment that the owner may be in violation of this section. Alternatively, the commissioner of public works may give notice of violation to the owner. The owner shall then be allowed 30 days to resolve the conflict by removing the encroachment, entering into an "encroachment agreement" with the city, or by demonstrating to the satisfaction of the commissioner of public works that the structure or property in question is not in violation. Failing compliance, the owner shall be cited to appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing on the charge of violation of this section. Upon finding that this section has been violated, the owner may be required by the court to remove the encroachment within a time prescribed by the court or the commissioner of public works shall be authorized to remove the encroachment and the cost of removal shall be a lien against the property. 
(d)  Penalties. Any violator of this section shall be held accountable as provided in the penalty section of this chapter. Each day of continuation of violation after notice shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-25. - Erection of bridges, tunnels or similar structures across streets or alleys. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to erect a bridge, tunnel or similar structure which crosses any public street or public alley, whether above or below the surface of the right-of-way, for the purpose of providing a passageway between property or structures adjacent to the right-of-way except upon the approval and authorization of the council by ordinance and upon compliance with all applicable sections of this Code and other ordinances of the city, including this sections, as follows: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to place supports for any bridge or tunnel or any other obstructions within the public right-of-way of any street or public alley or of any portion thereof set aside for or used for sidewalk purposes. 
(2)  The minimum height above or depth below street level in each instance of the construction of the bridge or tunnel shall be fixed and determined in advance by the commissioner of public works in order to provide for the safe and efficient use of the right-of-way for public transportation purposes. 
(3)  The maximum outside width and height dimensions of each bridge or tunnel shall be as fixed and determined in advance by the commissioner of public works in order to provide for the safe and efficient use of the right-of-way for public transportation purposes. 
(4)  The bridge or tunnel shall be designed by an architect or an engineer licensed to practice in the state, and the plans and specifications for the bridge or tunnel presented to the city for approval shall bear the architect's or engineer's official registration seal thereon. The plans and specifications shall be submitted to the commissioner of public works, the director, bureau of buildings and the urban design commission for their written recommendations before the council shall consider approval thereof. 
(5)  The outside appearance of any bridge permitted by this section shall not detract from the adjoining buildings or the neighborhood, and no articles of any nature, other than lighting fixtures, shall be permitted to be suspended from the outside of the bridge. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful to display or place any advertisements or mercantile displays upon or attached to any outer surface of the bridge or placed upon or attached to any window or glass-like surface of the bridge so as to be visible from outside. 
(b)  The granting of permission to construct any bridge or tunnel across any street or public alley shall be contingent upon the owner or, where applicable, lessor and lessee of the property or structures between which the bridge or tunnel is to be constructed entering into an agreement with the city, which shall be executed by all the parties prior to the issuance of any building permit therefore and the covenants of which shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The owner, lessor or lessee shall remove the bridge or tunnel within 90 days after the commissioner of public works directs the bridge or tunnel to be removed without cost to the city, following the commissioner's determination that such removal is required for the safe and efficient use by the public of the right-of-way for transportation purposes. 
(2)  The owner, lessor or lessee shall furnish and maintain a bond, at no expense to the city, with a corporate surety satisfactory to the city, to guarantee the performance of the principal in removing the bridge or tunnel as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(3)  The owner, lessor or lessee shall pay to the city a monthly rental for the air space or subsurface space occupied by the bridge or tunnel, as follows: 
a.  The monthly rental rate for all bridges or tunnels used for pedestrian transportation or utility purposes only shall be the fair market value of each such bridge or tunnel as determined by a certified general real estate appraiser selected by the chief procurement officer. A fee to cover the cost of such appraisal shall be paid by the owner, lessor or lessee. The appraisal shall be submitted to and shall be reviewed and approved by the city utilities committee before submission to the council. The monthly rate as determined by the appraiser shall be for an initial period of ten years from the execution date of the agreement and shall be subject to re-appraisal every ten years 
b.  To the extent currently authorized by other applicable sections of this Code, the monthly rental rate for each bridge or tunnel used for the sale of merchandise and mercantile displays, shall be the fair market value of the space occupied by such bridge or tunnel, which rate shall be determined by a certified general real estate appraiser selected by the chief procurement officer. A fee to cover the cost of such appraisal shall be paid by the owner, lessor, or lessee. The appraisal shall be submitted to and shall be reviewed and approved by the city utilities committee before submission to the council. The monthly rate as determined by the appraiser shall be for an initial period of ten years from the execution date of the agreement and shall be subject to re-appraisal every ten years. 
c.  Reserved. 
(4)  The owner, lessor or lessee shall hold the city harmless from any and all claims arising out of the construction, operation, use, maintenance or removal of the bridge or tunnel and shall furnish and maintain a policy of public liability insurance satisfactory to the city, naming the city as a named insured, in an amount approved by the city's risk manager, and the agreement to hold the city harmless shall not be limited to the amount of such insurance. 
(5)  The obligation to hold the city harmless against all claims arising out of the construction, maintenance, use or removal of the bridge or tunnel shall not be waived by the city's having approved the plans and specifications for the bridge or tunnel or by the city's requiring or not requiring modifications to the bridge or tunnel or by the city's requiring or not requiring maintenance of the bridge or tunnel, even though the city may be found to have been negligent as a matter of law because of its action or failure to act in regard thereto. 
(6)  All parties required for the execution of such agreement shall be signatories thereto, as evidenced by a title certificate of an attorney licensed to practice law within this state, which title certificate sets forth the name and address of the owner of the property or structures to be connected by the bridge or tunnel and the names and addresses of the lessors and lessees of the property or structures, together with sufficient information as to the terms of any leases of the property or structures, and the corporate names of any parties. 
(7)  The owner, lessor or lessee shall determine the location of all public utilities and all utilities of the city in the area where the tunnel or bridge is to be constructed and shall make arrangements for the removal or relocation of those utilities, if necessary, all at such person's own expense and at no expense to the city. 
(c)  This section shall apply to all rentals of air space or subsurface space above or below the public right-of-way for bridges and tunnels and supersede the procurement and real estate code in chapter 2, article X to the extent of any conflict. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3008; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2008-18(06-O-1947), §§ 1—3, 3-25-08) 
Sec. 138-26. - Erection of balconies over sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to attach a balcony or erect other structures to a building so as to extend over any portion of a public sidewalk, except upon the authorization of the commissioner of public works and upon compliance with all applicable sections of this Code or other ordinances of the city, including this section. 
(b)  Balconies shall be designed by an architect or an engineer licensed to practice in the state and the plans and specifications for balconies presented to the city for approval shall bear the official registration seal of the architect or engineer. The plans and specifications shall be submitted to and approved by the urban design commission and the director, bureau of buildings before the commissioner of public works authorizes the balconies. 
(c)  The granting of permission to construct these balconies so as to extend over the public sidewalks shall be contingent upon the owner, lessor or lessee of the building onto which the balconies are constructed, the owner of the land upon which the building is erected and all creditors secured by all or a part of the land or building entering into an agreement with the city which shall include but not be limited to agreements by the owner or lessee of the building to which the balconies are attached to: 
(1)  Construct and maintain the balconies so as to prevent any portion thereof from becoming detached and falling to the street or sidewalk below; 
(2)  Remove any or all of the balconies without cost to the city within a 90-day period after the council directs such removal by mailing a notice to remove the balconies to the owner, or lessee at an address set forth in the agreement; 
(3)  Furnish and maintain a bond, at no expense to the city, with a corporate surety satisfactory to the city, to guarantee the performance of the principal in removing the balconies as provided for in subsection (c)(2) of this section; 
(4)  Indemnify and hold the city, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any and all claims arising out of the construction, maintenance, use of or removal of any and all of the balconies, including claims arising out of persons falling or jumping from the balconies or arising out of objects being dropped or thrown from the balconies; 
(5)  Furnish a policy of public liability insurance and property damage insurance satisfactory to the city and naming the city as a named insured or an additional named insured, in an amount approved by the, city's risk manager, which protects the city and its officers, agents and employees from claims arising out of the construction, maintenance, use of or removal of the balconies, including claims arising out of any person falling or jumping from any such balcony or throwing or dropping any object from a balcony; 
(6)  Provide insurance covering the agreement to indemnify and hold the city and its officers, agents and employees harmless from any and all claims arising out of construction, maintenance, use of or removal of any or all of the balconies, including claims arising out of persons falling or jumping from the balconies or similar structures or arising out of objects being thrown or dropped from the balconies, with a further agreement that the obligation to indemnify and hold the city and its officers, agents and employees harmless shall not be limited to the amount of the public liability and property damage insurance naming the city as a named insured or an additional named insured; and 
(7)  Pay to the city a monthly rental for the air space occupied by the balconies extending over a sidewalk of the city or a portion thereof at a rate per square foot, as determined by the commissioner of public works. 
(d)  Each request for permission to erect those balconies shall be accompanied by a title certificate of an attorney authorized to practice law in the state setting forth the names and the addresses of the owner and lessee of the building and the land on which it is erected, the names and addresses of any creditors who are secured by all or any part of the land or building involved, together with sufficient information as to the terms of any leases on the land or building, the corporate names of any of the parties sufficient to accurately disclose the names of any of the parties required in the agreement between the city and the parties desiring to construct the balconies, which agreement shall be executed by all the parties desiring to construct the balconies, which agreement shall be executed by all the parties prior to the issuance of any building permit for the construction of the balconies or similar structures. The agreement shall be binding on all the parties, their heirs, administrators, assigns and successors in title, and upon the execution of the agreement it shall be filed in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3009; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2008-18(06-O-1947), § 4, 3-25-08) 
DIVISION 2. - UTILITIES 

Sec. 138-27. - Franchise utilities. 
Nothing contained in this article or any other section of this Code or other ordinances, resolutions or acts of the council in relation to the construction, operation, or maintenance of any public or private utility and transmission and distribution facilities shall be construed to mean that the city holds itself in any manner responsible or liable for damages to persons or property caused by such, and the city disclaims any liability whatsoever in the premises. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3125; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Secs. 138-28—138-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POLES, CONDUITS, WIRES AND OTHER FACILITIES 

Sec. 138-40. - Poles. 
(a)  Granting of permits to erect poles and facilities conditioned on right to grant use to others. 
(1)  In granting permits to erect poles and transmission and distribution facilities for purposes of electric light or power or for the use of telephone, telegraph or other wires, the council reserves the right, if the interest of the city so requires, to encourage other persons to use the same poles and transmission and distribution facilities for similar purposes, upon the payment to the owner thereof of a proper compensation to be determined by agreement. All permits shall be subject to this condition and in accepting a permit the applicant binds the applicant according thereto. 
(2)  To the extent permitted by law, permits for newly issued franchises may be conditioned upon the placement of transmission and distribution facilities underground. 
(3)  To the extent practicable, persons shall locate all above ground facilities in such a manner as to minimize disruption to the access of private property and pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  Duty to reset or remove poles to facilitate street improvements. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of any street railway or electric light or power, CATV, telephone or telegraph company authorized to set poles for the stringing of wires thereon, within 30 days upon notice from the commissioner of public works, to remove or reset any poles belonging to that company, when the removal or resetting of poles is necessary in the judgment of the commissioner to facilitate the improvement of any public right-of-way or in order to protect public health, safety and welfare. In such instances, the expense of the removal shall be borne by the owners of the poles. The commissioner of public works may also request that the owner of poles reset poles for the convenience of a lot, but the owner of such poles shall have no obligation to reset such poles unless the lot owner agrees to reimburse the owner of such poles for the costs of resetting the poles. Relocation requirements are located in section 138-23. 
(2)  Mandate to place facilities underground. The city may designate geographical areas in which facilities are preferred to be placed underground; provided however, that franchisees are not required to place transmission and distribution facilities underground when aerial facilities exist and that where existing aerial facilities are being retired and removed from service, replacement will be made using underground construction if technically practical and economically feasible and subject to applicable state and federal law. 
(c)  Restoration of streets and sidewalks after setting or removing poles. All surplus dirt remaining after setting telegraph, telephone, electric light and other poles on a street or sidewalk shall be removed by the company placing the poles. When any poles are removed, the street or sidewalk shall be repaired and left in a condition satisfactory to the commissioner of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2001-82, § 2, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 2003-72, § 2, 6-8-03) 
Sec. 138-41. - Conduits. 
(a)  Application of section. This section shall apply to all persons installing conduits under any ordinance or resolution of the council. However, this section shall not apply to any person having a specific contract or agreement with the city with reference to the manner in which conduits or subways maintained by that person within the city may be used by any other person, if the provisions of the contract or agreement are different from or contradictory to this section. 
(b)  Restrictions upon installation. All grants or permissions given by the council by ordinance or resolution to any person to install multi-duct conduits of any kind in or upon the streets and public places of the city, for the purpose of having wires or other appliances, such as cables and the like, placed or strung therein to convey electric current, gas or steam to supply electric light, electric power or heat or for the use of telephones, telegraphs or television shall be subject to the right of the council to grant similar privileges and permits to other persons to use the same conduits for similar purposes, provided such additional use is practicable and capacity is available as determined in the discretion of the owner which shall not be unreasonably withheld. Persons using such conduits shall pay a reasonable value, as determined by agreement, to the owner. Such value shall be determined by agreement or condemnation subsequent to the grants or permits made by the council to the second applicant. All grants, permits and privileges made by the council for any of the purposes named in this section shall be subject to all the conditions of this section, and the applicant therefore binds the applicant thereto by accepting any of the grants or privileges. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3123; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-42. - Location of certain electrical wires. 
(a)  Overhead electrical wires installed within the public right-of-way which carry 2,000 volts or more and are located less than ten feet, measured horizontally, from any wire or structure owned by another person shall be at least five feet above such wire or structure. 
(b)  New installations of electrical wires that carry 2,000 volts or less shall be located underground. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3126; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
DIVISION 4. - BUS SHELTERS 

Sec. 138-43. - Bus shelters. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  "Bus shelter" means a shelter or bench located at a bus stop for the convenience of passengers of public transportation systems owned and operated by governmental units or public authorities. 
(2)  "Commercial advertisement" means a printed or painted sign encouraging or promoting the purchase or use of goods, services or events and includes public service announcements and art displays, but does not include campaign posters, signs or advertisements prohibited by O.C.G.A. §§ 32-6-51 and 21-1-1. 
(b)  Restrictions; permit required. It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain a bus shelter located within the city except by issuance of a permit by the commissioner of public works. No bus shelter shall be erected, located or maintained except in accordance with this chapter. No bus shelter shall be permitted within the sight distance triangle of another street as defined in this section. Any violator of this section shall be held accountable as provided for in the penalty section of this chapter. Any violator of this section shall also be subject to an order by the commissioner of public works to remove any bus shelter found to be in violation of this section. Failure of the owner of the bus shelter to remove the bus shelter within 30 days of being issued a written order of removal by the commissioner of public works shall authorize the commissioner of public works to remove the bus shelter, at the expense of the owner of the bus shelter. Applications for permits shall be in the form and shall contain such information as shall be required by the commissioner of public works. All bus shelters shall be erected and maintained by the permit holder in conformity with the city's zoning ordinance, and this section shall be in addition to and shall in no way modify or replace the city's zoning ordinance and all permits required therein. Only governmental units or public authorities which own and operate public transportation systems within the city or their approved designees shall be permitted to erect or maintain bus shelters. All applicants for bus shelters permits shall comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51 imposed by the state, shall obtain any other permit required by any other political jurisdiction and shall abide by all applicable state and federal regulations. 
(c)  Agreement for use of public right-of-way. Permits for bus shelters erected or maintained on the right-of-way of a public road or street shall only be issued upon a written agreement being entered into by the city and the respective public authority or governmental unit owning and operating the public transportation system. No permit for any bus shelter in the public right-of-way shall be authorized or issued unless the property immediately adjacent to such shelter is zoned to the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, I-1, I-2, SPI-1, SPI-2, SPI-3, or SPI-4 zoning district pursuant to part 16 of this Code. 
(d)  Authorization for use of other property. All permits issued for bus shelters erected or maintained on property other than on the right-of-way of public roads or streets shall be issued only upon the governmental unit or public authority owning and operating the public transportation system first obtaining authorization of the owner of property on which the bus shelter is to be erected and providing proof thereof at the time of filing an application for the permit. No permit for any bus shelter or property other than such right-of-way shall be authorized or issued unless the property upon which such shelter is to be located is zoned to the I-1 or I-2 zoning district pursuant to part 16 of this Code. 
(e)  Limitation on number. There shall be a limit of 300 total bus shelters on the right-of-way of public roads or streets or on other property within the city. There shall be no more than 300 bus shelter permits issued by the commissioner of public works. Permit numbers shall be affixed to the permit in the upper right hand corner of the shelter. Permits are not transferable. 
(f)  Design plans; location. Before a bus shelter is permitted to be erected, the applicant must submit design plans, which should be accompanied by photographs and any other supporting documents, to the commissioner of public works for approval. If an applicant proposes that a bus shelter contain illumination, the applicant must submit illumination plans at the time the application is made. It shall be unlawful for a bus shelter to contain illumination except pursuant to a permit issued by the commissioner of public works authorizing illumination. All permits authorizing the erection or the illumination of a bus shelter are subject to the final inspection and approval of the commissioner of public works before the bus shelter may be used to serve bus passengers. All permit requests shall be reviewed by the urban design commission as is required by chapter 90, article II, division 2 of this Code. The commissioner of public works shall not issue a permit until the permit application has been reviewed by the urban design commission pursuant to chapter 90, article II, division 2 of this Code. Each application must be approved by the commissioner of public works as to location and design and a permit issued before a bus shelter is erected. The criteria for evaluating the bus shelter design shall be the design compatibility with the site proposed, and the factors to be considered in making the determination shall be the aesthetics, size, scale, massing, detailing and materials of the proposed bus shelter. Additionally, the applicant must receive the approval of the commissioner of public works regarding the location of each and every proposed bus shelter before it is erected. The criteria for evaluating bus shelter locations shall be whether the bus shelter is compatible with the site selected, whether the proposed setback for the bus shelter would allow for the proper flow of pedestrian traffic and whether public transit usage levels justify the erection of a bus shelter at a particular location. All bus shelters shall be erected in accordance with the location and design approved and permitted by the commissioner of public works. All shelters serving bus passengers shall be handicap accessible and provide handicap access to and from the bus to the shelter. 
(g)  Setbacks. Where a curb and gutter are present, there shall be a minimum of five feet of clearance from the face of the curb to any portion of the bus shelter. Where no curb or gutter is present, the front of the bus shelter shall be at least ten feet from the edge of the main-traveled roadway. In special public interest (SPI) districts 1, 2, 3 and 4, the minimum amount of unobstructed pedestrian space shall be as set forth in the pedestrian space plan in chapters 18A-18D of part 16 of this Code. 
(h)  Maintenance. All governmental units and public authorities permitted to erect and maintain bus shelters or their designated agents shall be responsible for maintaining the bus shelters in a safe, clean and complete condition and in good order and repair at all times. A notice shall be placed on all bus shelters listing the name, address and telephone number of the person designated by the bus shelter permit holder who is responsible for the maintenance of the bus shelters and for fielding complaints by the public. The permit holder or designee shall maintain a log of each and every complaint made regarding the bus shelters and corrective action taken, which shall be available during normal business hours for inspection by the department of public works. The bus shelters shall be subject to inspection by the department of public works at all times, which may issue citations for maintenance violations. All maintenance violations shall be corrected within 48 hours upon the permit holder's being provided notice by the commissioner of public works of a violation. 
(i)  Commercial advertisements. Commercial advertisements are permitted on shelters serving bus passengers only in those zoning districts specified in subsections (c) and (d) of this section. It shall be unlawful to place commercial advertisements on any shelter serving bus passengers within 100 feet of any designated landmark district, historic district, conservation district, landmark building or site; historic building or site; and 50 feet of any park. In addition, such commercial advertisements are prohibited within any landmark district, historic district, conservation district or park. However, bus shelters containing advertising shall be permitted on the public right-of-way in otherwise prohibited areas when at least one adult from 70 percent of residences within 500 feet in either direction on the street of the proposed bus shelter location signs a petition requesting a bus shelter be permitted. It shall be unlawful to place commercial advertisements on a bus passenger bench, whether inside or outside a shelter. One double-faced commercial advertisement, not to exceed 24-square feet in sign area, may be attached to a shelter for bus passengers; provided however, such commercial advertisements must be placed at the end of the shelter furthest from the approaching traffic flow on the side of the street on which the shelter is located and may not be placed on the back or any other portion of the shelter. Such commercial advertisement shall not extend beyond the limits of the shelter. Placement of such commercial advertisement on the top of any shelter serving bus passengers is specifically prohibited and a violation of the City Code. Double-faced commercial advertisements are defined and measured as set out in chapter 28A of part 16 of this Code. 
(j)  Nonconformities. Any legal bus shelter in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives which does not comply with this section shall be removed by the permit holder or owner after a period of ten years commencing with the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives. Any such nonconforming bus shelter which shall cease being used for a continuous period of one year shall be removed after such period of nonuse. However, no commercial advertisement which was not permitted prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be permitted on any shelter serving bus passengers unless the shelter is in conformity with this section. 
(k)  Indemnification. All permit holders for bus shelters located within the city shall at all times assume all risks for the bus shelters and shall indemnify and hold harmless the city against all losses or damages resulting from or alleged to have resulted from the existence, maintenance or any other aspect of the bus shelters. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9-3020, 9-3021; Ord. No. 1995-76, § 1, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
DIVISION 5. - VENDING DEVICES AND TELEPHONES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Identification of coin-operated vending machines or amusement devices, § 30-1; vending on public property, § 30-1401 et seq. 

Sec. 138-44. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
(1)  "Downtown improvement district" means that certain area of downtown Atlanta designated as a community improvement district pursuant to Resolution 95-R-1374 passed by the city council. 
(2)  "Equivalent publication vending device" means any publication vending device which is of the same size, material, dimensions, and style of the specified publication vending device and which is approved by the commissioner of the department of public works. 
(3)  "Olympic corridors" means Peachtree Street from Memorial Drive to Third Street; Auburn Avenue; Capitol Avenue from Decatur Street to Little Street; International Boulevard; North Avenue from Techwood Drive to Peachtree Street; Ralph David Abernathy Boulevard from Lee Street to Capitol Avenue; Georgia Avenue from Capitol Avenue to Grant Terrace; Tenth Street from Fowler Street to Peachtree Street; Marietta Street from International Boulevard to Peachtree Street; Pine Street from West Peachtree Street to Peachtree Street; Currier Street from Courtland Street to Piedmont Avenue; the Atlanta University Center/Westside Pedestrian Corridor System; and extending 30 feet in either direction on all cross streets intersecting the foregoing streets. A map indicating the boundaries of the Olympic Corridors shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the municipal clerk. 
(4)  "Publication" means newspapers; news-related, non-news-related, and commercial periodicals; or published materials of any nature. 
(5)  "Publication vending device" means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit, or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display, distribution, or sale of publications. 
(6)  "Public sidewalk" means that portion of the public right-of-way designed or ordinarily used for pedestrian travel. 
(7)  "Public street" means that portion of the public right-of-way designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07, § 1, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 138-45. - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
It shall be the duty of the commissioner of public works to enforce this article. Any person violating any section of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 138-4. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 14-11011; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-46. - Permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, locate, operate or maintain any publication vending device in or on any part of the public sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the commissioner of public works. 
(b)  No fee shall be required for the issuance of a publication vending device permit. 
(c)  Applications for all permits for the placement and maintenance of publication vending devices must contain the following: 
(1)  The applicant's name and address at which any notices required by this article shall be deemed received when placed on an envelope and deposited in the United States mail with adequate postage affixed. 
(2)  The telephone number of the applicant at which notice of any repairs deemed necessary to permitted publication vending devices are appropriately received. 
(3)  The total number of and exact location of each publication vending device to be permitted. 
(4)  An agreement of indemnification, as required by this article. 
(5)  A certification that the applicant has reviewed, understands, and will comply with all requirements of this article. 
(6)  An agreement by the applicant promptly to inform the director in writing of any changes in the applicant's name, address or telephone number, and that failure to do so shall constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(d)  Applications for all permits for the placement and maintenance of publication vending devices shall be reviewed, and if in compliance with all requirements of this article, shall be approved by the commissioner of public works within 30 days of receipt of such applications. Only one permit shall be required for the placement of any number of publication vending devices, provided that the application clearly states the location of each. 
(e)  If at any time the commissioner of public works determines to deny an application for a permit, or determines that a publication vending device for which a permit has been issued does not comply with any requirement of this article, the commissioner shall issue a written notice of intent to deny, or intent to revoke, the applicable permit to the applicant or permittee. The notice shall state specifically the reason for the denial or revocation of the permit, and shall offer the applicant or permittee an opportunity for a hearing before the commissioner of public works or his or her designee, on such denial or revocation not less than ten days following the issuance of such notice. The applicant or permittee may file a written response to the notice prior to such hearing setting forth the reason the permit should issue or should not be revoked. In the alternative, the applicant or permittee shall submit sufficient evidence that any application deficiency or violation has been corrected. If the commissioner of public works or his or her designee determines, following a hearing, that the denial was proper, or that the violation as charged is true and accurate, and that the applicant or permittee has not caused the application or violation to be corrected, or if the applicant or permittee fails to appear at the hearing and can present no justifiable excuse for the nonappearance, a final notice of denial or revocation shall issue. If sufficient evidence is submitted that the applicant or permittee is in compliance with the requirements of this article, the commissioner shall issue the requested permit, or withdraw the notice of violation. 
(f)  Nothing in this section will prohibit the owner or lessee of property abutting a city sidewalk upon which is placed publication vending devices that have not been permitted by the city from, after due diligence and inquiry to the city to determine that a permit has not been issued, removing any such illegal publication vending devices. The decision to remove any publication vending device by such an abutting property owner or lessee is at its own risk and the city will incur no liability to the abutting property owner or lessee or the owner or lessee of the publication vending device removed. 
(Code 1977, § 14-11010; Ord. No. 1996-07, § 3, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 1996-47, § 1, 7-8-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2002-73, § 1, 10-15-02) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2002-73 states that the city further imposes a moratorium on any further permitting or placement of publication vending devices on any city sidewalk for a period of 180 days, to commence on the date this section is approved by the city's mayor. [October 15, 2002] 
Sec. 138-47. - Hold-harmless agreement. 
Every person who installs, places or maintains a publication vending device on a public sidewalk in the city shall file a written statement with the municipal clerk satisfactory to the city attorney whereby the person agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, directors and employees from any loss of liability or damage, including expenses and costs, for bodily or personal injury and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, placement or maintenance of a publication vending device within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-11009; Ord. No. 1996-07, § 3, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-48. - Projection onto public streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, place or maintain any publication vending device which projects onto, into or over any part of a public street or which rests wholly or in part upon, along or over any portion of any public street. 
(Code 1977, § 14-11002; Ord. No. 1996-07, § 3, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-49. - Dangerous condition or obstruction. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, place or maintain any publication vending device which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public street or any public sidewalk when such installation, placement or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property or when the site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use or when such publication vending device unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress or egress of any residence or place of business, the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near the location. 
(Code 1977, § 14-11003; Ord. No. 1996-07, § 3, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-50. - Identification. 
Every person who installs, places or maintains a publication vending device on a public sidewalk of the city shall have affixed thereto, in a place easily seen, the name, address and telephone number of such person. 
(Code 1977, § 14-11004; Ord. No. 1996-07, § 3, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-51. - Standards for installation and maintenance of publication vending devices in designated areas. 
(a)  Publication vending devices shall be installed and maintained as mandated for the district in which they are located, as set forth below: 
(1)  Olympic corridors, downtown improvement district, and the government district of Downtown Atlanta. In the Olympic corridors, downtown improvement district, the government district of Downtown Atlanta, and all publication vending devices shall be uniform and standardized as outlined below. 
a.  The color of publication vending devices shall be CODA Green (Pantone color 5467C). The publication's name shall be permitted to be displayed on the front of the publication vending device directly below the publication display window in letters a maximum of two inches high. The publication's name shall also be permitted to be displayed one time on the back of the publication vending device, centered, exactly four inches from the top edge of the publication vending device, with letters a maximum of two inches high. A service telephone number for the reporting of publication vending device malfunctions may be displayed directly below the publication's name on the front (the side which contains the display window) of the publication vending device in letters a maximum of one and one-half inches high. This service telephone number may also be displayed, instead of the publication's name, one time on the back of the publication vending device, centered, exactly four inches from the top edge of the publication vending device, with numbers a maximum of two inches high. No other logo, advertising, or lettering shall be permitted on publication vending devices. Face plates for coin boxes may be customized to contain a publication's name or logo. Free publications or other publications whose vending device does not require a coin box may also customize the face plate where a coin box would otherwise be located. Card holders may be permitted to be displayed on publication vending devices provided that card holders contain logos, lettering or advertising for that publication only. Card holders shall not exceed 11 inches by 17 inches and shall be placed in the space provided directly below the front display window. 
b.  Publication vending devices shall be standard Sho-Rack galvanized material model 100, or equivalent publication vending device, as defined in section 138-156. 
c.  Publication vending devices shall weigh a minimum of 75 pounds and may be fastened to one another in such a manner that they cannot be easily moved or toppled or otherwise pushed or thrown into a right-of-way or street. 
d.  Publication vending devices shall not be fastened to the sidewalk without prior approval from the commissioner of the department of public works. 
e.  Publication vending devices shall abut one another and shall be located so as to abut one another beginning at a location not less than 30 feet from the intersection point of the projected curblines of any intersection. No group of publication vending devices may extend for more than 13 feet. There shall be a space of 50 feet between groups of publication vending devices. 
f.  Publication vending devices shall not be located: 
1.  Within five feet from the nearest outer edge of any crosswalk; 
2.  Within 20 feet from any fire hydrant, fire call box, or police call box; 
3.  Within five feet from the nearest outer edge of any driveway; 
4.  Within two feet of signs, parking meters, streetlights, or utility poles; or 
5.  Within 15 feet of any designated bus stop sign or post. 
6.  In such a manner that hinders egress to parked vehicles in marked parking stalls; 
7.  In such a manner that impairs bus, taxicab, truck or passenger loading zones; or 
8.  In a manner that blocks historic markers, benches, or other public improvements. 
g.  Publication vending devices shall be placed within the street furniture zone as described by the pedestrian space plan (sheets 137 and 138 of the city official zoning map) no closer than 18 inches from the back of the nearest curb of the road and shall be positioned to provide for a minimum of nine feet of unobstructed sidewalk so as not to impede reasonable pedestrian traffic on sidewalks. Publication vending devices shall not be permitted on sidewalks with a width, which is less than 12 feet. 
(2)  All other locations. Publication vending devices within the city that are not within the Olympic corridors, downtown improvement district, or the government district of Downtown Atlanta shall not be subject to the regulations imposed on publication vending devices as set forth in subparagraph (1), but shall comply with the following: 
a.  Publication vending devices shall not be located: 
1.  Within five feet from the nearest outer edge of any crosswalk; 
2.  Within 20 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box or police call box. 
3.  Within five feet from the nearest outer edge of any driveway. 
4.  In such a manner that impairs bus, taxicab, truck or passenger loading zones; 
5.  Within 15 feet of any designated bus stop sign or post; 
6.  Within 50 feet of any other publication vending device on the same side of the street containing the same edition of the same publication; and 
7.  At any location whereby the area of unobstructed public sidewalk for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet. 
(b)  No single publication vending device shall exceed five feet in height, 30 inches in width or two feet in thickness. 
(c)  No vending device shall be chained to any property not owned by the owner of the publication vending device or to any permanently fixed object; however, publication vending devices, when placed side by side, may be chained or otherwise attached to one another. 
(d)  Publication vending devices may be placed next to each other, provided that no group of publication vending devices shall extend more than six feet along a curb or wall. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07, § 2, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 1996-21, §§ 1, 2, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2017-15(17-O-1153) , § 1, 4-26-17) 
Sec. 138-52. - Maintenance; advertising prohibited. 
(a)  Each publication vending device shall be maintained in a state of good repair at all times. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a publication vending device for advertising or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the publications sold therein. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07, § 2, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-53. - Abandonment. 
Any publication vending device placed upon the public right-of-way which appears to have been in disuse by the permittee for that location for at least 45 days shall be considered abandoned, and to constitute a public nuisance subject to abatement procedures as provided for in this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1996-07, § 2, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 1996-47, § 2, 7-8-96) 
Secs. 138-54—138-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FLAGS, BANNERS, SIGNS, DISPLAYS 

Sec. 138-60. - Flags, banners, signs, displays. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall attach any flag, banner, bunting, sign, display or other form of decoration to any light pole or other standard erected in any right-of-way along any street, whether the pole or standard is the property of the city or of a person, unless a permit to attach the flags, banners, bunting, signs, displays or other forms of decorations to the pole or other standard shall have been issued by the commissioner of public works under the following conditions: 
(1)  No flag, banner, bunting, sign, display or other form of decoration shall be permitted which contains any advertising or any reference to any organization organized or operated for profit or which contains advertisement of any event or occurrence to take place under the sponsorship or for the benefit of any person operating for profit. However, for permitted festivals and centennial celebrations of local companies or corporations, the commissioner of public works may issue a permit allowing a limited form of advertising, if the following conditions or others determined by the commissioner of public works are met: 
a.  The actual surface area of the flag, banner, bunting, hanging sign, display or other form of decoration does not extend more than three feet horizontally and four feet vertically, such dimensions resulting in an area no greater than 12 square feet, with the exception of those poles designated specifically for the purpose of accommodating flags, banners, buntings, hanging signs, displays, the dimensions of which shall not exceed eight feet horizontally and eight feet vertically, such dimensions resulting in an area no greater than 24 square feet total; 
b.  The form of advertising shall be the corporate logo or trademark of the for-profit sponsoring organization; 
c.  The corporate logo or trademark shall not exceed one-tenth of the total surface area on either side; 
d.  Only one corporate logo or trademark shall be allowed per street decoration; and 
e.  All provisions of this section are strictly adhered to. The approved size of the flag, banner, bunting, hanging sign or other display shall be in the discretion of the commissioner of public works, considering the areas to be decorated, structures upon which such decorations are to be installed, length of street right-of-way involved and the impact on adjacent structures, properties and activities. The determination of the commissioner of public works with respect to approving applications and permitting the hanging of flags, banners, buntings, signs, displays or other forms of street decorations shall be final. 
(2)  No flag, banner, bunting, sign or display or other form of decoration shall be permitted which, in the opinion of the fire chief, would create a fire hazard. No permit shall be issued under this section by the commissioner of public works until the materials to be used in such decorations have been approved in writing by the fire chief. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued by the commissioner of public works for any flag, banner, bunting, sign, display or other form of decoration to be attached to any poles or standards in any right-of-way area, which poles or standards belong to any person, other than the city, unless permission in writing from the owners of the poles or standards to attach the decorations is submitted to the commissioner of public works with the application for the permit. 
(4)  The permit under this section which will allow flags, banners, buntings, signs, displays or other forms of decoration to be placed within the rights-of-way should be for a duration of no more than 30 days except by authorization from the commissioner of public works. 
(5)  The permit for banners, buntings, signs, displays or other forms of decoration should be limited to 100 except by authorization from the commissioner of public. The distribution of such decorations along the public right-of-way are subject to the approval of the commissioner of public works and the criteria for approval of the number of such shall include those standards and requirements pertaining to size and format as set forth in this section. 
(6)  No permit shall be issued by the commissioner of public works until the person requesting the permit agrees in writing to remove all flags, banners, bunting, signs, displays or other forms of decorations, without cost to the city, within five days after the end of the permit period. 
(7)  With the exception of permit applications filed by or on behalf of the office of cultural affairs for city sponsored annual events, no permit shall be issued by the commissioner of public works until a deposit of $1,000.00 is made by the applicant for the permit to the commissioner of public works. The deposit shall be returned to the applicant if all flags, banners, buntings, signs, displays or other forms of decorations attached to any poles or standards under the permit granted are removed within five days after the end of the permit period. If the flags, banners, buntings, signs, displays or other forms of decorations are not removed within five days, the deposit shall be forfeited as liquidated damages and the commissioner of public works shall remove the flags, banners, buntings, signs, displays or other forms of decorations. If the expense of removal shall exceed the amount of the deposit, the excess over the amount of the deposit shall be collected from the person to which the permit was issued, as provided by law. 
(8)  With the exception of permit applications filed by or on behalf of the office of cultural affairs for city sponsored annual events the base fee for a permit shall be $100.00 (plus the $1,000.00 refundable deposit per subsection (a)(7) of this section). 
Additional fees shall be assessed as follows: 
a.  For-profit organizations: $1.80 per banner for each permitted day. 
b.  Not-for-profit and charitable organizations: 
1.  $0.75 per banner per day for each permitted day in excess of 30 days. 
2.  $0.75 per banner per day for each banner in excess of 100. 
(9)  The commissioner of public works shall approve all brackets, supports or any type of supporting structures for hanging the banners. 
(10)  The printing process for the banners shall be approved by the special events coordinator of the department of parks and recreation. 
(11)  The applicant shall enter into an agreement with the city indemnifying and holding the city, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any and all claims arising out of the placement of, maintenance of, use of or removal of banners, including claims of banners or the structures upon which they are hung falling on people or property. 
(b)  Hanging across streets. No banners, bunting, signs, displays or other forms of decoration may be constructed to cross any street in the city, and no permit shall be issued therefore. 
(c)  Use of city personnel or equipment for installation. No city agency may use any city personnel or any city equipment to install or to aid in the installation of any flags, displays or other forms of decoration along the city right-of-way for any private organization. 
(d)  Certain waivers for sporting events. The commissioner of public works is authorized to waive the requirements of subsections (a)(1), (a)(7) and (b) of this section for applicants sponsoring one-day sporting events when, in the commissioner's judgment, public safety will not be compromised. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3010; Ord. No. 2000-62, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 2, 5-16-01; Ord. No. 2003-92, § 1, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 8, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2018-67(18-O-1714), §§ 1, 2, 12-12-18 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 14, provided for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2007. 
Cross reference— Sign regulations generally, § 6-26 et seq. 
Land Development Code Reference— Supplemental zoning regulations pertaining to signs, § 16-28A.001 et seq. 
DIVISION 7. - DUMPSTERS 

Sec. 138-61. - Dumpsters in the right-of-way. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  "Dumpster" shall mean any container or storage box used for the storage, collection, or removal of construction debris, demolition debris, or other discarded material but shall not include a refuse compactor or grease container, and shall also not include the refuse containers. 
(2)  "Applicant" shall mean the person who leases or otherwise causes placement (if a dumpster or container for temporary use at the location requested). 
(3)  "Provider" shall mean the person who owns a dumpster. 
(b)  Permit required. It shall be prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain a dumpster in the public right-of-way unless such person shall first obtain a dumpster permit from the department of public works. 
(c)  Application. An application for a dumpster permit shall be made to the commissioner of public works by the applicant. The application form shall require the applicant to provide the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  The number of dumpster(s) requested to occupy the permitted location; 
(3)  The street address adjacent to the permitted location; 
(4)  The intended use of the dumpster(s); and 
(5)  The intended period of occupancy of the dumpster(s). 
(d)  Duration and conditions of permit. 
(1)  Duration of permit. Duration of a dumpster permit shall not be more than six months. An applicant holding a permit and requesting an extension of time shall apply for a new permit according to the provisions of this code section. 
(2)  Demonstrated need as condition of permit. No dumpster permit shall be issued unless the applicant shall first demonstrate to the commissioner of public works that the dumpster(s) cannot be accommodated on private property. 
(3)  Indemnification insurance as condition of permit. No dumpster permit shall be issued until the applicant for such permit shall first have presented to the commissioner of public works or his designee evidence of insurance issued to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers and employees from all claims arising out of any injury to persons or damage to property resulting from the placement, presence, use, maintenance or removal of the permitted dumpster on, irk, over or within the public right-of-way. Such insurance shall be furnished by an insurer satisfactory to the city, the amount of the policy being determined by the city's risk manager to be adequate to protect the interests of the public and shall name the City of Atlanta, its officers, employees and agents as additional insured. The insurance shall be maintained in effect at all times that the dumpster remains on the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Reimbursement of damages to city. The granting of permission to place or maintain a dumpster on, or in, the public right-of-way shall be contingent upon the agreement of the applicant to repair any damage to the public way resulting from the placement, maintenance, use or removal of the dumpster during the times the dumpster remains on the public right-of-way. 
(5)  Compliance with this chapter. The granting of permission to place or maintain a dumpster on, or in, the public right-of-way shall be contingent upon the agreement of the applicant to comply with all the terms of this chapter and to comply with all other ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(e)  Permit fee. The applicant for a permit issued by the department of public works for dumpster placement shall, upon receipt of such permit, pay to the city a permit fee as provided in this section. 
(1)  There shall be a $20.00 fixed fee for all permits issued as provided in this section, unless otherwise provided herein. 
(2)  A permit cost for use of up to 100 linear feet of any portion of the adjacent curb lane shall be $10.00 per calendar day for the duration of the permit. 
(3)  A permit cost for use of 101 to 200 linear feet of any portion of the adjacent curb lane shall be $15.00 per calendar day for the duration of the permit. 
(4)  A permit cost for use of 201 to 300 linear feet of any portion of the adjacent curb lane shall be $20.00 per calendar day for the duration of the permit. 
(5)  A permit cost for use of over 300 linear feet of any portion of the adjacent curb lane shall be $25.00 per calendar day for the duration of the permit. 
(6)  An additional fee to recover the cost of the blocked parking meters, or to recover the cost of the issuance of emergency no parking signs or other materials related to traffic control measures may be added to the cost of the permit, where applicable. 
(f)  Dumpster identification. The commissioner of public works is authorized to establish and publish a list of conditions and requirements for the placement, maintenance, use or removal of any dumpster in the public way in a manner not inconsistent with this chapter. Said conditions shall contain, but not be limited to, the requirement that the provider clearly identify all dumpsters in the public right-of-way in the following manner: 
(1)  Clear identification of the name and telephone number of the provider, visibly displayed in a conspicuous manner, according to standards established and published by the commissioner of the department of public works. 
(2)  The requirement to affix and maintain, on each of the four corners of the dumpster high-intensity retro-reflective sheeting, or other retro-reflective or prismatic material or substance according to standards established and published by the commissioner of the department of public works. 
(g)  Location. No dumpster shall be permitted for a location that is: 
(1)  Within 40 feet of any bus stop. 
(2)  Within 20 feet of any parking space designated for persons with disabilities. 
(3)  Within 20 feet of any pedestrian crosswalk. 
(4)  Within 30 feet of any intersection. 
(5)  Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant. 
(6)  On any sidewalk, unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the commissioner of public works or his designee that an alternative location is not feasible and that placement of the dumpster(s) on such sidewalk would not create a safety hazard, disrupt pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or damage public or private property. 
(h)  Placement, appearance and maintenance of dumpster. 
(1)  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to place the dumpster immediately adjacent to the property identified by the street address stated on the permit application. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of the provider to make certain that the dumpster remains free of graffiti (as defined at section 106-801 of this Code) at all times. 
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of the provider when transporting or otherwise moving a dumpster, to ensure that no portion of the load is falling, shifting, blowing, dropping or in any way escaping from the dumpster. The provider shall use a tarpaulin or other appropriate cover to secure the top of a dumpster while in transit. 
(i)  Violations. 
(1)  Violations of the conditions stated in the permit required by this section, or failure to obtain or maintain a valid permit shall constitute an offense and shall be punishable as provided under in the penalty section of this chapter. 
(2)  Any dumpster in the public right-of-way not bearing its identification information or reflective material as required by subsection (f) of this section, shall be in violation of the requirements of this section; and 
(3)  Any dumpster not located immediately adjacent to the street address specified in the permit shall be in violation of this section; and 
(4)  Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(j)  Enforcement and penalties. Upon a determination that a person is in violation of this chapter, the commissioner of public works or his designee shall give notice or issue a citation that indicates the person is in violation of a section of this chapter. Should the violation continue for a period of 14 days after the person receives notice, the commissioner or his designee may cite the violator to appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing on the charge of violation of this chapter. 
Upon a finding that a section of this chapter has been violated, the violator shall be subject to one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  The revocation or suspension of a permit issued in accordance with this section. 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $1,000.00 a day for a violation of this section. 
(3)  Imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months. 
(k)  Effective date. This ordinance shall be effective starting on September 1, 2005. 
(Ord. No. 2005-44, § 1, 7-26-05; Ord. No. 2008-23(08-O-0555), § 1, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 138-62. - Bike sharing infrastructure. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  The public health, safety and welfare will be enhanced by the implementation of a self service bicycle rental program also known as citywide bike share program ("program" or "system") of the type generally set forth in "The Atlanta-Decatur Bike Share Feasibility Study" ("Atlanta-Decatur Study") published in January 2013 by the Atlanta Bicycle Coalition. The program, which will establish bike sharing infrastructure, both in the public right-of-way and on private property in the City of Atlanta ("city"), and which will be fully paid for by one or more vendors ("providers") selected by the city, will accomplish the city's goals of establishing a positive and useful program for the general public while eliminating city costs and expenses if the city were to directly implement the program. 
(2)  The location of bike share infrastructure on public property is intended to increase utilization of other transit modes by providing a first mile and last mile travel alternative that will increase the range of destinations served. 
(3)  The bike sharing experience of the general public as set forth in the Atlanta-Decatur Study will be enhanced by the ability of the city to contract with providers to install and manage bike share infrastructure on public property including the public right-of-way for the installation around the city of multiple rental stations ("stations" or "kiosks") that house rental bicycles ("bicycles"). 
(4)  The system will allow the general public to rent bicycles from stations located around the city, use a bicycle for trips of varying times and durations and return the bicycle to a different station. Such programs provide a convenience for residents, workers and visitors because Bicycles are available on an as-needed basis and are available for one-way trips. The program, made available by the city, can operate on a cooperative basis and link with other programs sponsored by other entities to grow the system quickly and expand the reach of the program beyond the city. 
(b)  Definitions. The words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The use of capitalized abbreviated reference terms for the definitions contained herein are intended to refer to the terms and phrases from which they were derived. 
(1)  " Bike Sharing Rental Program " means a system funded, managed and operated by one or more providers under contracts entered into with the city, which provide the public with opportunities to rent bicycles from stations at locations on both private and public property including the public right-of-way. 
(2)  "Citywide Bike Share System" is an initiative by the city to implement certain of the recommendations of the type generally set forth in the Atlanta-Decatur Study in order to provide a non-traditional transit option to cover the "first and last mile" of a transit trip by encouraging and installing infrastructure that will allow access to rental bicycles and for other purposes. 
(3)  "Commissioner of planning" means the commissioner of the department of planning and urban development, and/or his or her successor performing the same general duties, or a designee. 
(4)  "Commissioner of public works" means the commissioner of the department of public works, and/or his or her successor performing the same general duties, or a designee. 
(5)  "Kiosk" means self service bicycle rental station kiosk which is a structure containing the self service payment device located at a station at which bicycles are rented. 
(6)  "Provider" means a bicycle rental service provider which is a person or entity with a contract with the city to provide public self service bicycle rental services. When used with respect to interconnectivity, the private self service bicycle rental service as defined in the Zoning Code is included as a "provider" only in the capacity as one whose rental bicycles may be returned to, stored in or rented from stations operated by that person or entity. 
(7)  "Rental bicycle" or "bicycle" means a self service rental bicycle that is rented from a station that is operated by a private self service bicycle rental service as defined in the Zoning Code. 
(8)  "Station" means a public self service bicycle rental station which is an automated facility constructed as a part of a bike sharing rental program where bicycles are made available for rental without the requirement that employees or attendants be present to accept rental payments from customers, rent bicycles to customers, or receive bicycles from customers when the bicycles are returned from rental. 
(9)  "Storage" means self service rental bicycle storage which is a part of a station that is utilized for the storage of rental bicycles available for rental or v being returned after rental at any station, including stations maintained by a private self service bicycle rental service as defined in the Zoning Code; for the servicing of rental bicycles, or for the storage of any other goods or materials, provided that no part of any station may be used for the storage of rental bicycles that are inoperable or which cannot be rented within 24 hours after their return. 
(c)  Authorization to allow the use of public property and right-of-way for the program. The commissioner of public works is authorized to allow the installation of stations and kiosks on public property including the public right-of-way. Such stations shall only be installed by a provider that has a contract with the city to manage and provide services to the public under the program. In order for the provider to install required infrastructure for operation of the program in the public right-of-way, the provider must enter into an encroachment agreement with the city for the installation of each kiosk and station pursuant to the requirements of Division 1 of Chapter 138 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances in general, and Code section 138-24 in particular. In no instance shall the contract or the authorization granted by this section require the commissioner of public works to allow the installation of kiosks and stations in locations which the commissioner of public works deems unsuitable for the installation of such infrastructure. 
(d)  Criteria for the location of stations in the public right-of-way. 
(1)  No station shall interfere with the reasonable visibility needs of drivers on the street where the station is located or any connecting street. 
(2)  No station shall interfere with the flow of pedestrian traffic taking into consideration the queuing areas for adjacent businesses, the size of the station and the width of the sidewalk. 
(3)  No station shall be located so as to unreasonably interfere with businesses located on the same block (block faces) as the proposed station location. A notice shall be posted by the provider at the site on the street frontage where the station is to be located which states that the provider has sought permission from the city to install a station at the location. The required encroachment agreement shall not be executed by the city until the provider submits an affidavit that the notice has been posted for ten days. The commissioner of public works shall receive any comments from the public and consider those comments in making a decision as to whether to authorize the station installation. 
(e)  Installation of infrastructure on private property. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain a station on private property except as permitted by the commissioner of planning through an endorsement of a special administrative permit ("SAP") obtained from the office of planning by a provider and issued pursuant to the City of Atlanta's Code of Ordinances Land Development Code at Part 16 of Chapter 25. The endorsement by the commissioner of planning of such SAP shall be the final approval required before a building permit may be sought to construct the station. 
(2)  All stations to be located on private property shall be erected, operated and maintained by the provider in conformity with the city's zoning ordinance, including without limitation, the requirements as to signage, station size and design, as evidenced by the approval of an SAP by the commissioner of planning. The permit and the review of the criteria required in this section to obtain the endorsement of the SAP by the commissioner of planning shall be in addition to and shall in no way modify or replace the requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance and all permits required therein. 
(3)  Before a permit for a station to be located on private property can be approved, the applicant must submit design plans, to be accompanied by photographs and any other required supporting documents, to the commissioner of planning for approval. The submitted design plans for stations located on private property must also comply with the same restrictions related to the location and placement of the stations installed in the public right-of-way as described immediately above in subsection 138-62 (d). 
(4)  All SAPs shall be reviewed by the urban design commission as required by Chapter 90, Article II, Division 2 of Part 16. Such review may be undertaken at any time prior to the commissioner of planning's endorsement of the SAP. 
(f)  Provider assumes risk for installation and operation/management of the stations. All stations located on public property are to be installed and managed by the provider who shall at all times assume all risks for the condition and management of the stations, the use of rental bicycles and any events occurring at the stations. The provider will obtain liability insurance in an amount approved by the city's office of enterprise risk management and under which the city shall be named an additional named insured. 
Such insurance requirements shall be set out in the encroachment agreement that must be agreed to and executed by the provider. 
(g)  Provider responsible for condition of public property. All stations located on public property are installed at the risk of the provider who shall at all times have the obligation to return the public property on which the station is located back to the city in the same condition as when the encroachment agreement was entered into. In this regard, bond requirements as set out in the encroachment agreement must be complied with by the provider. 
(h)  City held harmless. The provider shall hold the city harmless against all losses or damages resulting from or alleged to have resulted from the installation, and/or existence, and/or maintenance operation or any other aspect of the operation and use of the stations and the bicycles. Such hold harmless agreement as provided for in the encroachment agreement must be agreed to by the provider. 
(i)  Maintenance. The provider shall be responsible for maintaining the stations in a safe and clean condition. The stations shall be kept in good order and repair at all times. 
(i)  Failure of compliance. The provider shall be notified by the commissioner of public works when a station is no longer in compliance with city code requirements and/or the provisions of the encroachment agreement and the actions that must be taken to bring the station into compliance. In addition to any contractual remedies, the commissioner of public works may order removal of a station that cannot be brought into compliance by issuing a written order of removal to be sent by certified mail. Failure of the provider to remove the station within 30 days of being issued a written order of removal by the commissioner of public works shall allow for the removal of the station at the cost of the provider. 
( Ord. No. 2014-35(14-O-1325), § 1, 7-30-14 ) 
Secs. 138-63, 138-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION OR EXCAVATION IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, adopted March 14, 2001, amended article III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to improvements as they relate to streets, sidewalks and other public places. See the Code Comparative Table. 
To the extent permitted by law, the city may determine to apply all or certain provisions of this ordinance [Ord. No. 2001-22] to agreements, franchises, and licenses existing on the effective date of this ordinance [March 5, 2001]. This ordinance shall apply to all telecommunications providers, persons seeking to use the streets in the manner described in section 138-127 herein, and franchisees, permittees, and licensees after its adoption. 

Sec. 138-65. - Permits for construction or excavation. 
(a)  Permit required. Any person desiring to conduct construction activities within the public right-of-way or to have an excavation or opening made within a public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way shall make application for a permit to the commissioner of public works. The commissioner of public works shall have the authority to impose such permit terms and conditions necessary to protect the public health and safety, and the permittee shall comply with all terms and conditions imposed by the commissioner of public works including the right to maintain a register of authorized contractors. Only authorized contractors shall engage in permitted activities in the rights-of-way. Applications for all permits for construction and excavation pursuant to this section shall be reviewed, and if the application is complete and the permittee is in compliance with all requirements of this article, to the extent practicable, the city shall issue a permit within 60 days of receipt of the last application and notice to all parties; provided that all joint application permits for excavation by two or more persons shall be expedited and if in compliance with all requirements of this article shall, if practicable, be approved by the commissioner of public works within 30 days of receipt of such applications. 
(1)  Scheduled maintenance permits— There shall be a standing permit for the routine maintenance and repair by the franchisees to existing facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Construction permits: 
a.  Persons desiring to conduct excavation work in the streets or public rights-of-way for the purpose of sewer installation, water line installation, and water meter installation shall apply for a construction permit. Such permits shall be issued for a fee of $85.00 per permit. 
b.  Persons desiring to conduct excavation work in the streets or public rights-of-way including, but not limited to, any street cuts boring activity and the placement or removal of conduits, manholes, cable, shall apply for a construction permit. Such permits shall be issued for a fee of $200.00 per permit. 
The permit fees set out above shall include one hour of inspection by a department of public work's inspector upon the completion construction activity. In addition, the city may charge an inspection fee of $50.00 per hour. However, where the Georgia Department of Transportation has primary permitting authority over a particular construction activity, the permittee may show a copy of the GDOT permit upon application for a city permit and the city permit fee and inspection fees shall be waived for that permit. With respect to subsection (2)b. immediately above, to the extent that a person pays or remits payment to the city pursuant to section 138-127(h)(1). Such payment shall be in lieu of permit fees and inspection fees. 
(3)  Emergency repair permit —Persons conducting excavation work in the public rights-of-way pursuant to an emergency shall comply with the provisions set forth in section 138-74. 
(b)  Permit maintained on site. The permit granted by the commissioner of public works to conduct construction activities within the public right-of-way, maintenance activities, or to open any street or sidewalk shall be maintained on site and displayed to any official of the department of public works, police, or other city official upon request. A scheduled maintenance permit shall be exhibited for scheduled maintenance. A construction permit shall be exhibited for excavation activities. Emergency repair permits shall be exhibited for emergency repairs. Failure to exhibit the appropriate permit shall not only be a violation of this article but shall also be cause for revocation of the permit by the commissioner of public works. 
(c)  Working without a permit. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of the City Code to perform any regulated activity within the public right-of-way without complying with the permit requirements of the department of public works in this chapter. Any person deemed guilty of such violation, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished with a fine of $1,000.00. An additional fine of $100.00 per day will be assessed for each day of the violation. 
(d)  Denial of a permit. The commissioner of public works shall grant no permit where the applicant has failed to comply with the terms of a prior permit. It shall be within the reasonable discretion of the commissioner of public works to decline a permit to any person who shall have failed to carry out any prior order or instruction of the commissioner of public works in connection with the opening of a street or sidewalk at any time. The commissioner of public works may in the commissioner's discretion decline to grant a permit if the commissioner determines that the permit will not be in the public interest. A person may appeal the denial of a permit to the commissioner of public works. The responsibility shall be upon the commissioner of public works to see that no permit is granted to any person to open any street or sidewalk where the results to be accomplished under the permit will unreasonably interfere with the use of the street or sidewalk. Time length for allowing excavations to remain shall be determined by the commissioner of public works. 
(e)  Signed petition required. The commissioner of public works shall not grant any permit to conduct construction activities within the public right-of-way or for an excavation underneath sidewalks or streets for any purpose, unless the petition for that use in each instance is signed by the owner of the proposed facility, who shall enter into an agreement with the city binding the owner and the owner's successor in title. The owner shall agree to indemnify the city against any and all damages to either persons or property caused by the construction or maintenance of the excavation or opening and agree that the commissioner of public works shall have the right to have said excavations closed and filled at any time the commissioner of public works determines and the owner shall vacate the area beneath the sidewalk when requested to do so by the city without cost to the city. The work in each instance shall be done under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the commissioner of public works. Any person violating this section shall be required to close the excavation and remove any obstructions upon the direction of the commissioner of public works. If such notice is not complied with, such encroachment shall be removed by the commissioner of public works at the owner's expense. 
(f)  Supervision of work. All such openings, except as provided in this subsection, shall be made and refilled and permanent improvements removed shall be replaced by or under the supervision of the commissioner of public works. 
(g)  Cost of work. The cost of conducting construction activities within the public right-of-way or making and refilling any opening and of replacing any permanent improvement removed shall be paid by the person at whose request such opening is made. If work is performed by the city on behalf of or at the request of an applicant, charges therefore shall be in such amounts as may be fixed by the commissioner of public works, subject to the approval of the council. The commissioner of public works shall likewise in each case estimate the cost of replacing permanent improvements and shall have authority to replace or require the replacement of all of a sidewalk or street when it is necessary to put the sidewalk in as good condition using materials of equal or better quality as before the opening. All such cost, whether computed from a schedule fixed by the commissioner of public works or embodied in an estimate made under this subsection by the commissioner of public works, shall be paid before the work is done by the city or the permit is granted. 
(h)  Conditions of maintaining a permit. 
(1)  The commissioner of public works is authorized to establish and publish a list of conditions and requirements for all construction, repair, maintenance, and other activities within the public right-of-way including, among other things, the power to establish reasonable fees and fines not inconsistent with this chapter. Said conditions shall contain, but shall not be limited to, requirements pertaining to: 
a.  Notice of proposed construction activities and projected impediment to the abutting commercial and residential land five business days prior to construction activity. Notice shall be visibly displayed in a conspicuous manner on the door of the residence or commercial establishment; 
b.  Traffic protection; 
c.  Emergencies; 
d.  Clear identification of all construction and maintenance sites, vehicles, metal plates and other obstacles with the name and phone number of the utility owner and the person performing the work; 
e.  Construction plans to show length of cut, construction activity to install the equipment, size, type and location of utilities in the rights-of-way and technical specifications for street rehabilitation; 
f.  Placement of warning signs identifying construction and excavation-site; 
g.  Replacement of decorative sidewalk style and material; 
h.  Coordination of excavation and paving activities between and among any persons; 
i.  Placement and removal of paint markings for utility locations; 
j.  Bonds, insurance and other financial protection for the city; 
k.  As-built plans. As-built plans and drawings in a form specified by the department of public works. Plans submitted to the department of public works for permit approval, which have been updated and certified to reflect actual construction and field changes, shall satisfy this section. Permittee shall not be required to supply privileged information. Any such plans submitted to the city, to the extent permitted by applicable law, shall remain proprietary. No person shall artificially under-estimate the size of their proposed system to evade the purpose of this article. 
l.  Permittee shall provide to the department of public works a list identifying all subcontractors used by a permittee on a construction or excavation project. List shall include the name and telephone number of the subcontractor, location and the anticipated duration of the project; and 
m.  Any other requirements, limitations, or conditions that may be necessary and proper. 
(2)  Restoration of the right-of-way. Upon the determination by the department of public work that all construction and excavation activity in the right-of-way, has ceased, within 14 business days of such determination, all persons shall begin to restore the right-of-way to its pre-construction condition. The restoration of the right-of-way shall include; the repaving of all streets and sidewalks, removal of temporary utility markings, the removal of all barricades, obstructions, surplus excavation material and the restoration of the appropriate vegetation. However, trees and shrubs should be planted during the appropriate season. All restoration shall be completed within 21 days after the end of construction activity. Failure to comply with this section will subject all persons to the maximum penalties as set forth in section 138-4 of this chapter. 
(i)  Safety barriers. It shall be the duty of all persons doing any kind of non-emergency work in the streets of the city, such as paving, laying sewers, sidewalks and curbing, moving buildings or any other work that in any way obstructs free passage thereon to notify the commissioner of public works at least 96 hours before the work is commenced and on its completion. It shall be the duty of the commissioner of public works to see that this subsection is enforced, both as to the erection of barriers or enclosures and as to travel on the street by vehicles or otherwise during the time prohibited. It shall also be the duty of the commissioner of public works to notify the fire chief and police chief, Grady Memorial Hospital, the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority and persons named by the mayor or the mayor's designee of the date and time the street will be closed. 
(j)  Performance bond. Persons performing construction or excavation work in the right-of-way shall maintain a performance and completion bond in the amount of $500,000.00 or in an amount determined by the city's risk manager to be adequate to either complete the proposed work impacting the public right-of-way in its entirety or to restore the public right-of-way to its condition prior to the commencement of the work if the person fails to complete the work to the satisfaction of the commissioner of public works. 
(k)  Insurance. The city's risk manager shall require the person conducting construction activities within the public right-of-way to obtain a policy of public liability and property damage insurance naming the city as an additional insured and affording coverage for personal injury, including death in an amount not less than $3,000,000.00, or such amounts established by the city's risk manager, to protect the city from liability claims arising out of the permitted construction activities. These insurance requirements may be met by evidence of self-insurance acceptable to the city. 
(l)  Cash deposit and irrevocable letter of credit. The permittee conducting construction activities within the public right-of-way shall maintain either an irrevocable letter of credit from a qualified financial institution or a cash deposit securing the compliance of the terms of this chapter and the faithful performance of the obligations of the party conducting construction activities within the public right-of-way. The permittee is not required to obtain an irrevocable letter of credit or cash deposit for each individual construction activity for the year beginning January 1. The irrevocable letter of credit or cash deposit shall cover all construction activities conducted by the permittee from January to January of the next year. 
(1)  Amount. The irrevocable letter of credit or cash deposit shall be in the sum of $10,000.00 for work up to 500 feet in the public right-of-way. A $25,000.00 irrevocable letter of credit or cash deposit shall be required for work performed in the public right-of-way in excess of 500 feet. The deposit shall be placed in an interest bearing account. 
(2)  Demand on the irrevocable letter of credit or from cash deposit. The commissioner of public works may demand payment from the institution that issued the letter of credit for a violating party or make deductions from the cash deposit, as applicable to offset the costs of, among other things, the repair, excavations or work performed by the department of public works, or to pay any assessed penalties or costs associated with violations of this chapter. Where practicable, the city shall provide the permittee with ten days advance written notice of a deduction from the deposit. 
(3)  Release of the letter of credit or cash deposit. The letter of credit or cash deposit shall be maintained for a period of one year after the satisfactory completion of work performed in the public right-of-way to secure the obligations in the permit and this ordinance. Upon expiration of one year of the satisfactory completion of the latest activity conducted in the public right-of-way, the department of public works shall either release the letter of credit or cash deposit securing satisfactory completion of the work performed in the public right-of-way. If the department determines that the work is unsatisfactory, the department of public works shall provide written notice of the reasons why the work is unsatisfactory to the person conducting the construction activities. If no notice of unsatisfactory work is provided by the department of public works within 30 days after a request for release pursuant to this section, any letter of credit or cash deposit plus accrued interest will be refunded. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the requirement for an irrevocable letter of credit or cash deposit may be waived, or the amount may be decreased at the discretion of the city's risk manager. 
(m)  Notification to abutting property owners or occupants. The commissioner of public works shall require the person conducting activities pursuant to the permit and construction activities within the public right-of-way to provide each abutting property owner or occupant with reasonable and timely notification of any impending construction work that would unreasonably interfere with either egress or ingress onto said owner's property. 
(n)  Indemnity of the city. The commissioner of public works shall require the person conducting activities pursuant to the permit and construction activities within the public right-of-way to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees, from any and all claims or litigation arising from any construction activities which interfere with the ability of the abutting property owner to conduct his business and/or personal activities in a manner to which he is accustomed. 
(o)  Consequential damages. The commissioner of public works shall require the person conducting activities pursuant to the permit and construction activities within the public right-of-way to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees, from any and all claims or litigation arising from any consequential damages arising from any construction activities within the public right-of-way, including but not limited to vehicular damage caused by such disruption to the right-of-way. 
(p)  Guarding of temporary excavations. All persons making an excavation in any street, sidewalk or public place for any purpose shall erect around the excavation a fence or barrier adequate to protect the public from the excavation. When the excavation is made across the sidewalk or at a place used by pedestrians, a bridge shall be erected over the excavation sufficient for the safe passage of the public. All excavations shall be properly lighted at night as determined by the commissioner of public works. The guarding and protection of excavations shall be in accordance with state law and with specifications promulgated by the commissioner of public works and on file in the office of the commissioner of public works. Appropriate signage shall be erected by all persons making an excavation in the street to provide notice of the excavation to the public. 
(q)  Reservation of rights. The city reserves the right, upon the review of its franchise application, to waive, modify or amend the various bonding, letter of credit, cash deposits and insurance requirements as set forth in section 138-65, taking into account, among other factors, the financial stability of the franchisee or revocable licensee and the past performance of the franchisee or revocable licensee in the city's right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2001-82, §§ 3, 4, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 2002-91, § 1, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 2003-72, §§ 1, 6, 6-8-03; Ord. No. 2008-42(08-O-0880), § 1, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2015-32(15-O-1131), § 1, 6-24-15 ) 
Sec. 138-66. - Neighborhood identification signs. 
Neighborhood identification signs as defined in section 16-28A.012(a)(10) shall be subject to the requirements of this section, except for section 138-24(a), and, section 138-24(b)(4), (5), and (9) which shall not apply to such signs. In lieu of said provisions which shall not apply to such signs, the commissioner of public works shall review and approve the plans and technical specifications and the location of the proposed neighborhood identification signs. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-67. - Pedestrian access. 
(a)  Where it is necessary to close a portion of the pedestrian public right-of-way, only the minimum necessary width of the right-of-way shall be obstructed so as to leave a safe, passable thoroughfare not less than four feet in width, and providing appropriate access at and between intersections in accordance with the Americans With Disabilities Act (the "ADA") standards, and separated from the construction area by adequate safety barriers as approved by the commissioner of public works. 
(b)  Where a four-foot wide pedestrian route on the existing thoroughfare cannot be dedicated, a temporary covered, lighted walkway shall be constructed over the existing pedestrian thoroughfare in accordance with regulations set out by the department of public works. 
(c)  Where it is not possible to provide access via methods (a) or (b) above, a temporary pedestrian route shall be erected utilizing a combination of the existing sidewalk, the adjacent parking lane, and/or the adjacent vehicular traffic lane at the discretion of the commissioner of public works. Where a traffic or parking lane is used, appropriate barricades and signage shall be utilized to separate the pedestrian lane from the vehicular lane and the route shall be accessible as per the guidelines of the ADA. 
(d)  Where the party seeking the permit has shown due diligence to perform either (a), (b), or (c) of this section and are unable to do so due to the structural necessities of the work to be completed, proper signage must be provided at each pedestrian-accessible intersection, between which lies the permitted closure or obstruction, directing pedestrian traffic to cross to the other side of the street. Signage must be visible to pedestrian traffic both on the side of the street with the obstruction and to pedestrian traffic at intersections with access to the segment of the sidewalk containing the permitted obstruction. 
(e)  The commissioner of public works is prohibited from accepting, as reason for an inability to comply with items (a), (b), or (c) of this section, that the pedestrian right-of-way must be closed due to a need for vehicular parking on the site of the work being performed necessitating the closure. 
(f)  All such walkways mandated by this section, shall be maintained by the party responsible on the permit for closure and any damage, or obstructions to this temporary right-of-way shall be repaired and cleared immediately by that party. Permittee is required to display the permit in a conspicuous place so that the public and inspectors can visibly see it. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9-3031, 9-3034, 9-3037; Ord. No. 1995-60, § 1, 9-24-95; Ord. No. 1998-82, §§ 1—3, 11-20-98; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-68. - Scheduling and coordination of excavation. 
(a)  Twenty-four month plans. In order to facilitate an interactive planning process, persons desiring to cut or make an opening, in the street shall submit a quarterly plan in a format acceptable to the commissioner of public works that shows all major excavation work anticipated to be done in the public right-of-way for the next 24 months. The plan shall include a method of excavation designed to protect to the maximum extent possible, the existing infrastructure and minimize the interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic plans may be revised and updated from time to time by such person. The person submitting the plans shall mark such plans as proprietary, or trade secrets and the plans will be protected from disclosure by the city, to the extent permitted by law. This requirement shall not impose any requirement on any person desiring to cut a street to disclose confidential business information. This 24-month plan shall not require persons to disclose information on lateral construction marked protected. In addition, this information is only an estimate and will only be used for general location of construction activities of the person and no liability shall be incurred due to or on account of the submission of such projection. 
(b)  Persons participating in joint excavation. The permit holder shall be deemed the lead person on the joint excavation. In addition, the permit shall list the names of all persons participating in the joint excavation. 
(c)  Application fee. When two or more persons for a joint excavation submit an application for an excavation permit, the joint applicants shall pay one fee for the excavation permit. 
(d)  Coordination of 24-month plans. The commissioner shall review all 24-month plans on file in order to identify conflicts and opportunities for coordination of activities. The commissioner shall notify persons with a 24-month plan on file of such conflicts to the extent possible to maximize coordination of major excavation work and to avoid unnecessary and repeated excavations in street. All persons shall coordinate, to the extent possible, major excavation with other potentially affected persons to minimize disruption of the city's public right-of-way. The department of public works may schedule monthly meetings with persons who desire to work in the right-of-way for the purpose of reviewing submitted as-built plans as required in section 138-65. Persons who seek to perform excavation activities in the right-of-way shall be required to attend such meetings. Failure to attend such meetings shall subject all persons to: revocation or suspension of licenses or permit, the issuance of a stop work order or the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(e)  Department repaving schedule. In October of every year, the commissioner of public works shall prepare for public inspection, a preliminary 12 month repaving plan showing anticipated and proposed resurfacing and repaving of the public right-of-way. Upon completion, such 12 month repaving plan shall be provided to every person with a 24-month plan on file with the department of public works. The commissioner of public works will update such plan as appropriate and provide a copy to the persons referenced in the preceding sentence. 
(f)  The persons subject to this chapter will use their best efforts to conduct industry meetings on a regular basis to try and better coordinate excavation activities. The department of public works may participate in these industry meetings and endeavor to coordinate major excavation work of the city and the industry. 
(g)  Good faith efforts. Persons subject to this chapter will use good faith efforts to conduct joint excavation activities subject to technical, economic and competitive considerations. Joint applications shall be approved in an expedited manner. Any joint application shall identify the lead person responsible for the requested permitted activity. The lead person will coordinate the activities of the other persons participating in the joint project. As an incentive, to encourage joint excavation activities, the city shall implement expedited permit procedures and other fee schedules. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-69. - Rehabilitation and restoration of the pavement. 
Whenever any person desires to cut or make an opening in any street, such person shall repair and restore the street, including milling and resurfacing, to the specifications of the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-70. - Work done by public utilities. 
The commissioner of public works may require public utilities to make their own cuts, backfills and permanent improvements, but all that work shall be done under the supervision and subject to the approval of the commissioner of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-71. - Availability of material and equipment before starting work. 
It shall be unlawful for a contractor to tear up or interfere with the pavement upon a street or sidewalk unless, immediately prior to the time the contractor commences work on the contract, the contractor has sufficient material and equipment immediately available with which to carry out the paving proposed and the commissioner of public works is satisfied that this section has been complied with. If the commissioner of public works determines that the contractor has not complied with this section, the commissioner shall refuse to allow the street and sidewalk to be torn up or interfered with, nor shall this be done until the contractor shall comply with this section. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3051; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-72. - Building adjoining viaduct, bridge or tunnel. 
(a)  Bearing upon or against viaduct, bridge or tunnel. No portion of a building adjoining a viaduct, bridge or tunnel shall bear upon or against the viaduct, bridge or tunnel structure, but a space of not less than one inch shall be left open between the sidewalk and the structure and then filled with an approved expansion joint material. 
(b)  Responsibility for damages. Any and all damages to streets, on either level, or damage to bridge, viaduct or tunnel structures caused by the contractor or by the contractor's employees must be repaired immediately at no cost to the city and to the satisfaction of the commissioner of public works. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3039; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-73. - Protection for gas lines. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commence, perform or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating equipment in any street right-of-way or any tract or parcel of land inside the city limits of the city until such person has complied with O.C.G.A. § 25-9-5 and O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 and all other applicable state laws. 
(b)  The provisions of this section are in addition to the requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 9 (O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq.). 
(Code 1977, § 17-11006; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-74. - Emergency excavations. 
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent any person from taking any action reasonably necessary for the preservation of life or property or for the restoration of interrupted service provided by a utility when such necessity arises during days or times when the department of public works is closed. In the event that any person takes any action to excavate or cause to excavate the public right-of-way pursuant to this section such person shall apply for an emergency permit within four hours after the department of public works' offices are first opened. Permits submitted pursuant to this section shall receive an expedited review. The applicant for an emergency permit shall submit a written statement of the basis of the emergency action and described excavation performed and any work remaining to be performed. Persons conducting emergency excavations pursuant to this section shall prominently display a notice of such emergency activity. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-75. - Fees charged for permits which allow blocking or closing sidewalks or streets; etc. 
(a)  The applicant for any permit issued by the department of public works for closing, occupying, blocking or otherwise using sidewalks or streets for building construction, building repairs, material or equipment storage, movement of oversize vehicles or loads and other special purposes shall pay to the city an application fee of $35.00 and, upon receipt of such permit, pay to the city a permit fee as provided in this section. 
(b)  There shall be a $35.00 fixed fee for all permits issued as provided in this section, unless otherwise provided herein. 
(c)  A variable permit cost for use of up to 100 linear feet of sidewalk and any portion of the adjacent curb lane shall be $15.00 per calendar day for the duration of the permit. 
(d)  A variable permit cost for use of 101 to 200 linear feet of a sidewalk and any portion of the adjacent curb lane shall be $30.00 per calendar day for the duration of the permit. 
(e)  A variable permit cost for use of 201 to 300 linear feet of a sidewalk and any portion of the adjacent curb lane shall be $45.00 per calendar day for the duration of the permit. 
(f)  A variable permit cost for use of over 300 linear feet of a sidewalk and any portion of the adjacent curb lane shall be $60.00 per calendar day for the duration of the permit. 
(g)  The variable permit cost for use of sidewalk space only shall be 40 percent of the variable permit cost as determined for paragraphs (c), (d), (e) and (f) of this section, based on the linear feet of sidewalk used. 
(h)  The variable permit cost for use of multiple lanes or full street closure shall be the cost of a single lane permit as established in paragraphs (c), (d), (e) and (f), multiplied by the number of marked traffic lanes encroached upon by the permitted use. Where no lane markings are used, a lane width of ten feet shall be assumed for determining the permit cost. 
(i)  The variable permit cost for trenching or excavating within rights-of-way shall be $25.00 per calendar day per lane for the duration of the permit. 
(j)  Each truck, trailer, crane, tractor, structure or similar device parked or placed within public rights-of-way contrary to established parking regulation and not within an area permitted, as provided by other portions of this section, shall be required to have from the department of public works a permit for such storage or parking. The cost of such permit shall be $20.00 per day; however, the fixed fee of $20.00 shall not be applied. 
(k)  A single trip permit for moving vehicles over city streets which exceed the legal length, width, height, or weight shall be $20.00 for exceeding one of the limitations and $30.00 for exceeding more than one of the limitation. If the department of public works determines that such vehicles or load, because of its size, must be moved at night or will require a special police escort, the variable permit cost shall be $200.00. Permit charges required in this subsection may be waived if such oversized vehicle or load thereon is being used as part of or in preparation for a parade, festival or other such event. 
(l)  An annual multiple trip permit cost for moving vehicles which exceed the legal length, width, height or weight shall be $200.00. 
(m)  Minor routine maintenance of buildings, walls, signs, fences, trees or similar facilities which requires use of a sidewalk, shall require a permit and permit fee. 
(n)  The commissioner of the department of public works shall make a determination on any question concerning conditions which require a permit and shall approve waivers of permit fees as provided for herein. 
(o)  The fee for a haul route permit shall be $80.00. 
(Ord. No. 2008-43(08-O-0881), § 1, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2015-32(15-O-1131), § 2, 6-24-15 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPROVEMENTS WITHIN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, adopted March 14, 2001, amended article IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to poles, wires and conduits as they relate to streets, sidewalks and other public places. See the Code Comparative Table. 
To the extent permitted by law, the city may determine to apply all or certain provisions of this ordinance [Ord. No. 2001-22] to agreements, franchises, and licenses existing on the effective date of this ordinance [March 5, 2001]. This ordinance shall apply to all telecommunications providers, persons seeking to use the streets in the manner described in section 138-127 herein, and franchisees, permittees, and licensees after its adoption. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 138-76. - Cost and fees of street paving and the improvement of unimproved right-of-way by city assessed against abutting property owners. 
Whenever any street or sidewalk or part thereof in the city is originally paved, or the improvement of unimproved right-of-way is accomplished by the city, the cost and fees of street paving and the improvement of unimproved right-of-way shall be assessed against abutting property owners unless other method of payment is authorized by city council. Whenever such work is by direction of the council, there shall be added to the total assessable cost of the work a fee for inspection and engineering services furnished by the city, and the total of cost and fee shall be assessed against the abutting property owner. The fee shall be retained by the chief financial officer to cover the cost of inspection and engineering services. The fee shall be established by ordinance and may be found in the city's rules and regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3052; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-77. - Engineering and inspection fees for improvements by owner or developer. 
When any owner of property or developer thereof shall install any public improvement, such as the grading and paving of streets, sidewalks, the installation of curbs and combination curbs and gutters, either by such owner or developer or by any duly authorized contractor, the contractor or the owner or developer of those properties causing the work to be done shall pay to the city, in advance of construction, a fee for inspection and engineering services as provided by ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3053; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Secs. 138-78—138-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREETS 

Sec. 138-81. - Notice to contractor and public utilities of paving. 
(a)  Definition. As used in this section, the term "public utility" includes power, gas, light, telephone, CATV and telegraph corporations and such others as may operate like public services and also includes the department of water. 
(b)  Notice to contractor that street is ready for paving. The commissioner of public works shall notify the contractor to whom a street paving contract has been awarded that the street is ready for paving under the contract. After the notice has been given the contractor, it shall be unlawful for any person to make any opening of any kind in the street, without the written joint consent of the contractor and the commissioner of public works. 
(c)  Notice to public utilities. At least 60 days prior to commencing of paving, the commissioner of public works shall notify public utilities and all other persons that have a 24-month plan on file as of the date that the street will be paved, and if any public utility so notified is unable to complete any of its work in the street within 30 days from this notice, the commissioner of public works shall be notified in writing by the public utility, whereupon the commissioner may, at the commissioner's discretion, delay the sending of the notice to commence paving. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3057; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-82. - Closing of streets during paving operations. 
(a)  Authority, duties of commissioner. For paving or repaving a street, construction of a bridge or any other work, the commissioner of public works shall be authorized to close the street or part of the street from the time the work is started until, in the commissioner's judgment, the street is suitable for ordinary traffic thereon. If there is any dispute as to the time when the pavement is sufficiently set or hardened or otherwise has become fit for travel, the decision of the commissioner of public works shall be final. The commissioner of public works shall see that this section is enforced, both as to the erection of barriers or enclosures and as to travel on the street by vehicles or otherwise during the time prohibited. The commissioner of public works shall notify the police chief, fire chief, Grady Memorial Hospital, the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority and persons named by the mayor or the mayor's designee of the date and time street will be closed. 
(b)  Violation. Any person interfering with the street closing or undertaking to operate a vehicle or otherwise travel upon a street closed by authority of the commissioner of public works before the enclosures have been removed therefrom and the street opened for travel shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be punished as provided in the penalty section of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-83. - Closing of streets during construction of bridges, viaducts and similar structures. 
Whenever the city, a public utility or a railroad undertakes work such as the construction of bridges, viaducts or the like, which necessitates the use of a roadway for the erection of such public work, all streets and sidewalks affected by these works shall be closed. The commissioner of public works shall have power to keep any portions of those streets and sidewalks open temporarily where necessary to ensure public safety, but any permits to allow any portions of those streets or sidewalks to be kept open temporarily shall be subject to be revoked at any time in the discretion of the commissioner of public works. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3059; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-84. - Traffic calming devices—Installation. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section and in section 138-85, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection except when the context requires otherwise: 
(1)  Traffic calming guidelines mean the document titled "Traffic Calming Device Implementation Guidebook," prepared by City of Atlanta, May 1999 and any future revisions. 
(2)  ITE Guidelines mean the document titled "Guidelines for the Design and Application of Speed Humps" issued by the Institute of Transportation Engineers' I.T.E. Technical Council Speed Humps Task Force in March, 1993 and subsequent revisions. 
(3)  Speed table means that geometric roadway design features described and defined in the ITE guidelines, which shall be no less than 22 feet in width. 
(4)  Traffic calming device means a roadway feature such as speed tables, speed cushions, traffic circles and measures implemented to reduce vehicular speed as described in the "Traffic Calming Implementation Guidebook" and "Guidelines for the Design and Application of Speed Humps". 
(5)  Street segment means a portion of a local residential street within the city located between any two intersecting streets. 
(6)  Study area means one or more street segments located within the proposed traffic calming area. 
(7)  Vertical traffic calming measures means measures which create variations in pavement height along a vehicle travel path. 
(b)  The department of public works shall be responsible for the administration of the traffic calming program to include conducting a traffic engineering study to determine whether all of the conditions set forth below are met. 
(c)  As a part of such study, the affected neighborhood planning unit and the police and fire departments shall be notified and given the opportunity to comment on the propriety of installing traffic calming devices in the study area. In addition, all utility companies and other companies that have franchise agreements with the city shall be contacted to determine whether any work in the public right-of-way is planned in the study area. 
(d)  Petitions may be submitted to the department of public works by property owners seeking the installation of traffic calming devices. The submission of such petitions must be within two years from the date of the traffic engineering study in a form satisfactory to the city. The petitions must be signed by 75 percent of the property owners in any study area (based on parcel count), evidencing their desire to have traffic calming devices installed. The petitioners must accept the signage and markings appurtenant thereto, and acknowledge that installing the traffic calming devices could slow the response time of fire and police department vehicles and ambulances by several seconds per traffic calming device. If all conditions are met, the city may construct and install traffic calming devices in such study area. The conditions, which must be met, are as follows: 
(1)  The study area must be a residential street functionally classified as local or collector street except that streets classified as collector and arterial streets shall not qualify for vertical traffic calming measures; 
(2)  The 85th percentile speed of traffic on such street must be at least ten miles per hour over the posted speed limit; 
(3)  The property owners in such study area may apply to the city for funding for all costs of construction and installation. In the alternative, the property owners may elect to engage a private contractor to construct the traffic calming devices in accordance with all requirements of the department of public works and to pay all costs of construction and installation; and 
(4)  The study area must meet the criteria contained in part 2.0 of the ITE guidelines for speed humps or the criteria contained in the Traffic Calming Device Implementation Guidebook, except to the extent this article expressly provides for different criteria. If the Institute of Transportation Engineers' or the City of Atlanta revokes or suspends their guidelines, then this requirement shall not need to have been met for any traffic calming device installation not completed by the date of such revocation or suspension. 
(e)  The commissioner of public works reserves the right to install or remove traffic calming measures outside of this traffic calming petitioning process consistent with City Code section 138-3 which assigns authority to regulate activities in the public right-of-way to the commissioner of public works. 
(f)  In addition to the requirements outlined in this code section, traffic calming installation policy shall be consistent with standard operating procedures adopted by the department of public works and contained in the Public Works Right-of-Way Manual. 
(Ord. No. 1995-03, § 9-3061, 2-14-95; Ord. No. 1997-46, §§ 1, 2, 8-25-97; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2003-15, § 1, 3-11-03; Ord. No. 2012-21(12-O-0695), § 1, 5-30-12) 
Sec. 138-85. - Traffic calming devices—Removal. 
Speed tables on a street segment may be removed if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Seventy-five percent of property owners within the street segment where the traffic calming devices are installed must, via formal petition, request their removal. 
(2)  The speed traffic calming devices have been in place no less than one year. 
(3)  The property owners are made aware that speeds will increase upon removal of the traffic calming devices. 
(4)  The property owners agree to pay all costs associated with such removal. 
(5)  The department of public works agrees that removal of the traffic calming devices will not negatively affect public safety. 
(Ord. No. 1995-3, § 9-3062, 2-14-95; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2012-21(12-O-0695), § 2, 5-30-12) 
Secs. 138-86—138-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SIDEWALKS, CURBS, CURBS AND GUTTERS AND DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 138-96. - Schedule of charges for construction or repair. 
The commissioner of public works shall maintain a schedule of charges for sidewalks, curbing or driveway aprons constructed or repaired by the city which may be revised from time to time by the commissioner of public works, subject to council approval, and which shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3091; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-97. - Construction of sidewalks, driveways and curbs in multifamily residential, commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
(a)  Before any building permit shall be issued for the construction of any structure on property within any planned development-housing (PD-H) district or any zoning district which permits multifamily residential, commercial or industrial uses, the owner shall agree to construct or have constructed sidewalks, driveways and curbs on all public streets within and abutting the property. This subsection does not apply to property already having such improvements in a condition satisfactory to the commissioner of public works. Failure to construct these improvements shall be grounds for denial of occupancy or use of the improvements constructed on the property. The director, bureau of buildings shall not issue an occupancy permit until the improvements are made. The plans and specifications for the sidewalks, driveways and curbs shall be submitted to and approved by the commissioner of public works prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
(b)  The requirements of subsection (a) of this section may be waived by the commissioner of public works upon a showing by the applicant of sufficient evidence that the proposed work includes only site improvements and no new construction of new occupiable space. 
(c)  The commissioner of public works may, in the commissioner's discretion, require the installation of curbs on property exempted pursuant to subsection (b) of this section in conformance with city standards if such is required for proper storm drainage on the abutting or adjacent properties. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3092; Ord. No. 1996-28, § 1, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-98. - Constructing sidewalks, driveways and curbs by private contractors. 
(a)  Private contractors may be permitted to lower curbs and construct sidewalks and curbs and driveways across sidewalks in the city subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  License required. The contractor shall hold a business license from the city. 
(2)  Permit required. The contractor shall obtain a permit from the commissioner of public works to construct the sidewalks, driveways and curbs. 
(3)  Standards. All work performed under the permit shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the commissioner of public works, and such sidewalks, driveways and curbs shall be constructed only in accordance with the established lines and grades of the city. 
(4)  Inspection required. Whenever any contractor holding a permit authorized by this section shall desire to pour any sidewalks, driveways and curbs, the contractor shall notify the commissioner of public works of the contractor's readiness and desire to do so, whereupon it shall be the duty of the commissioner of public works, as soon thereafter as is practical, to send an inspector of the department of public works to inspect the work, and no work shall be poured except on approval of the commissioner. 
(5)  Insurance. All contractors constructing driveways, sidewalks and curbs shall carry insurance which will protect the city and its officers, agents and employees from all claims for personal injury and property damage arising out of the construction of the sidewalks, driveways and curbs. The insurance shall be in an amount and shall provide such coverage as determined by the city's risk manager after consultation with the commissioner of public works. The insurance shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents and employees against all claims resulting from injuries to persons or property damage for a period beginning on the date of the commencement of any work being performed by the contractor and continuing for 30 days after the completion of the work by the contractor. Presentation and delivery of the policy of insurance or appropriate certificate thereof to the commissioner of public works shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of any permit for the work. 
(6)  Charge for permit. The charge for the permit required by this section shall be fixed by the council, and the sum shall be paid to the department of public works at the time of the issuance of any permit under this section. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3093; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-99. - Permit required for construction of driveways or sidewalks on streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any driveway or sidewalk on any street without first having obtained a permit from the commissioner of public works. If any person without first obtaining the permit should construct a driveway or sidewalk on any street, then the person shall be in violation of this Code, and the commissioner of public works shall be authorized to condemn the driveway or sidewalk and have it removed and replaced at the expense of the owner of the property, the owner being notified of this action prior to construction. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3094; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-100. - Notice to abutting property owners prior to construction of sidewalks. 
Except for a single-property request for the construction of a sidewalk, it shall be the duty of the commissioner of public works to give all abutting property owners written notice prior to construction of any sidewalk abutting their property. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3095; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-101. - Additional standards for replacement or reconstruction of sidewalks in certain districts and areas. 
(a)  Applicable districts and areas. This section shall apply in the following districts and areas: 
(1)  Any landmark district, except for the M. L. King, Jr. Landmark District. This exemption does not apply to the Auburn Avenue Streetscape improvements which were installed for the 1996 Olympics. 
(2)  Any historic district. 
(3)  Any urban conservation district which existed prior to 1991, as so defined by the Urban Design Commission, except for the Candler Park Urban Conservation District. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(b)  Existing standard sidewalks. In any of the districts or areas listed in subsection (a) of this section where replacement or reconstruction of the standard sidewalk is deemed necessary, the standard sidewalk shall be replaced or reconstructed with hexagonal pavers or a standard sidewalk inlaid with an 18-inch diameter hexagonal imprint. This shall be considered a standard sidewalk replacement in such circumstances in such districts and areas. All such sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the commissioner of public works and in accordance with established lines and grades of the city. 
(c)  Existing sidewalks constructed of hexagonal pavers or inlaid with hexagonal imprint. In any of the districts or areas listed in subsection (a) of this section, a sidewalk constructed of hexagonal pavers or a standard sidewalk inlaid with a hexagonal imprint shall only be replaced or reconstructed with material of equal or better quality and similar in design to the original. Hexagonal pavers may be replaced with hexagonal pavers or a standard sidewalk inlaid with an 18-inch diameter hexagonal imprint. This shall be considered a standard sidewalk replacement in such circumstances in such districts. All such sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the commissioner of public works and in accordance with established lines and grades of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3096; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2001-61, §§ 1—3, 8-15-01) 
Sec. 138-102. - Additional standards for limited local residential streets in new subdivisions. 
(a)  Standards of construction for limited local residential streets in new subdivisions are as follows: 
(1)  The width of the street as measured from face of curb to face of curb shall be 28 feet. 
(2)  The pavement section shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
a.  All natural ground under fill or base shall be scarified to a depth of not less than six inches and recompacted to 90 percent of maximum density at optimum moisture content as determined by the modified Proctor method in accordance with ASTM D-1557. 
b.  The crushed aggregate base course shall conform to the requirements of the department of public works streets and sidewalk construction specification, January 1975, and the crushed aggregate base course shall be a minimum thickness of six inches. 
c.  The asphalt concrete base and top shall conform to the requirements of the department of public works street and sidewalk construction specifications, January 1975, and the asphalt concrete base course and top course shall be a minimum total thickness of four inches. 
(3)  The standards of the department of public works are amended to include a curb and gutter cross section having the dimensions of six inches thick by 24 inches wide with a curb six inches high, materials and workmanship conforming to the standards of the department of public works, subject to the following: 
a.  Pending the adoption of a revised standard by the city, by the department of public works and, where applicable, the owner shall agree to install a modified grate and frame compatible with the reduced gutter width provided for in this section. The type, style, thickness, weight and other mechanical properties of such grate and frame, as well as modifications that may be required of existing standard basins permitted, shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner of public works or the commissioner's authorized agent. 
(4)  On limited local residential streets in proposed new subdivisions, the owner shall agree to dedicate to the use of the public forever a nine-foot wide utility easement on either side and abutting the right-of-way of the limited local residential street, including around the bulb of any cul-de-sac which is a part thereof, the purpose of such dedication being to install traffic signs, fire hydrants, gas, water, sewer mains, related appurtenances and public sidewalks as provided for in this section. On all limited local residential streets, the sidewalk may be installed by petition of the abutting property owner or, when in the opinion of the commissioner of public works it is necessary, by any other means provided in this section. 
(5)  On limited local residential streets and higher classification streets in proposed new subdivisions permitted under this section, the owner shall agree to install the full roadway prism in accordance with the standards of the department of public works and the governing sections of this Code or other ordinances of the city. The roadway cross section to be developed will extend from the right-of-way line or utility easement line to the right-of-way line or utility easement line, whichever distance is greater. Cuts and fills employed to construct the roadway prism to the limits specified shall be two feet horizontal to one foot vertical rise, which, in the case of cut slopes and at the discretion of the commissioner of public works for unusual difficulty or hardship, may be reduced to 11 feet horizontal to one foot vertical rise. 
(6)  On limited local residential streets and higher classification streets in proposed new subdivisions permitted under this section, where such new or existing street has a proposed intersecting street or is a through street serving other subdivisions or areas and on looped limited local residential streets, the owner shall agree to install a minimum five-foot wide by four-inch thick concrete sidewalk, with the back of the sidewalk being located at the right-of-way line or at the most far removed utility easement line, whichever distance from the centerline of the street is greater, with the exception that the owner will not be required to install sidewalks around the bulb of the cul-de-sac of a proposed street classified as limited local residential. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3097; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01) 
Land Development Code References— Subdivision design standards, § 15-08.001 et seq.; required improvements in subdivisions, § 15-09.001 et seq. 
Sec. 138-102.1 - Negotiated traditional neighborhood development (NTND). 
(a)  Intent. The following street design standards, called the NTND Street Standards, are to be utilized by the City of Atlanta as optional street standards for new developments meeting the definition of a negotiated traditional neighborhood development (NTND). The primary purpose of these NTND streets is to create places that will be safe, pleasant, and useful for pedestrians and bicyclists. Providing mobility for cars and occasionally trucks is a secondary purpose. In general, NTND streets are narrow streets with low traffic speeds and low traffic volumes, designed naturally to slow traffic without the need for bumps, humps, or bulb-outs. NTND streets often are designed to require some degree of "slow flow" whereby cars must slow or even stop intermittently to allow oncoming traffic to pass. 
Users of these standards are reminded that the street design regulations apply to communities and locations that conform to design features cited above. These NTND streets are not intended to carry large volumes of through traffic, and an adequate, separate system of arterial roadways is necessary to serve higher volumes and long distance travel. 
(b)  Definition, negotiated traditional neighborhood development . A development using the NTND Street Standards shall be required to receive approval from the commissioner of the department of planning, development and neighborhood conservation to ensure that the development is consistent with all of the following guidelines. 
(1)  The NTND shall be compact and pedestrian-friendly. 
(2)  The NTND shall contain at least eight acres of property. 
(3)  The NTND shall contain at least two land uses, including residential and commercial and/or office. 
(4)  The NTND shall contain at least one internal public street. 
(5)  Streets shall interconnect to form a grid or web-like pattern, rather than a dendritic (tree-like) pattern. 
(6)  The street network of the NTND shall connect to the existing public street network [at] at least two points. 
(7)  Within the gross area of the residential component of the NTND, residential unit density shall exceed six units per acre. 
(8)  The NTND shall contain at least 5,000 square feet of non-residential floor area, of which no less than 2,000 square feet shall be used for retail uses including eating and drinking establishments. 
(9)  A park that is accessible to the general public and is at least one-eighth acre in size shall be provided within 2,000 feet, as measured in a straight line from property line to property line, of all residences. 
(10)  Garages shall not be located closer to the adjacent public or private street than the principal building. 
(11)  Sidewalks or pedestrian access shall be provided along all streets within the NTND. 
(c)  Applicability requirements. 
(1)  A development using the NTND Street Standards must receive approval from the commissioner of the department of planning, development, and neighborhood conservation and the commissioner of public works that it meets the definition of a negotiated traditional neighborhood development. 
(2)  Streets for which these standards are applied must have posted speeds no greater than 25 m.p.h. 
(3)  Maximum street grades shall not exceed 11 percent. 
(d)  General Conditions. 
(1)  On-street parking is allowed on one or both sides of a street. Such parking permission depends on the type and size of the street, as outlined in the following sections. Certain streets as herein designated require specific approval of the City of Atlanta Fire Department. 
(2)  On residential streets where the primary function of the street is to provide access to adjacent development and foster a safe and pleasant environment, at least one unobstructed moving lane of not less than 12 feet must be ensured even where parking occurs on both sides. On-street parallel parking lane widths are assumed to be not less than seven feet in width for purposes of calculating street sections. 
(3)  Street lanes, including bicycle lanes, should not be striped. 
(4)  Header curbs are required to be used to maximize pavement area and improve street appearance. 
(5)  Streets that are within 1500 feet of a neighborhood collector or arterial street are not required to accommodate large-scale, public transit vehicles. 
(6)  Special provisions are required to accommodate emergency, sanitation, and other special vehicular access. These provisions depend on the type and size of the street, as outlined in the following sections. 
(7)  Curb ramps shall be designed to meet ADA requirements and shall include a top and bottom landing of at least 48" in length and 36" in width. Maximum slope of 1:12 and maximum cross slope of 1:50 are permitted. 
(8)  Driveway aprons shall end at the sidewalk clear zone and be limited to the street furniture/tree planting zone. Driveway aprons shall have a slope of between 1:10 and 1:13. A minimum of 36" of landing area at sidewalk shall be required and sidewalk may be partially dropped to prevent apron from exceeding 1:13 slope. 
(9)  Block lengths shall be no greater than 600 feet. Stop signs may be placed within the NTND to ensure that automobiles travel no greater than 600 feet without interruption. 
(10)  Alleys must be privately owned and all drawings and plats issued for the NTND must contain an acknowledgement of that private ownership. Any improvements, maintenance and other similar actions to such alleys must be the responsibility of the private property owners. 
(11)  The physical curb radii for intersections within NTND and between NTND streets and non-NTND streets shall be as follows: 
a.  The physical curb radii for intersections of 20 feet wide streets without parking shall be 20 feet, 
b.  The physical curb radii for intersections of 27 feet wide streets with parking on one side shall be 15 feet with mountable curbs. Mountable curbs shall be designed in accordance with criteria established by the department of public works, 
c.  Physical curb radii for intersections of 34 feet wide streets with parking on two sides shall be 15 feet with mountable curbs. Mountable curbs shall be designed in accordance with criteria established by the department of public works, 
d.  For conditions a, b, and c above, the full street width of all streets shall extend to the intersection and parking shall not be allowed within 30 feet of each intersection. 
(e)  Street designations. The following street designations and design standards are applicable to negotiated transitional neighborhoods development: 
(1)  Type 2-C: Two-way street with no parking may be designed as follows: 
a.  Curb to curb street sections permitted: 20 feet. 
b.  Special provision required: 
1.  To provide maximum vehicular space, there shall be no solid obstructions (includes trees, poles, etc.) within 18" of the face of curb on both sides of the street. 
(2)  Type 2-D: Two-way street with parking on one side only may be designed as follows: 
a.  Curb to curb street sections permitted: 27 feet. 
1.  Special provision required: 
i.  To provide maximum vehicular space, there shall be no solid obstructions (includes trees, poles, etc.) within 18" of the face of curb on both sides of the street. 
(3)  Type 2-E: Two-way street with parking on both sides may be designed as follows: 
a.  Curb to curb street sections permitted: 34 feet. 
b.  Special provision required: 
1.  To provide maximum vehicular space, there shall be no solid obstructions (includes trees, poles, etc.) within 18" of the face of curb on both sides of the street. 
( Ord. No. 2018-04(18-O-0602), § 1, 7-9-02 ) 
Sec. 138-103. - Inspection and repair of sidewalks. 
The commissioner of public works shall inspect the sidewalks along public right-of-way, to maintain the sidewalks thereon in a safe and suitable condition for public use and travel, to condemn promptly pavements on such sidewalks that are unsafe or unsuitable for public travel, and to cause repairs to be made in accordance with city law and to charge the cost of the repair to the abutting property; provided however that where funding is identified, applicable and available for implementation of repairs by the city, such repairs shall be undertaken by the city upon a prioritized basis until the funding is exhausted. The absence of city funding shall not excuse the abutting property owner from the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1996-26, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2015-40(14-O-1361), §§ 3, 4, 7-29-15 ) 
Secs. 138-104—138-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES AND REVOCABLE LICENSES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, adopted March 14, 2001, amended article V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly said article pertained to publication vending devices as related to streets, sidewalks and other public places. See the Code Comparative Table. 
To the extent permitted by law, the city may determine to apply all or certain provisions of this ordinance [Ord. No. 2001-22] to agreements, franchises, and licenses existing on the effective date of this ordinance [March 5, 2001]. This ordinance shall apply to all telecommunications providers, persons seeking to use the streets in the manner described in section 138-127 herein, and franchisees, permittees, and licensees after its adoption. 

DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 138-126. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. 
Affiliated person means such person who falls into one or more of the following categories: (i) each person having directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the applicant or franchisee; (ii) each person in which the applicant or franchisee has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; (iii) each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the applicant or franchisee; and (iv) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the applicant or franchisee; provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the city or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with, the applicant or franchisee. 
Applicant means any person seeking to obtain a franchise or revocable license pursuant to this article. 
Cable services means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"). In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Control or controlling interest means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the applicant or the equipment in the streets. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more than five percent of any person (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or "controlling interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one person or group of persons. 
Equipment means any and all transmission facilities, poles, wires, electrical conductors, fiber, conduits, subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances that are used in connection with the provision of telecommunications services. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to construct, install, operate, upgrade, repair, maintain, and remove equipment used to provide telecommunications services upon, along, over and under the streets. A franchise does not guarantee the universal use of the right-of-way. Each site-specific use of the right-of-way shall be assessed during the permit application process for that particular site. 
Franchisee means a person which is party to a franchise issued by the city. 
Gross revenues means all revenue that is received, directly or indirectly by the franchisee with facilities in the right-of-way, from or in connection with the provision of telecommunication services over the franchisee's telecommunications system in the established corporate limits of the city; provided that gross revenue shall not include any fees or any sales or excise taxes collected for direct pass-through to any entity with facilities in the right-of-way other than an affiliated person, including any local, state or federal government, and further provided that gross revenue shall not include any revenue generated by the rental, lease, sale, or other use of a franchisee's facilities by a person who is also a franchisee. 
Peachtree Corridor means those commercial areas in the City of Atlanta known as Midtown, Downtown, and Buckhead and which are more specifically defined in the handbook of the department of public works. 
Revocable license means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the limited occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited circumstances set forth in sections 138-127 and 138-135 of this article. 
Revocable license fee means a payment for the fair and reasonable compensation for the use of the city's right-of-way in providing telecommunication services. This fee shall not include fees associated with any other license agreement with the city. 
Telecommunications means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
Telecommunications franchise fee means a payment of for the fair and reasonable compensation for the use of the city's right-of-way in providing telecommunication services. This fee shall not include fees associated with any other franchise agreement with the city. 
Telecommunications provider means any person who: 
(1)  Owns, constructs, operates or maintains equipment in the streets used to provide telecommunications services regardless of whether such telecommunications services originate or terminate in the city; or 
(2)  Provides telecommunications services that originate or terminate in the city by means of: 
a.  Specifically identifiable equipment in the streets, which equipment is owned by such person or made available to such person under a lease or any other arrangement for a period longer than 120 days; or 
b.  Equipment in the streets if the use of such equipment is continuing and substantial, and the city has determined that it is necessary and appropriate to impose the requirements of this chapter in order to preserve the application of this article on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis consistent with applicable law. 
Telecommunications services means the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to resellers or other such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used. The term "telecommunications services" shall not include cable services. 
Telecommunications system means the plant, equipment, real property (including interests in real property), tangible and intangible personal property, buildings, offices, furniture, customer lists, cable, wires, optical fibers, amplifiers, antenna, switches, and all other electronic devices equipment and facilities used to provide telecommunications services. 
Utility easement means any easement owned by the city and acquired, established, dedicated, or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities. 
Universal access provider means a local exchange company that is obligated to provide basic local exchange service in Atlanta in response to reasonable requests for such service. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
DIVISION 2. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 138-127. - Granting authority. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy the streets as a telecommunications provider, or construct, operate or maintain equipment in the streets used to provide telecommunications services, without a franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. A revocable license is granted only for a specified portion of (a) particular street(s). Franchises and revocable licenses are not required for telecommunications providers that do not construct, operate, or maintain equipment in the streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person seeking to use the streets to construct, operate or maintain equipment to provide telecommunications for or in connection with the internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person in the city, without first obtaining a revocable license in accordance with the provisions found in sections 138-129 and 138-135 of this article. A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use and occupy specifically identified streets to provide telecommunications and shall be granted only if: 
(1)  The use or occupation of such streets, together with all revocable licenses previously granted to such person and affiliated persons, shall not exceed 500 linear feet; and 
(2)  The use or occupation of such streets does not involve: 
a.  The offering or provision of telecommunications services to or from any person in the city; or 
b.  The origination or termination of any telecommunications service to or from any person in the city. In determining whether the provisions of clause (2) of this section 138-127 are satisfied, the city may consider whether it is necessary or appropriate to require a license or franchise to preserve the application of this article on a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory basis consistent with applicable law. 
(c)  The city council may grant one or more franchises and revocable licenses in accordance with this article, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereof. 
(d)  The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as shall be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise or license agreement between the city and the franchisee or licensee. 
(e)  Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises, revocable licenses or other authorizations for use of the streets by any means, as the city deems appropriate. 
(f)  A franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be construed to grant any rights or authorization to provide cable services in the city, and any person seeking to provide cable services in the city shall first obtain a separate franchise in accordance with the City of Atlanta Cable Communications Ordinance, 94-0-1777. 
(g)  In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a telecommunications provider to exceed the limits established in section 138-127, or fail to comply with the requirements therein, then such telecommunications provider must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this article, and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. It shall be unlawful to provide service pursuant to a revocable license where the licensee exceeds the limitations or fails to meet the requirements contained in section 138-27(g). 
(h)  Compensation. It is the purpose of this section to fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the use of the city's rights-of-way. 
(1)  Measure of compensation—Telecommunication franchisees and revocable licensees shall pay the city an annual franchise fee equal to three percent of the franchisee's annual gross revenue provided that a telecommunications franchisee or revocable licensee shall not be required to pay more than $11,000,000.00 in telephony franchise fees for the reasonable use and occupancy of the rights-of-way. The $11,000,000.00 cap will be increased annually at the anniversary date of the execution of the agreement by the rate of inflation Which will be measured by the percentage change in the gross domestic product-price index "GDP PI"), which is the gross domestic product fixed weight price index calculated by the United States Department of Commerce. In addition, in any calendar year that telecommunication franchisee's or revocable licensee's gross revenue does not exceed $500,000.00, the telephony franchisee fee shall be $15,000.00 per year. 
(2)  Where a request is made for a determination that ascertaining the amount of gross revenue of a particular franchisee or licensee is impossible, upon such determination the requesting party shall pay compensation to the city at a rate of $8.00 per linear foot for the use of the right-of-way within the Peachtree Corridor, and $2.00 per linear foot for the use of the right-of-way outside the Peachtree Corridor. Such impossibility shall be determined by an auditor and other professionals selected by the city and paid for by the requestor, and as used above, the term impossible shall not mean inconvenient or difficult for the franchisee or licensee, but instead, shall mean that gross revenue is truly incapable of calculation. 
(3)  The measure of compensation for equipment installed for private use only, which is not used to provide telecommunications services or facilities to end-users or other third parties, shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(4)  Such fees represent the fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the use of the city's public rights-of-way. 
(5)  Certification and payment of fees. Fees shall be paid on a quarterly basis for the prior quarter, and shall be due on April 1, July 1, October 1, and the first business day of January of each year. Projections from the prior year shall be adjusted in the first quarter in the following year. On or before each quarterly payment date, all franchisees shall provide a certificate, signed and attested to by appropriate corporate officers or authorized corporate representative which verifies the franchisee's gross revenue for the prior quarter. 
(6)  Quarterly reports. On or before each quarterly payment date, each telecommunications franchisee and revocable licensee shall submit a quarterly report to the mayor's office of telecommunication to indicate reasonable documentation of the accuracy of the franchise fees or license fees paid. 
(7)  Inspection and audit. Each franchisee shall submit a certificate on a quarterly basis verifying and reporting its gross revenue to the city. The city reserves the right to audit or review the accuracy of the reports submitted for the purpose of insuring compliance with this article. Such audits or reviews shall be conducted by an auditor chosen by the city. In cases where the franchisee has failed to submit a certificate verifying gross revenue for two consecutive quarters the costs of such audit shall be borne by the franchisee. In addition, should cases where the audit or review reveals an understatement of' gross revenue more than five percent by the franchisee, all reasonable costs and expenses of such audit or review shall be borne by the franchisee and the franchisee shall make full payment of the relevant obligation, including interest at the legal rate set forth in O.C.G.A. Section 7-4-2. 
Provided further that if, as a result of any audit or review conducted by the franchisee, it is determined that the franchisee has overpaid franchise fees to the city, then the city shall make full refund of the overpayment, including interest at the legal rate set forth in O.C.G.A. Section 7-4-2, which may be in the form of a credit on future franchise fees, and the city has received an underpayment of franchise fees, city shall receive the legal rate of' interest on all such underpayments. 
(8)  In the event the franchise fee is passed through by a telecommunications provider to the citizens of Atlanta as a cost of providing service, such fees shall be labeled as City of Atlanta right-of-way franchise fee. 
(i)  Franchisee and revocable licensee shall report linear miles, linear feet, cable-run, and fiber-run miles, depth and width of all manholes and handholes for their use and occupancy in the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2001-82, §§ 1, 5—7, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 2003-72, §§ 4, 5, 6-8-03) 
Sec. 138-128. - Compliance with rules; licenses required. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of this article, the city may adopt rules, policies and requirements to carry out the purposes and provisions of this article. Each applicant, franchisee and licensee shall comply with such rules, policies and requirements. 
(b)  No person shall construct or install any equipment in the streets to provide telecommunications services without first obtaining such permits or other authorizations as may be required by the city. Such permits which may be required are described more particularly in article II of this chapter. Neither the fees paid in conjunction with obtaining such permits, nor any penalties imposed for the failure to obtain necessary permits or for any other purpose shall be construed as franchise fees nor shall they be used to set off franchise fees or additional permit fees owed by the franchisee or licensee. No permits or other authorizations for such construction or installation shall be issued prior to the granting of a franchise or a revocable license pursuant to this article or such other authorization as may be required by applicable law. 
(c)  No person shall construct or install equipment in the streets without clear identification of all construction maintenance sites, vehicles, metal plates, and other obstacles with the name and phone number of the franchisee or revocable licensee. 
(d)  The department of public works may schedule monthly meetings with the franchisee and revocable licensee for the purpose of reviewing the as-built plans as required in section 138-65. Franchisees and licensees who seek to perform construction activity in the right-of-way shall be required to attend the meetings. 
(e)  Each day during which a franchisee or licensee is in violation of the permitting requirements shall constitute a separate violation. 
(f)  No permit shall be issued by the city pursuant to chapter 138 Code of Ordinances to any entity that is not a party to a current franchise agreement or revocable license agreement with the City of Atlanta, or is not current in the payment of any franchise fees, revocable license fees, or any other fees imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2001-98, § 1, 12-12-01) 
Sec. 138-129. - Submission of application for franchise or revocable license. 
(a)  Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted to the office of the mayor and shall be in such form and request such information as the mayor may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  The mayor may require that an application contain the following information with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license and such other information, documentation, and items with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license as the mayor shall deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with applicable law: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person to be contacted concerning the application; 
(2)  A description of the telecommunications services proposed to be provided, including, without limitation, a description of facilities and equipment to be located within the streets; 
(3)  A description of the proposed franchise area or in the case of a revocable license, the specifically identified streets proposed to be used; 
(4)  A proposed construction schedule and sequence; 
(5)  An application fee, which shall consist of a one time non-refundable fee of $10,000.00 for franchise applicants and $5,000.00 for revocable license applicants; 
(6)  Indicia of ownership of the applicant and identification of all affiliated persons; 
(7)  A statement from the applicant that they will abide by all applicable laws; and 
(8)  Such other information as the mayor may determine to be necessary or appropriate to manage the public right-of-way and ensure compliance with this article, subject to applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-130. - Compliance with all legal requirements. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-131. - Factors for review of application. 
(a)  In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise or revocable license, the city may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and necessary to ensure proper management of the public right-of-way and compliance with this article, provided such factors are consistent with applicable law, including without limitation: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city; 
(2)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise or the revocable license; 
(3)  Any services or uses of the streets that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise or revocable license; and the adverse impact of the proposed franchise or revocable license on the efficient use of the streets at present and in the future; 
(4)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all lawful conditions, limitations, requirements and policies with respect to the franchise or the revocable license; 
(5)  The adequacy of the terms and conditions of the proposed franchise or revocable license agreement to protect the public interest, consistent with applicable law; and 
(6)  Any other factors or considerations that the city has a lawful right to consider and that are deemed pertinent by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-132. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and revocable licenses and determine whether a franchise or revocable license should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. 
(b)  Consistent with applicable law, the city may develop and implement policies and requirements to ensure that the streets have sufficient capacity to reasonably accommodate existing and future uses in a rational and efficient manner. In evaluating an applicant for a franchise or revocable license, the city may consider an applicant's proposals for addressing capacity needs and compliance with city policies and requirements. 
(c)  Consistent with applicable law, upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city, the city may grant or deny the franchise or revocable license, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise or revocable license is granted. If the application is denied, a written determination shall be prepared which shall include the reasons for denial. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-133. - Agreement required. 
If an application is complete and the applicant otherwise complies with applicable law, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city, including the provisions of this article, the mayor shall enter into negotiations with the applicant to determine whether such applicant and the city are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable license in accordance with section 138-134 and 138-135 of this article. The proposed agreement, the application, and such other information as the mayor determines is appropriate or may request shall be forwarded to the city council for its review and consideration. The city may reject any application which is incomplete or otherwise fails to comply with applicable law, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-134. - Terms and conditions of franchise. 
(a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise and/or in a separate written agreement. A franchise granted pursuant to this article shall not become effective until said separate ordinance becomes effective and any separate agreement is executed by both parties. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
(1)  The term of the franchise which shall not exceed five years with the option of the city to renew for two additional one year terms: 
(2)  The franchise area and the telecommunications services to be offered; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or cancelled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, which shall be required to ensure the performance of the franchisee's obligations under the franchise; 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities located in the right-of-way and records of the franchisee in order to ensure compliance with this article and the franchise; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the franchisee; 
(8)  The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records of those matters pertinent to its obligations under the franchise, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight of the franchisee by the city; 
(12)  Provisions to monitor changes in control of the franchisee and in the event the franchisee assigns, sells or otherwise disposes of the entirety of the rights and privileges in a franchise agreement, the assignee shall he obligated to negotiate an acceptable franchise agreement with the city. 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the franchisee, including the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise, including compliance with any coordinated construction schedules as may be established by the commissioner of the department of public works; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of this article and to effectively manage the public right-of-way, consistent with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01; Ord. No. 2003-72, §§ 3, 7, 6-8-03) 
Sec. 138-135. - Terms and conditions of revocable license. 
(a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any revocable license granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the revocable license and/or in a separate written agreement. A revocable license granted pursuant to this article shall not become effective until the separate ordinance granting the license becomes effective and any separate written agreement is executed by both parties. Such separate ordinance and/or written agreement shall address the same subjects listed in section 138-129 of this article subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  The revocable license shall be for an initial term not to exceed five years from the date that the ordinance granting the revocable license becomes effective with the option of the city to renew not to exceed two additional one years; 
(2)  The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the city for cause; and 
(3)  The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses previously granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not authorize the occupation and use of more than 500 linear feet of specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the streets does not involve the offering or provision of telecommunications services to any person in the city. 
(b)  In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a telecommunications provider to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified in sections 138-127(b)(1) and section 138-135(a)(3). then such telecommunications provider must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this article, and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-136. - Renewal applications. 
(a)  A franchisee or licensee that desires to renew its franchise or license under this article shall, not less than six months nor more than 12 months before expiration of the current franchise or license, file an application with the city for renewal of its franchise. Any information required pursuant to the specific agreement between the city and the franchisee or licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-137. - Renewal determinations. 
(a)  Upon receiving an application for renewal, the mayor may solicit comments from the relevant city departments and the public at large by undertaking the following: 
(1)  Notifying the commissioner of the department of public works and any other relevant city department that the application has been filed. The departments may provide written comments regarding the past performance of the franchisee or licensee. 
(2)  Presenting the matter for public comment before the city utilities committee. 
(b)  Within 120 days after receiving a complete application for renewal in accordance with section 138-136, infra, the mayor shall issue a written recommendation to city council recommending the grant or denial of the renewal application in whole or in part. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal. These reasons may involve the same as those considered in granting the original franchise or license, in addition to the applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and other chapters referenced herein, and with the terms of its franchise or revocable license. Comments from the public or from other city departments as described in section (a) above may serve as evidence of the franchisee or licensee's compliance or noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-138. - Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal. 
No franchise or revocable license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the franchisee's or licensee's performance of the franchise or license, or of the requirements of this chapter or of other chapters referenced herein, have been cured, or until a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the franchisee has been approved by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-139. - Surety, security fund, and bonding requirements. 
Each franchise and revocable license agreement shall contain surety, security fund, insurance, and bonding requirements that have been determined by the risk manager to be sufficient to protect the city from occurrences and omissions which may occur during the construction and maintenance activities conducted by the franchisee or licensee in the streets. 
Sec. 138-140. - Franchise fee for state or local issued cable or video franchise. 
There shall be imposed a uniform franchise fee of five percent of the gross revenues on any cable or video franchisee from services provided within the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05(08-O-0192), § 1, 2-12-08) 
Sec. 138-140.1. - Authorized designee. 
The city hereby authorizes the commissioner of the department of public works, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the secretary of state and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05(08-O-0192), § 1, 2-12-08) 
Secs. 138-141—138-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 138-161. - Severability. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed or operate to be more stringent than the conditions or requirements imposed by the Georgia Department of Transportation for utilities and similar service providers with facilities in the state rights-of-way. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this article is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-162. - Coordination and interpretation. 
In the coordination and interpretation of this article, the provisions of this article shall prevail over any conflicting provisions in the franchise agreement. In the coordination, interpretation, or enforcement of this article, whenever the singular, plural, masculine, feminine or neuter is employed, such references shall be deemed interchangeable whenever necessary to preserve the form and intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-22, § 2, 3-14-01) 
Sec. 138-163. - Amendments to article. 
Any franchises or revocable licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to all amendments to this article effected during the term of the franchise or revocable license. 
Secs. 138-164—138-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CITY HALL[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— It should be noted that section 2 of Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), provides, " The City currently charges a rental fee for the City Hall Old Council Chambers in the amount of $1,500 for six hours. It currently charges a rental fee for the City Hall Atrium in the amount of $2,500 for six hours and this ordinance does not increase the current fee structure." 

Sec. 138-186. - Applicability of previous articles. 
Article I through Article V of this chapter, including the definitions and the department of purview, shall not apply to this Article VI. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12) 
Sec. 138-187. - City Hall defined. 
For purposes of this article, "City Hall" shall mean all interior areas of City Hall, including without limitation the building located at 68 Mitchell Street, the building located at 55 Trinity Avenue, the connecting hallway between the two, the entrance area in the Mitchell Street building immediately inside the exterior doors, the entrance area in the Trinity Street building in which security screening is located, all meeting rooms, office suites, Council Chambers, Old Council Chambers, the cafeteria, the Atrium, the underground parking garage, and any completely enclosed outdoor areas including the roof terrace on the fifth floor of the Trinity Street building. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12) 
Sec. 138-188. - Department of purview. 
The commissioner of the department of enterprise assets management may adopt appropriate rules and regulations governing the use and operation of City Hall. In addition, the commissioner of the department of enterprise assets management may issue rental permits for use of the Atrium located on the first floor of the Trinity Street building, and Old Council Chambers located on the third floor of the Mitchell Street building, provided that the rules for obtaining permits are set forth in written policies and procedures made available to the public and applied uniformly. Issuance of permits shall not be based on or influenced by the race, color, creed, religion, gender, age, disability status, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation or gender identity of the applicant and/or the event participants. In addition, issuance of permits shall not be based on the identity, associational relationships or viewpoints of the applicant and/or the event participants, or on the viewpoints that may be expressed during the event. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 6, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 138-189. - Rules of conduct for City Hall. 
In addition to any rules and regulations established by the commissioner of the department of enterprise assets management, the following conduct shall be prohibited in City Hall: 
(a)  Shouting, screaming or yelling, where the person's voice is plainly audible to anyone at a distance of 50 feet or more. 
(b)  Emitting or creating any sound, including sound created by musical instruments, where the sound is plainly audible to anyone at a distance of 50 feet or more. 
(c)  Using a sound-amplifying or voice-amplifying apparatus. 
(d)  Blocking any of the City Hall entrance/exit doors. 
(e)  Obstructing other persons from freely entering or leaving City Hall, or any of the City Hall meeting rooms, suites, offices or common areas. 
(f)  Carrying or possessing any sign, poster, plaque or notice unless it is constructed solely of a cloth, vinyl, paper or flexible cardboard material no greater than one-quarter inch in thickness. 
(g)  Carrying or possessing any length of lumber, wood or wood lath unless it is one-fourth inch or less in thickness and two inches or less in width. If not generally rectangular in shape, the object shall not exceed three-quarters inch in its thickest dimension. Both ends of the length of lumber, wood or wood lath shall be blunt and shall not be pointed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 6, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 138-190. - Exceptions to rules of conduct. 
Exceptions to the rules of conduct set forth in section 138-189 are as follows: 
(a)  The rules of conduct shall not apply where the prohibited activity is performed by a city official or employee acting in her/his official capacity, where the activity is executed as part of her/his official city duties. 
(b)  The rules of conduct shall not apply where the prohibited activity is performed by a city contractor or subcontractor, and is associated and performed in conjunction with the scope of work set forth in the applicable city contract. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12) 
Sec. 138-191. - Rental of City Hall Atrium and Old Council Chambers. 
(a)  Members of the public may receive a rental permit for use of the City Hall Atrium and/or City Hall Old Council Chambers for the purpose of conducting life cycle event ceremonies such as weddings, and for having receptions and parties, provided that these events begin after 5:30 p.m. on weekdays or on weekends or holidays. Rental permits shall be applied for pursuant to the written rules established by the commissioner of the department of enterprise assets management, as described in section 138-188 above. 
(b)  Persons who have obtained a rental permit for use of the City Hall Atrium or Old Council Chambers may speak, emit or create sound louder than established in section 138-189, and may use one or more sound-amplifying or voice-amplifying apparatuses, but only if the conduct occurs at the time and location set forth in the permit, and only if the permit explicitly allows the conduct at the time it is occurring. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 6, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 138-192. - Additional rules for meeting rooms and press conference locations. 
(a)  In addition to applying the rules of conduct set forth in section 138-189 above, any city official, employee or city entity holding a meeting (including without limitation a hearing or press conference) in City Hall may establish additional conduct rules for the meeting, provided that: 
(1)  The meeting is run by a city official or employee in her/his official capacity, or is a meeting of a city-created agency, board, or committee; and 
(2)  The meeting is open to the public; and 
(3)  The additional rules are applied uniformly; and 
(4)  The rules are not based on the identity, associational relationships, or viewpoints of any speaker, and are not based upon any of the protected categories listed in section 138-188 above. 
(b)  For any meeting that fits the description set forth in subsection (a)(1) and (a)(2) above, the city official or city entity holding the meeting shall have the right to waive section 138-89(c) above for the sole purpose of allowing use of microphones. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12) 
Sec. 138-193. - Rules of conduct for City Hall suites and offices. 
In addition to applying the rules of conduct set forth in section 138-189 above, a department head or her/his designee may establish additional rules of conduct for all offices and suites where the department is housed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12) 
Sec. 138-194. - City Hall access during evenings, weekends and holidays. 
(a)  Standard operating hours of City Hall are weekdays from 8:00 a.m. to 5:30 pm. 
(b)  Entrance to City Hall during weekday non-standard operating hours, weekends and holidays observed by city government shall be limited to: 
(1)  A city employee who presents a valid city-issued photo identification card to the City Hall entrance security guard; 
(2)  A non-city employee or a city employee without a city identification card accompanied by a city employee who presents a valid city-issued photo identification card; 
(3)  A contractor hired by the city to perform maintenance, repairs or improvements at City Hall, provided that the department of enterprise assets management issues written notification to the City Hall entrance security guard allowing admission, and provided that the contractor produces valid photo identification to the security personnel; 
(4)  A person attending a meeting that is being held by the city, or by a city-created agency, board, or committee, where the meeting is open to the public; 
(5)  A person attending an event being held in the City Hall Atrium or Old Council Chambers, after providing valid photo identification. 
(c)  With the exception of city employees or people accompanied by them, and contractors providing services at City Hall, any person in City Hall during weekday non-standard operating hours, weekends and. holidays must be at a meeting open to the public or at an event in the City Hall Atrium or Old Council Chambers. The visitors may not be in any other area of City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 2012-11(12-O-0362), § 1, 3-28-12; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 6, 8-29-18 ) 
Secs. 138-195—138-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 1, adopted Sept. 26, 2006, effective Jan. 2, 2007, repealed art. VII in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to parades as enacted by Code 1977; as subsequently amended. The user is directed to chapter 142 of this Code for similar provisions. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of repeal. 

Secs. 138-231—138-255. - Reserved. 
Chapter 142 - OUTDOOR EVENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, approved Sept. 26, 2006, added ch. 142 to read as herein set out. Section 14 of said ord. provided for an effective date of Jan. 2, 2007. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 142-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Outdoor Events Chapter." 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Applicant means the individual requesting a permit for an outdoor event, and the organization, corporation, or other group on whose behalf the individual is requesting the permit. 
(b)  Application means a written request on a form or forms supplied by the special events manager that sets forth the information required to be provided by this chapter. 
(c)  Application fee means the non-refundable fee paid in connection with an application made pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  Banner means a long strip of cloth, paper, or other potentially flammable material hung from or attached to an object, used for decoration, advertising, or to provide information. 
(e)  Chief of staff, unless otherwise designated by the mayor, refers to the chief of staff of the office of the mayor. 
(f)  City means the City of Atlanta. 
(g)  City representative means any city official or employee providing input to the office of special events regarding whether a particular applicant shall be granted an outdoor event permit. 
(h)  City-sponsored event means an outdoor event that meets one of the two following criteria: 
(1)  An outdoor event that is executed entirely by the city and/or its contractors and/or consultants, and that is fully financed by the city and/or by sponsors obtained by the city; or 
(2)  An outdoor event: 
(a)  that is executed entirely by an entity that assumes complete or partial responsibility for maintaining and/or improving a city park or facility for one year or greater at no cost to the city, pursuant to a written agreement with the city, or an outdoor event that is executed by said entity's contractors and/or consultants; and 
(b)  where all of the net proceeds from the outdoor event are utilized by the entity to perform maintenance and/or improvement of a city park or facility. 
An outdoor event application must indicate whether the applicant deems the event to be city-sponsored, and if so, must provide a written explanation of how the outdoor event meets one of the two criteria set forth in this subsection (h). The chief of staff shall review the written explanation and shall be the final decision maker as to whether the outdoor event is approved as being city-sponsored. Where the chief of staff determines that the outdoor event meets one of the criteria set forth in this subsection (h), s/he must approve the outdoor event as city-sponsored. Where the chief of staff determines that the outdoor event does not meet either of the criteria set forth in this subsection (h), s/he must deny the outdoor event's request of being deemed city-sponsored. 
(i)  Emergency services and fire safety plan means a plan submitted by the applicant setting forth its plans for providing emergency services, including fire suppression, fire safety, and emergency medical services, to public property and private property, and to performers, entertainers, exhibitors, speakers, attendees, or other persons at the outdoor event. 
(j)  Fee or fees, where the term is not specified as being a particular type of fee, means the amount of money required to be paid by an applicant pursuant to this chapter for the issuance of a permit. Examples of such fees include, without limitation, the application fee, permit fee, and sub-permit fee. 
(k)  Gated park event means an outdoor gathering that is located in a city park and that is gated, thereby closing a portion of the park to the public and excluding members of the public, and for which a ticket and/or admission fee is required to attend the gathering. 
(l)  Host is the person, either on behalf of her/himself, or on behalf of an organization, corporation, or other group, who will be in charge of the outdoor event and will be responsible for the conduct that occurs during the outdoor event. 
(m)  Outdoor event means any gathering of people that occurs completely or partially outdoors, that occurs on public property and/or private property, that is not a gated park event, as defined above, and that either: 
(1)  Lasts for 90 or fewer consecutive days; or 
(2)  Lasts for 13 or fewer consecutive weeks, where the outdoor gathering occurs on no fewer than three days out of each consecutive week; or 
(3)  Is a series. 
(n)  Overnight event means a permitted large gathering or outdoor festival (as defined in this chapter 142), or any portion of a permitted large gathering or outdoor festival that occurs in a city park after 11:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m., and that meets the criteria set forth in section 110-75(c) of this Code of Ordinances. Where the outdoor festival or large gathering begins prior to 11:00 p.m. and/or continues after 6:00 a.m., the "overnight event" shall be only that portion of the festival or gathering that occurs between 11:00—6:00. The term "overnight event" does not include outdoor festivals or large gatherings that occur at the Outdoor Activity Center or Lake Allatoona. 
(o)  Permit means the written authorization from the city allowing an applicant to hold the outdoor event or perform the function for which s/he filed an application. 
(p)  Permit fee means the amount of money required to be paid pursuant to this chapter for the issuance of a permit to hold an outdoor event, where such fee shall be assessed so that the city can recover the direct and indirect costs associated with the outdoor event, but the permit fee shall not exceed the administrative costs of regulation. 
(q)  Private property means all property that is located within the boundaries of the city, except for property that is owned by the city or by a governmental entity that is not required to adhere to the city's laws. 
(r)  Public property means property that is owned by the city. 
(s)  Restoration means the work required after an outdoor event to bring city property to the condition it was in immediately prior to the outdoor event. Restoration includes but is not limited to trash collection and general clean-up services where such services exceed one hour, repairing damaged property, and/or replacing damaged items or property if the chief of staff finds that such replacement is necessary. Restoration includes work performed only if the work arises from the outdoor event, though it shall not include work necessitated by the presence or actions of counter-demonstrators. 
(t)  SEM shall mean the special events manager of the office of the mayor. 
(u)  Series means a sequence of gatherings occurring on fewer than three days per week of consecutive weeks for no longer than two months, where each gathering occurs completely or partially outdoors on public property or private property, involves identical activities at an identical location, and where each gathering, if considered alone, would meet the definition of a Class D or E outdoor festival, as defined in section 142-51 and 142-59 of this chapter. 
(v)  Solid waste fee means the amount of money to be paid by an applicant to reimburse the city for solid waste services provided for an outdoor event. 
(w)  Sub-permit means any permit or written approval that authorizes some component of an outdoor event, such as, but not limited to, an electrical permit or an alcohol permit. The full list of sub-permits is set forth in article IV of this chapter. 
(x)  Supplemental services means those services that are provided by the city because a host fails to provide the services set forth in her/his permit application or sub-permit application(s), including without limitation adequate ambulance coverage. In addition, supplemental services means those services that are provided by the city because a permitted outdoor festival is larger than anticipated, such that the class of outdoor festival permitted is smaller than the class of outdoor festival that actually occurred. Supplemental services include services that are provided by the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department and/or the Atlanta Police Department because the activities of the outdoor event, including without limitation the activities of an outdoor event vendor(s), violate city, state, or federal law, including without limitation the city's fire code. Supplemental services also include those services that are provided by the city because a host fails to meet the requirements of the outdoor event permit or related sub-permits, including without limitation time of ending the outdoor event, time of loading out all outdoor event equipment, and timely removal of portable restrooms. 
(y)  Supplemental services fee means the total cost that a host or applicant must pay to reimburse the city in full for the city's expenditures for supply of supplemental services, as defined above. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2013-62(13-O-1243), § 2, 11-27-13 ) 
Sec. 142-3. - Scope. 
(a)  The outdoor events chapter is intended to be the framework within which all outdoor events held in the city are approved and regulated. The outdoor events chapter applies to all outdoor gatherings located within the city, regardless of whether the gathering is held on public property or private property, except that the requirements of the chapter do not apply to those outdoor gatherings discussed in subsections (d), (e), (f), (g), and (h) below. The outdoor events chapter does not apply to events that are being held exclusively indoors. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to hold an outdoor event without complying with the procedures set forth in this chapter, except that where an event is city-sponsored, as determined by the chief of staff, the requirements of this chapter regarding payment of fees, timing of application submission, insurance and indemnification shall not apply. 
(c)  Additional outdoor event operating guidelines, policies and procedures may be developed and adopted administratively and enforced by the city. 
(d)  Outdoor gatherings with a duration of greater than 90 consecutive days, or outdoor gatherings with a duration of greater than 13 consecutive weeks, where the gathering occurs on at least three days of each consecutive week, shall not be deemed an outdoor event. Such outdoor gatherings, if located on public property or private property, require a special use permit, which is obtained from the city's bureau of planning. Where said gathering requiring a special use permit occurs in a city park, the bureau of planning shall work collaboratively with the bureau of parks to determine whether a special use permit should be issued. 
(e)  A gated park event shall not be deemed an outdoor event for purposes of this chapter. Gated park events shall be regulated by the commissioner of the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs, in consultation with the police chief and the fire chief. The commissioner of the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs shall approve only those gated park events that certify that they will not deny admission to the gated park event on the grounds of race, color, creed, religion, gender, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation or gender identity. In addition, the host of a gated park event will need to submit plans to the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department to receive a maximum occupancy, will need to have an internal security plan (as defined in City Code section 142-51) approved by the police department, and will need to obtain any applicable sub-permits set forth in article IV of this chapter. 
(f)  The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the use of a sports facility located on city property, including without limitation a ball field, tennis court, pool, or golf course, for the purpose for which the facility was intended, as reasonably determined by the commissioner of the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs. Rules regarding the use of such sports facilities, including making reservations for the facilities, shall be established in writing by the commissioner for the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs, and said rules shall be placed in the department's policies and procedures manual, provided to the SEM, and provided to the public upon request. 
(g)  The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to events being held exclusively on a college or university campus. City right-of-way, regardless of its location, shall not be deemed to be part of a college or university campus. 
(h)  The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any event being held exclusively on any of the following city-owned properties, because the properties are the subject of a lease or management/operating agreement with a private party, and the lease or agreement contemplates the private party's ability to hold outdoor events on the property: The Chastain Amphitheater; the Chastain Horse Park; the Atlanta Botanical Garden; the Atlanta Zoo; the Piedmont Park Multi-purpose complex; any other city-owned property that is the subject of a lease or management/operating agreement, whereby the lease or agreement explicitly exempts outdoor events on the property from the requirements of the city's outdoor events chapter. 
(i)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as repealing other sections of the Atlanta Code of Ordinances requiring the application for and issuance of permits or licenses. Those permits or licenses must be applied for separately in accordance with the Atlanta Code of Ordinances and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-4. - Purpose and intent. 
The City of Atlanta finds that an ever-increasing number of demands are being made upon city resources and infrastructure by applications to hold outdoor festivals and other outdoor events in the city streets, sidewalks, and parks. In addition, large outdoor gatherings on private property require the deployment of city resources. In order to conserve and allocate the city's resources, both in terms of personnel and of the natural areas and infrastructure, and to adequately protect public safety and the safety, health and welfare of outdoor event participants, neighboring property owners, residents and businesses, the city finds that it is necessary to regulate the use of the city's parks and streets by those desiring to hold outdoor events on public property, and to regulate large outdoor events on private property. 
The intent of the city in adopting this outdoor events chapter is to insure that the city will have adequate advance notice of outdoor events. The city also wishes to work cooperatively with the applicant in order to properly plan for and allocate the city services that will be needed, such as security, solid waste and traffic control. The intent is also to insure that the city's parks are protected from extreme wear and tear, by limiting the number and type of events held in parks. To this end the city has authorized the creation of festival districts, so that the burden of providing a venue for outdoor festivals does not fall disproportionately upon certain districts to their detriment. 
It is also the intent of the city, and the purpose of this chapter, that, insofar as is possible, the costs to the city in providing services to outdoor festivals are recouped, although it is not the intention that the cost of outdoor festival permit fees be used for revenue production. The city desires to promote and encourage events for the greater good and cultural diversity of the city, and to abate the cost thereof, where the amount of the abatement shall be determined regardless of content, message or host, in accordance with the terms of this chapter. The costs to be recouped for outdoor festivals include, but are not limited to: personnel, equipment and supplies, wastewater, utilities, park and public right-or-way maintenance (including long-term degradation), and park monitoring. The city also intends to recoup a small percentage of the city's administrative costs for other outdoor events. 
Lastly, the intent of this chapter is to simplify the process that the public uses to obtain outdoor event permits. The outdoor events chapter requires all applicants to provide all application information to the SEM only, regardless of the type of outdoor event being held. If approval is required from other city departments prior to granting the permit, it shall be the responsibility of the SEM to obtain that approval or disapproval. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-5. - Responsible city department. 
The SEM shall be responsible for overseeing the issuance of all outdoor event permits. For a park facility reservation permit (section 142-102) or a large gathering that occurs in a park (section 142-104(b)), an applicant shall provide all information and items necessary to receive an outdoor event permit to either the SEM or the department of park, recreation, and cultural affairs. For all other outdoor events, the applicant shall provide all information and items necessary to receive an outdoor event permit to the SEM, with the exception of information required to obtain an alcohol license, as set forth in section 142-32(c) below. The specific types of outdoor events, and the information required for the permitting of each, is set forth in the remaining articles of this chapter. The SEM shall also be responsible for carrying out the other functions of this chapter, including but not limited to processing the application and maintaining any records or forms needed for such processing. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-6. - Penalties for violations of this chapter. 
Any person or organization violating the requirements of this chapter 142 shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(a)  Any person who shall conduct, host, or sponsor an outdoor event for which a proper permit has not been obtained, shall be responsible for paying all costs that would have been owed had the outdoor event been permitted or properly permitted. The chief of staff shall determine what type of outdoor event occurred based upon observations of a member of the Atlanta Police Department who observed the outdoor event. The chief of staff shall issue a bill for the total amount owed, and the bill shall be paid in full within 30 days of receipt of the bill. The bill shall include: 
(1)  An amount equivalent to what the person would have been assessed for the issuance of an outdoor event permit as set forth below in this chapter. The assessment shall be equivalent to the sum of: (a) the application fee; (b) the appropriate permit fee based upon the type of outdoor event, and based upon the number of persons attending the outdoor event, but only if such factor is normally a factor in determining the permit fee for the type of outdoor event that occurred; and (c) the sub-permit fee(s) if applicable. For purposes of determining the amount of attendees at the outdoor event, such determination shall be made by the chief of staff, based upon observations of a member of the Atlanta Police Department who observed the outdoor event; and 
(2)  The cost of solid waste services, maintenance services, services required to remove human waste and refuse, supplemental services, and other restoration services. 
(3)  An amount equivalent to the cost of providing the number and quality of off-duty law enforcement officers and private security guards that would have been required for the outdoor event, if any. If the outdoor event is an outdoor festival, the number and quality of required off-duty law enforcement officers and private security guards shall be determined as set forth in section 142-55 below. The cost of hiring these officers and guards shall be determined by the Atlanta Police Chief. In doing so, the Atlanta Police Chief or her/his designee shall contact a company licensed by the State of Georgia Board of Private Detective and Security Agencies, that employs such security officers, and gather the cost of contracting for such officers from the company at the time of the outdoor event. 
(4)  An amount equivalent to the cost of providing the number of fire marshals that would have been required for the outdoor event, if any, as determined by the Chief of the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department. In addition, the bill shall include the cost of any violations of the Atlanta Fire Code arising from the outdoor event, as determined by the Chief of the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department, or her/his designee. 
(b)  Any person who shall conduct, sponsor, host, or promote an outdoor event for which a permit has not been obtained as required by this article, shall have committed and may be charged with a misdemeanor. Upon conviction such person shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8(c) of this Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Any host who fails to abide by the terms of the permit, or any related sub-permit, and who fails to correct her/his deviation from said terms upon oral or written notice by the city, shall have committed and may be charged with a misdemeanor. Upon conviction such person shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8(c) of this Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  Any person who shall fail to timely pay the bill described in subsection (a) of this section shall have committed and may be charged with a misdemeanor that shall be continuous with respect to time for each day that the bill is not paid. Each day that the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and upon conviction, the person shall be subjected to the penalties of section 1-8(c) of this Code of Ordinances for each offense. 
(e)  The provisions of this section 142-6 shall apply to any person who obtains a large gathering or private large gathering permit, as defined below in sections 142-103 and 142-115 respectively, or any other type of outdoor event permit, other than an "outdoor festival" permit, (as defined below in section 142-51(h)), where the outdoor event actually has more than 250 attendees on public property, or more than 500 attendees on private property, and meets the requirements set forth in sections 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 of the definition of outdoor festival; except that the failure to obtain an outdoor festival permit shall be deemed a misdemeanor only if the person obtaining the outdoor event permit should have reasonably expected that the number of attendees would exceed 250 people on public property or 500 people on private property. For events that are publicized to the general public by fliers and/or radio advertisements and/or other types of advertisements, the person obtaining the outdoor event permit will automatically be deemed as having a reasonable expectation that the number of attendees would exceed 250 people on public property or 500 people on private property. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-7. - Timeframes and deadlines. 
Where a timeframe or deadline established in this chapter results in an item being due on a weekend day or holiday, the item shall be due on the business day immediately following said weekend day or holiday. 
The timeframes and deadlines established in this chapter that pertain to the city only, and not to the public, are administrative timeframes and deadlines only. In the event that one of these inner-city timeframes or deadlines is violated, such violation shall not impact the rights or remedies of a citizen or other person outside of city government. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Secs. 142-8—142-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPROVAL AND DENIAL OF OUTDOOR EVENT APPLICATIONS 

Sec. 142-11. - Submission of application by applicant/authority and responsibilities of the SEM once application received. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the chief of staff shall be charged with the responsibility and authority to determine whether a particular applicant shall be granted an outdoor event permit in the time, manner and place proposed; whether the proposed time, manner, and place of the outdoor event must be modified, according to criteria established by this chapter; or, whether such permit shall be denied altogether. Where this chapter requires other city representatives to approve the application before the permit is granted, the SEM shall be responsible for obtaining that approval or disapproval. 
(b)  An applicant shall timely provide all information required for obtaining a permit to the SEM, except that: 
(1)  Where an outdoor event requires an alcohol permit, and the alcohol server does not already possess an alcohol license, the alcohol server will need to obtain an alcohol license from the Atlanta Police Department; and 
(2)  Applications for a parks facility reservation, as defined in section 142-102 below, and/or a large gathering, as defined in section 142-103 below, to be held exclusively in a city park, can be submitted either to the SEM or to the bureau of parks. In those instances where such applications are submitted to the SEM, the SEM shall forward the entire application to the bureau of parks for handling, processing, and issuance of a permit where appropriate, except that sub-permit applications shall be retained and processed by the SEM, with a copy of the sub-permit applications sent to the bureau of parks for informational purposes only. Where parks facility reservations and/or park large gathering permits are issued on a first come, first served basis, the time that an application is received shall be based upon the time that the application is received in the bureau of parks only. When such applications are submitted to the SEM, the SEM must forward the application to the bureau of parks within one business day of receiving the application. After the application has been fully processed by the bureau of parks, the entire application package shall be sent to the SEM for informational and calendaring purposes, and the SEM shall maintain the outdoor events file. 
(c)  Where an outdoor event requires one or more sub-permits prior to the issuance of the outdoor event permit, other than the alcohol license as described in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the applicant shall provide all sub-permit information to the SEM, or to the bureau of parks in circumstances described in sections 142-102 and 142-103(b)(2). If the applicant provides all of the sub-permit information to the SEM, or to the bureau of parks where appropriate, within the time frames set forth in this chapter, the SEM shall be responsible for forwarding the sub-permit information to the city department(s) responsible for issuing the sub-permit, and said city department(s) shall forward the sub-permit, or notice of denial of the sub-permit, to the SEM. The SEM shall provide all of the relevant information and her/his recommendation to the chief of staff. If the applicant fails to meet the time frames set forth in this chapter, the chief of staff shall deny the sub-permit. 
(d)  Where an outdoor gathering occurs during only one or two days of a week for consecutive weeks, unless it is a series, each non-consecutive day shall be deemed a separate outdoor event, but the applicant shall be required to file only one application and pay only one application fee for the entire sequence of outdoor events. The sequence shall be deemed over when there is a break in consecutive weeks, or when the sequence has lasted for 13 weeks, whichever is earlier. The applicant must pay an outdoor event permit fee and applicable sub-permit fees for each separate outdoor event. A series shall be treated as one outdoor event, and the applicant shall be required to file one application and pay one application fee, one permit fee, and one sub-permit fee for each applicable sub-permit. 
(e)  After reviewing the comments and/or decisions from all of the city officials, employees, departments and/or bureaus from whom this chapter requires such feedback, the chief of staff shall approve the permit, deny the permit, or approve the permit with modifications or upon conditions, as set forth in this chapter. If the application is approved, the chief of staff, in consultation with the heads of affected departments, or their designees, shall impose restrictions or conditions as to time, manner and place, if the chief of staff deems such restrictions as necessary. These modifications shall be made when the chief of staff and the affected departments, based upon review of the application, find compelling reasons related only to public safety, health, or the environment, or to scheduling conflicts with other permitted uses at the time or place requested. The modifications shall not be based on any of the factors set forth in subsection 142-12(b) below. The chief of staff may deny a permit based only upon the grounds set forth in this chapter, and in particular, section 142-12 below. In no event shall permit denial be based on any of the factors set forth in subsection 142-12(b) below. 
(f)  For any outdoor event whose application is due at least 30 days prior to the outdoor event, with the exception of outdoor festivals, the chief of staff shall notify an applicant in writing of her/his determination regarding the application within 15 business days after receipt of the application, but in no event later than five business days before the date of the outdoor event. For any outdoor event whose application is due less than 30 days prior to the outdoor event, the chief of staff shall notify an applicant in writing of her/his determination regarding the application no later than five business days before the date of the outdoor event or three business days after receiving the application whichever is later. For outdoor festival applications, the chief of staff shall notify the applicant in writing of her/his determination within 90 days after the receipt of the application, but in no event later than 45 days before the date of the outdoor festival. A notification shall inform the applicant of whether the applicant has been granted a permit to conduct an outdoor event without modifications to the outdoor event proposed on the application; granted a permit to conduct an outdoor event with modifications as to time, manner, or place, or with other restrictions or conditions; or has been denied a permit to conduct an outdoor event. Where the permit has been granted with modifications, the notification shall state clearly the terms of the conditions, restrictions and/or modifications. 
(1)  Procedure when outdoor event permit is approved: 
(A)  After the chief of staff approves the issuance of a permit, the applicant may obtain such permit by agreeing to accept any classification and/or conditions imposed in accordance with this chapter, including but not limited to payment of the applicable permit fee and any other fees required pursuant to this chapter. 
(B)  The applicant must have the permit, and all sub-permits, if any, present at the outdoor event during the entire duration of the outdoor event, including but not limited to set-up and clean up. Failure to abide by this provision may result in the city's, including but not limited to any Atlanta Police Department Officer's, revoking the permit and/or any sub-permit. 
(2)  Procedure when outdoor event permit request is modified or permit is denied: When the chief of staff denies a permit, s/he shall set forth in writing the reasons for such denial in as much detail as possible. When the chief of staff modifies a permit application, s/he shall, if requested by the applicant, state in writing on the permit the reasons for the modification in reasonable detail. A modification, denial or revocation based upon inadequate police resources, as described in subsections 142-12(a), (b)(3) and (i) below, shall state with specificity the reasons for the chief of staff's opinion, giving as much detail as is possible. In denying the permit, or in granting the permit with modifications, the chief of staff shall abide by the provisions of section 142-12(b) below. Where a permit for an outdoor festival is denied or modified, the chief of staff or her/his designee shall forward a copy of the written determination to the councilmember(s) of the affected district. 
(g)  Appeals. 
(1)  Any aggrieved applicant shall have the right to a hearing before the mayor or her/his designee, provided that the request for such hearing is made to the mayor within five business days after the applicant's receipt of the chief of staff's determination. The designee may be a hearing officer appointed for that purpose. The person conducting the hearing must be impartial, and must have had no involvement in the chief of staff's determination. 
(A)  Where the chief of staff's determination notice is given only by mail, the mayor shall presume that the notice was received three business days after the mailing. Determination notices given in person, hand-delivered to the applicant's address, or sent by facsimile transmission or e-mail shall be presumed to have been delivered on the date given or sent. 
(B)  Should the mayor or her/his designee believe that the chief of staff's modification or denial of the permit was based on public safety reasons, s/he shall refer the appeal to the chief of police or the fire chief, as appropriate. In such situation, the aggrieved applicant shall have a right to a hearing before the chief of police or her/his designee, or the fire chief or her/his designee, as the mayor or her/his designee deems appropriate. The person conducting the hearing must be impartial, and must have had no involvement in the chief of staff's determination. 
(2)  Appeal hearings shall be held within seven business days after the mayor's receipt of the request for a hearing. The hearing may be continued at the request of the applicant or to allow the attendance of any necessary party or witness, but only from day to day. 
(3)  The appeal hearing shall be de novo. The person conducting the hearing shall evaluate the application and the chief of staff's decision in accordance with the criteria of this chapter. 
(4)  Appeal hearings shall be informal. 
(5)  The person conducting the appeal hearing may issue her/his decision verbally at the conclusion of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision within five business days thereafter. 
The decision shall affirm or modify the chief of staff's determination. In addition, if the applicant is appealing the denial of a permit, the hearing officer shall have the right to reverse the chief of staff's determination and either grant the permit, or grant the permit with conditions. 
(6)  The written decision of the person conducting the hearing shall be the final decision of the city in the matter, and shall be subject to review by the Superior Court of Fulton County by a petition setting forth an appeal and naming the City of Atlanta as the defending party. The city shall expedite its response to such petition so as to allow the provision of a judicial determination of the matter no later than ten days prior to the date of the outdoor event, if possible. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-12. - General considerations regarding approval, denial, or revocation of an outdoor event permit. 
In determining whether to approve a permit, including but not limited to the time, manner and place requested, whether to approve the permit with modifications as to time, manner and place, or whether to deny the permit altogether, the chief of staff and any other city representative evaluating the application, shall be guided by the following criteria: 
(a)  Except as set forth in section 142-102: 
(1)  when there are competing outdoor event applications that are substantially for the same time and place, where both cannot logistically occur together, or 
(2)  when there are competing outdoor event applications that are substantially for the same time and place, each of which requires police coverage over and above the police coverage that would normally be provided in that location, and the chief of staff, in consultation with the police chief, or her/his designee, determines that there is not a sufficient quantity of Atlanta Police Department personnel to provide adequate coverage for each of the outdoor events, then the earlier or earliest of those applications that is received by the SME in a substantially completed form, accompanied by the requisite application fee, if any, shall be given priority as to the time and place requested, provided that priority as to the same time and place may be given to any outdoor event that has been permitted at such time and place for three or more occasions in the four years immediately preceding the current application. 
(b)  Non-discrimination. This provision shall apply to all aspects of permitting. Though certain sections of this chapter refer to this provision specifically, those references are for emphasis only, and do not imply that this provision does not apply to all other sections of the chapter. 
(1)  No permit shall be denied nor shall the applicant be given less favorable treatment as to time, manner, or place on account of the race, color, creed, religion, gender, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation or gender identity of the applicant and/or the participants of the outdoor event. 
(2)  No permit shall be denied nor shall the applicant be given less favorable treatment as to time, manner, or place based upon the message of the outdoor event, the content of speech of the outdoor event, nor based on the identity or associational relationships of the applicant and/or participants. 
(3)  No permit shall be denied nor shall the applicant be given less favorable treatment as to time, manner, or place on account of any assumptions or predictions as to the amount of hostility which may be aroused in the public by the content of speech or message conveyed by the outdoor event, provided that reasonable accommodation as to time, manner and place may be required in order for the city to provide the resources necessary for police protection. 
(c)  The chief of staff may deny or revoke a permit if an applicant has an outstanding debt with the city, or if the outdoor event is done on behalf of or in the name of a person, organization, corporation or other group that has an outstanding debt with the city, until such time as payment is received in full. 
(d)  The chief of staff may deny or revoke a permit if an applicant has failed to complete payment of any sums required for a previously permitted outdoor event, until such time as payment is received. Said sums shall include, without limitation, the cost of supplemental services, and the cost of restoration services, including those restoration services described in subsections (e) and (f) below, arising from the past outdoor event. In the alternative, the chief of staff may condition the granting of a new permit on the payment of amounts in arrears in connection with the previous outdoor event. The chief of staff may not require the payment of arrears for previous outdoor events unless the chief of staff or her/his designee had mailed or delivered to the applicant a demand for such payment within 60 days after the ending date of such previous outdoor event. 
(e)  The chief of staff may deny a permit to an applicant who has failed to substantially perform a cleanup plan which was made a condition of a previous permit, or who has defaulted on a previous sanitation bond in connection with a permitted outdoor event until such time as restitution is made in a manner and amount satisfactory to the chief of staff, or until a reasonable plan for correcting the past deficiency is agreed upon by the applicant and the chief of staff. This provision notwithstanding, the chief of staff shall not require the payment of arrears or restoration costs from previous outdoor events unless the chief of staff or her/his designee mailed or delivered to the host a demand for such payment or restitution within 60 days after the ending date of such previous outdoor event. 
(f)  The chief of staff may deny a permit to an applicant who caused significant damage to city streets, sidewalks, parks, and/or other city real or personal property and, at the time of submitting an application for a new outdoor event, failed to adequately repair the damage or failed to pay a bill for restoration services in full, provided that the chief of staff or her/his designee mailed or delivered to the host a demand for such repair or restoration compensation within 60 days after the ending date of such previous outdoor event. 
(g)  The chief of staff may deny or revoke a permit if the applicant has, in this city or in any other locality, violated a material condition and/or restriction of an outdoor event permit, or if the applicant's conduct regarding the outdoor event was in violation of law or local ordinance. 
(h)  The chief of staff may modify, deny or revoke a permit when, due to the scope of the outdoor event, and the number of police personnel required to provide protection and traffic control for the outdoor event, and due to the need for police personnel elsewhere in the city, the outdoor event would require the diversion of such a number of police personnel that it will be more likely than not that normal police protection elsewhere in the city cannot be provided continuously and safely for the duration of the outdoor event. 
(i)  The chief of staff may deny or revoke a permit at any time if it shall appear by competent evidence that the applicant has made a material misrepresentation or given incorrect material information on the application. Prior to such denial or revocation, the chief of staff shall notify the applicant of the evidence and provide the applicant with three business days in which to rebut said evidence in writing. 
(j)  The chief of staff may deny an outdoor event permit if the outdoor event is being held for an unlawful purpose, and/or violates a federal, state, or local law or ordinance. 
(k)  The chief of staff may deny or revoke a permit if the applicant does not receive all sub-permits required to carry out the outdoor event, as established in article IV of this chapter, or does not fulfill any or all of the other outdoor event requirements, as established in article III of this chapter. 
(l)  The chief of staff may revoke an outdoor event permit upon the applicant's violation of the rules set forth in this chapter after s/he has received the outdoor event permit. 
(m)  The chief of staff may deny or revoke an outdoor event permit when by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the chief of staff, in consultation with the police chief and/or fire chief, determines that the safety of the public or property requires revocation or denial, provided that the chief of staff shall not revoke such an outdoor event permit based on any of the factors set forth in section 142-12(b) above. 
(n)  An outdoor event permit may be revoked and an outdoor event may be terminated for public safety reasons by the chief of police and/or the fire chief, or their designees, in consultation with the chief of staff. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-13. - Retention of permit. 
The outdoor event host or her/his designee, shall be present during the entire outdoor event, and shall carry the outdoor event permit personally during the entire outdoor event, including set-up and break-down. The host shall be responsible for providing the SEM or her/his designee with the contact phone number or location of the person carrying the outdoor event permit so that the SEM may contact the permit-holder at any time during the outdoor event. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-14. - Compliance. 
The recipient of an outdoor event permit, including but not limited to the applicant and the host, shall comply with all outdoor event permit directions and conditions, and with all applicable laws and sections of this chapter, and other ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Secs. 142-15—142-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADDITIONAL OUTDOOR EVENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 142-21. - Emergency services and fire safety plan. 
(a)  The host of any outdoor event is required to provide an emergency services and fire safety plan, as that term is defined in section 142-2(i) above, for the outdoor event, and shall be required to provide and pay for firefighter, emergency medical technician, emergency medical personnel and/or ambulance service(s) for such internal emergency medical and fire fighting services. This requirement notwithstanding, no Host shall pay for any of the costs set forth in section 142-12(b)(4) above, nor for general fire services and enforcement, and emergency medical services in the vicinity of the outdoor event. 
(b)  All outdoor event applications must include an emergency services and fire safety plan sub-permit application, as established by this section and section 142-37 below. The contents of the emergency services and fire safety plan shall be determined by the anticipated number of attendees at the outdoor event, as described below. 
(c)  Applicants shall submit their emergency services and fire safety plan sub-permit application to the SEM. The SEM shall forward the sub-permit application to the fire rescue department. 
(d)  The fire rescue department shall be responsible for determining whether to approve or deny an emergency services and fire safety plan sub-permit. Said decision shall be made in writing and forwarded to the SEM, who shall provide the information to the chief of staff. For any outdoor event whose application is due at least 30 days prior to the outdoor event, the fire rescue department shall provide its determination in writing to the SEM within five business days after receipt of the application. For any outdoor event whose application is due less than 30 days prior to the outdoor event, the fire rescue department shall provide its determination, in writing, to the SEM within five business days after receipt of the application or eight business days before the date of the outdoor event, whichever is earlier. The chief of staff shall not issue an outdoor event permit until it receives written approval of the applicant's emergency services and fire safety plan from the fire rescue department. 
(e)  The emergency services and fire safety plan for outdoor events with fewer than 2,000 anticipated attendees shall generally be a commitment by the applicant to contact 911 should a medical or fire emergency arise. Should the fire rescue department determine that an outdoor event requires additional emergency provisions to ensure public safety, it will modify the submitted emergency services and fire safety plan accordingly. 
(f)  The Atlanta Fire Rescue Department shall assign one City of Atlanta Fire-Rescue Emergency Medical Technician and one City of Atlanta Fire Marshal or Fire Inspector to each outdoor event with 2,000 anticipated attendees or greater. The host shall provide each of these assignees with a phone number at which the host or her/his designee can be reached at all times throughout the outdoor event. 
(1)  The assigned emergency medical technician shall be responsible for inspecting and monitoring the emergency services being provided at the outdoor event to determine if those services are in compliance with the host's approved emergency services and fire safety plan and if the services are sufficient given the actual circumstances of the outdoor event. 
(A)  Should the emergency medical technician determine that the emergency services being provided at the outdoor event do not comply with the approved emergency services and fire safety plan, and should this determination be the outdoor event's first violation of its approved emergency services and fire safety plan, the emergency technician shall contact the Host or her/his designee and shall provide her/him with one hour in which to bring the emergency services into full compliance with the approved emergency services and fire safety plan. As soon as possible after this contact, the emergency medical technician shall prepare written detailed documentation of the name of the outdoor event contact with whom s/he spoke, the time of the conversation, the emergency medical technician's findings regarding the violation(s), and the corrective action required of the host. This written documentation shall be provided to the SEM within two business days after the conclusion of the outdoor event. 
(i)  Should the host not comply in a timely manner with the corrective action required by the emergency medical technician, the city shall provide the necessary services and may include the full cost of providing these services in a supplemental services fee. 
(ii)  Should the violation be the outdoor event's second or greater violation of its approved emergency services and fire safety plan, the city may provide the necessary services without giving the host an opportunity to take corrective action, and the city may include the full cost of providing these services in a supplemental services fee. As soon as possible after finding the violation, the emergency medical technician shall prepare written detailed documentation of the nature of the violation and the corrective action taken by the city. This written documentation shall be provided to the SEM within two business days after the conclusion of the outdoor event. 
(B)  Should the emergency medical technician determine that the emergency services being provided at the outdoor event are not sufficient given the actual circumstances of the outdoor event, s/he shall notify the host or her/his designee of such determination. The emergency medical technician, using her/his sole judgment or the judgment of her/his superiors in the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department regarding the immediacy of the need to have additional emergency services, shall determine whether to allow the host to provide additional emergency services or whether to have the city provide additional emergency services. As soon as possible after the contact with the host or her/his designee, the emergency medical technician shall prepare written detailed documentation of the name of the outdoor event contact with whom s/he spoke, the time of the conversation, the emergency medical technician's findings regarding the need for additional emergency services, the corrective action required, and who will provide the corrective action. This written documentation shall be provided to the SEM within two business days after the conclusion of the outdoor event. Where the city provides the additional emergency services, the city may include the full cost of providing these services in a supplemental services fee. 
(2)  The assigned fire marshal or fire inspector shall be responsible for inspecting and monitoring the outdoor event to determine its compliance with the Atlanta Fire Code and with the host's approved emergency services and fire safety plan. 
(A)  Where the fire marshal or fire inspector finds a violation of the Atlanta Fire Code or the approved emergency services and fire safety plan, and where the violation is the first violation of the Fire Code and/or approved emergency services and fire safety plan, the fire marshal or fire inspector shall require the violation to be remedied immediately, shall notify the host or her/his designee of the violation, and shall prepare written documentation detailing the violation, the name of the violator, the location of the violation, the corrective action taken, the name of the outdoor event host or designee contacted, and the time of the contact. Said documentation shall be provided to the SEM within two working days of the conclusion of the outdoor event. 
(B)  Where the fire marshal or fire inspector finds a violation of the Atlanta Fire Code or the approved emergency services and fire safety plan, and where the violation is not the first violation of the Fire Code and/or approved emergency services and fire safety plan, the fire marshal or fire inspector shall require the violation to be remedied immediately and shall also determine the number of additional Atlanta Fire Marshals and/or fire inspectors needed to patrol the compliance of the outdoor event with the Atlanta Fire Code and the approved emergency services and fire safety plan. The fire marshal or fire inspector shall communicate with the host or her/his designee about the violation and the need for additional support from the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department. As soon as possible after ordering the additional support, the fire marshal or inspector shall prepare written documentation regarding the violation(s) found, the facts supporting the need for additional support, and the conversation with the host or her/his designee. Said documentation shall be provided to the SEM within two working days of the conclusion of the outdoor event. The city may include the full cost of providing these additional fire marshal and/or fire inspector services in a supplemental services fee. 
(C)  Should the violator or host not comply in a timely manner with the corrective action plan required by the fire marshal or fire inspector, a stop work or stop operating order shall be given to the violator and host or her/his designee. The stop work or stop operating order shall stay in effect until the violator or host comes into full compliance. 
(g)  The emergency services and fire safety plan for outdoor events with 2,000 or greater anticipated attendees must show the following information: 
(1)  The number of off-duty fire-rescue emergency medical technicians, and/or the number of private ambulance service personnel that the applicant plans to hire. The applicant has the option of not hiring any private ambulance service personnel, but rather hiring additional off-duty fire-rescue emergency medical technicians to fulfill the role of the ambulance company personnel. 
(2)  The arrangements that the applicant has made for hiring fire-rescue emergency medical technicians, and/or private ambulance service personnel. 
(3)  The emergency services and fire safety plan must include a specific plan for fire safety for the outdoor event. This fire safety plan must include a full site plan that indicates fire department access and exit locations, whether any cooking will be used, the location of each cooking area, the types and locations of all flammable materials that will be used and/or stored, including without limitation gas, and whether pyrotechnics, fire works, or other special effects will be used. 
(A)  It is not necessary for the outdoor event to hire off-duty fire inspectors and off-duty fire marshals, except as indicated in section 142-21(f) above. However, where the applicant intends to hire such personnel, the emergency services and fire safety plan should indicate the number of off-duty fire inspectors and off-duty fire marshals that the applicant plans to hire, and the number of private fire inspectors that the applicant plans to hire. 
(i)  The fire safety plan should indicate the arrangements the applicant has made for hiring the off-duty marshals, off-duty fire inspectors, and private fire inspectors. 
(ii)  The fire safety plan must show how many of the off-duty fire safety personnel to be used for internal fire safety services are National Fire Protection Association certified Fire Inspector I and have jurisdictional authority in the area of the outdoor event. In addition, the plan should show how many of the fire safety personnel are National Board of Professional Qualifications (NPQ) certified and state certified as emergency medical technicians. 
(h)  In determining the adequacy and appropriateness of any emergency services and fire safety plan, the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department shall be guided solely by considerations of the anticipated number of attendees at the event, the location of the event, whether the event has gates or other barriers to exiting the event, the season in which the event occurs, the presence of cooking, the presence of special hazards such as fireworks displays and other pyrotechnic and special effects, past experience with this particular outdoor event, or the outdoor event's applicant or host. The Atlanta Fire Rescue Department may consider the advice and counsel of public safety personnel and other persons with expertise in handling or promoting similar events. In evaluating the emergency services and fire safety plan, the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department shall not take into account any of the factors set forth in section 142-12(b) above. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-22. - Fees. 
The specific application fees and permit fees owed for each type of permit and sub-permit are listed in the succeeding articles below. The provisions set forth in this section 142-22 apply to all outdoor events. 
(a)  Applicants must submit all application fees at the time of submitting an outdoor event application. An application shall not be deemed complete until all application fees are received. 
(b)  All fees shall be paid by money order or certified check only. The city shall not accept cash, personal or company checks to pay for such Fees. Fees paid directly to the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs may also be paid by personal check or credit card. 
(c)  The chief of staff or her/his designee shall calculate the total fees owed by the applicant, including fees assessed by the bureau of business licenses, the office of parks, the bureaus of buildings, the fire rescue department, and the office of solid waste services, as described below in this chapter 142. The applicant shall pay all fees to the SEM, except for those fees owed pursuant to section 142-22(f)(2) below in which case said fees shall be paid directly to the office of solid waste services, or unless the outdoor event is a park facility reservation (section 142-102) or a large gathering in a park (section 142-103(b)(2)), in which case the fees may also be submitted to the office of parks. Applicants may combine all fees into one money order or certified check, except that fees assessed by the fire rescue department shall be paid with a separate certified check or money order. 
(1)  The chief of staff or her/his designee shall deposit the fire fees into the fire account. All other fees shall be deposited in a manner consistent with this City Code of Ordinances, and with other ordinances passed by the Atlanta City Council. 
(2)  The chief of staff or her/his designee shall provide all departments assessing outdoor event fees with a monthly accounting of the fees collected on their behalf and with notification of the accounts into which those fees were deposited. 
(d)  No applicant shall be required to supply or pay the cost of public safety personnel necessary to provide for the protection of an outdoor event and its attendees from hostile members of the public or counter-demonstrators, or for traffic control outside the defined area of the outdoor event, or for general law enforcement in the vicinity of the outdoor event. 
(e)  Any city department or bureau that prepares a bill for the outdoor event after the outdoor event occurs shall send the billing information to the chief of staff within ten business days after the conclusion of the outdoor event. In the case of outdoor events whose duration is greater than two weeks, billing information shall be sent to the chief of staff within ten business days after the conclusion of each week of the outdoor event. The chief of staff or her/his designee shall prepare a master city bill and send it to the host. 
(f)  Solid waste, restoration, and supplemental service fees. 
(1)  All outdoor event applications must provide information regarding the number of people expected at the outdoor event, and the city solid waste services requested by the applicant, if any. 
(2)  Section 142-40(a) sets forth the circumstances under which an applicant must receive a solid waste sub-permit. Where a solid waste sub-permit is required, the applicant may obtain solid waste services from a private entity or from the City of Atlanta's Office of Solid Waste Services. If the applicant is using the city's office of solid waste services, the applicant shall work directly with the office to establish the services that will be provided, and the fee for said services. The office of solid waste services will determine a solid waste fee to be assessed to an outdoor event based upon the amount of people expected at the outdoor event and the services requested by the applicant. The office of solid waste services shall have a schedule of fees and shall determine the appropriate solid waste fee consistently based on these factors. These arrangements must all be completed prior to the applicant's submission of the solid waste sub-permit application pursuant to section 142-40. The office of solid waste services shall provide to the applicant a written document containing the agreed-upon services and a bill for the solid waste fees so that the applicant can attach said information to her/his solid waste sub-permit application. The applicant shall make all payments for the solid waste services to the office of solid waste services directly. 
(3)  Event bonds. The event bonds described below shall be refunded if the city determines, after the conclusion of the outdoor event, that no more than minimal clean-up is required to be performed by the city and there has been no damage to any city property. Where the city determines that an event bond should be refunded, it shall refund the bond within 45 days after the conclusion of the outdoor event. 
(A)  If the host has conducted a previous outdoor event in the city and has been billed after the outdoor event for restoration services and/or supplemental services, and the host did not pay said bill in full within 30 days of receiving the bill, the city shall require the host to obtain a refundable event bond in the amount of said bill for all future outdoor events. 
(B)  The city may require a $100.00 refundable event bond where the host applies to reserve a park facility (see also section 110-3 (e)(2)) or to have any other outdoor event in a park, provided there is no formal agreement between the host and the city. Where an event bond has been posted as part of an outdoor festival application or other outdoor event application, no additional event bond shall be required. No more than one event bond shall be required for any particular outdoor event. With the exception of bonds required for outdoor festivals, the event bond requirement may be waived if the host has performed or held an outdoor event at least once per year during the past three consecutive years and completed all clean-up and cooperated fully with the city during each of those outdoor events. 
(C)  A $100.00 refundable event bond shall be required for all assemblies, as defined in article VI of this chapter. 
(4)  For outdoor events where: a) the city must provide restoration services; and b) the city property that requires restoration services is not a city park; and c) the city spends more money for restoration services than the amount remaining from the solid waste fee plus the sanitation bond, if any, the office of solid waste services will assess the amount owed for restoration services and will forward the assessment to the chief of staff or her/his designee for billing. The chief of staff or her/his designee must send the bill to the host no later than 60 days after the conclusion of the outdoor event. The host shall pay the assessment in full within 30 days of receiving the bill. 
(5)  For outdoor events where: a) the city must provide restoration services; and b) the city property that requires restoration services is a city park, the parks bureau will assess the amount owed for restoration services and will forward the assessment to the chief of staff for billing. The chief of staff or her/his designee must send the bill to the host no later than 60 days after the conclusion of the outdoor event. 
(A)  The host must pay the assessment no later than 30 days after receiving the bill. 
(B)  In the event that the park requiring restoration services is maintained, at least in part, by a conservancy or other group that has a memorandum of understanding with the city regarding said maintenance, the host may pay the conservancy directly to provide the restoration services, upon receiving written approval of said arrangement from the commissioner of the department of parks and recreation. The restoration shall not be deemed complete until approved in writing by the commissioner of the department of parks and recreation. 
(6)  For outdoor events where the city must provide supplemental services, the host must reimburse the city in full for the cost of such supplemental services. The chief of staff or her/his designee shall assess the amount owed for the supplemental services and shall send the bill to the host no later than 60 days after the conclusion of the outdoor event. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2013-01(12-O-1653), § 2, 1-16-13; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) 
Sec. 142-23. - Park facility reservations. 
Regardless of the type of outdoor event, any applicant wishing to utilize an outdoor facility in a park, such as a pavilion, as part of a larger outdoor event, must file a facility reservation application along with the application for the larger outdoor event. The method of applying for and the criteria for receiving a facility reservation permit are set forth in section 142-102. During Class A, B, and C outdoor festivals, the city will not allow any other applicant, other than the outdoor festival applicant, to reserve an outdoor facility located in the festival gathering area. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-24. - Portable restrooms. 
(a)  All outdoor events that provide portable restrooms must have a portable restroom sub-permit. The portable restroom sub-permit requirements and procedures are set forth in section 142-39 below. 
(b)  Location and removal of portable restrooms. 
(1)  The outdoor events portable restroom sub-permit shall state the exact location where the portable restroom(s) shall be placed. In the event that the portable restrooms are not placed at the location designated on the sub-permit, the chief of staff or her/his designee shall give the host oral or written notice to move the portable restroom(s) to the proper location. The host must have the portable restroom(s) moved immediately, but in no event greater than six hours. Should the host fail to meet this requirement, s/he shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8(c) of this Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  The outdoor events portable restroom sub-permit shall state the time that the portable restroom(s) shall be removed. In the event that the portable restrooms are not removed by the time set forth in the sub-permit, the host shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8(c) of this Code of Ordinances. Where the host provides evidence of a good faith effort to have the portable restroom owner remove the portable restrooms in a timely manner, the city shall not subject the host to the penalties of section 1-8(c). Instead, the chief of staff shall provide written notice to the portable restroom owner requiring that the owner remove the portable restrooms within 24 hours of receiving the city's written notice. Should the owner fail to meet this requirement, s/he shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8(c) of this Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Should portable restrooms be utilized at an outdoor event where a portable restroom sub-permit has not been obtained, or where the sub-permit does not permit the quantity of portable restrooms being utilized, the chief of staff or her/his designee may give the host oral or written notice to remove the non-permitted portable restroom(s) immediately, but in no event greater than six hours. Should the host fail to meet this requirement, s/he shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8(c) of this Code of Ordinances. 
(4)  Should portable restrooms be placed on public property for an outdoor event that is not permitted, the chief of staff or her/his designee shall require the owner of the portable restrooms to remove the portable restrooms within 24 hours of receiving the chief of staff's or her/his designee's written notice. Should the owner fail to meet this requirement, s/he shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8(c) of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-25. - Recycling and other solid waste issues. 
All hosts of outdoor events requiring a permit pursuant to this chapter must comply with the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances section 130-44, as well as all other applicable city, Fulton County, DeKalb County, state and federal laws. Said section 130-44 sets forth requirements regarding recycling, as well as timeframes for removal of solid waste from the property on which the outdoor event is held. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-26. - Right-of-way/park closure. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) below, under no circumstances shall the chief of staff approve any permit that allows the applicant to: 
(1)  Limit the use of a public street or sidewalk by pedestrians and/or vehicles that are using the street or sidewalk to move from location to location; or 
(2)  Limit the use of a public park, when use of the park by the general public shall not unreasonably disturb the activities of the outdoor event. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the imposition of reasonable restrictions on the movement of the general public which are necessary for the carrying out of the outdoor event; however, such restrictions shall not be based on nor impact any member of the public because of any of the factors set forth in section 142-12(b) above. 
(c)  An applicant that wishes to hold an event that requires closure of all or a portion of a city-owned street, sidewalk, park, or other right-of-way, shall apply for an assembly permit, a street closure permit, or a sidewalk closure permit, (all of which are defined in Article VI), whichever is applicable, pursuant to the criteria set forth in Article VI below. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2009-04(08-O-2030), § 1, 1-31-09) 
Sec. 142-27. - Rules during outdoor events in parks. 
In addition to the rules set forth in this chapter, additional rules regarding prohibited conduct in parks while an outdoor event is occurring in the park, are set forth in section 110-76 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Secs. 142-28—142-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUB-PERMITS 

Sec. 142-31. - Sub-permits in general. 
(a)  Any applicant submitting an application for any type of outdoor event, where the outdoor event includes the use of a temporary structure (such as a tent), electricity, amplification, food and/or drinks, portable restrooms, alcohol, amusements, banners, or that produces solid waste, may need to obtain a sub-permit. In addition, all Class A, B, and C outdoor festivals and all assemblies that include organized group movement from one location to another, including without limitation races, walks, marches, and parades, must obtain a water sub-permit. Lastly, all outdoor events must obtain an emergency services sub-permit. This article IV lists the types of sub-permits and when each type of sub-permit is required. 
(b)  Obtaining a sub-permit is part of the outdoor event permitting process. All applications for a sub-permit, including any fees associated with the sub-permit application, must be submitted to the SEM, except that where an applicant chooses to submit an application to the office of parks rather than the SEM pursuant to sections 142-102 and 142-103, the related sub-permit application(s) may also be submitted to the office of parks. The sub-permit application shall be submitted along with the outdoor event application, unless a different time frame for submitting the sub-permit application is designated below. Where the sub-permit application is submitted to the office of parks, the office shall forward the sub-permit application to the SEM for processing within one business day of receipt. 
(c)  The SEM shall be responsible for forwarding all sub-permit applications to the city department(s) and/or bureau(s) that are responsible for evaluating whether the sub-permit shall be granted, as provided in this section below. The SEM shall forward the permit application and the sub-permit application to the department or bureau within two business days of receiving the applications. Said city department or bureau shall provide a written determination regarding the sub-permit to the SEM within ten business days of receiving the applications, and the SEM shall provide the information to the chief of staff. Such determination shall be based on a set of written standards maintained by the reviewing department or office, and said standards shall be applied uniformly to all applicants. Where the reviewing department or office approves the sub-permit application, it shall provide the sub-permit to the SEM, who shall provide the sub-permit to the chief of staff. The chief of staff shall provide the sub-permit to the applicant. 
(d)  Denial of an alcohol, amplification, amusement, banner, electricity, food and beverage, and/or temporary structures sub-permit application does not necessitate denial of the outdoor event permit, but rather precludes the outdoor event's inclusion of the item or service for which the sub-permit was denied. In addition, denial of a portable restroom sub-permit application does not necessitate the denial of the outdoor event permit if the applicant's proposed use of the portable restroom(s) is strictly voluntary and there is no city or county requirement that portable restrooms be utilized at the outdoor event. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-32. - Alcohol sub-permit. 
(a)  No alcohol may be served and/or sold at any outdoor event unless the host receives an alcohol sub-permit. Where the outdoor event occurs in a park, the only type of outdoor event eligible for an alcohol sub-permit is an outdoor festival. Alcohol is not permitted in parks absent a permitted outdoor festival, subject to the provisions of Atlanta Code section 110-76(a)(5), and an alcohol sub-permit. 
(b)  If the outdoor event is utilizing an alcohol pourer that has already obtained a city-issued liquor license from the city's bureau of licenses and permits, the applicant shall complete and submit an alcohol sub-permit application to the SEM with the outdoor event application. Where the outdoor event application is due less than 30 days prior to the outdoor event, the alcohol sub-permit application must none-the-less be submitted to the SEM no later than 30 days before the outdoor event. 
(1)  The SEM shall forward the alcohol sub-permit application to the department of finance's office of revenue. The office of revenue shall be the sole decision-maker of whether to issue a sub-permit. 
(2)  The fee for an alcohol sub-permit shall be $25.00 per day, per fixed location where alcohol is served, for applicants that are non-profit organizations. For all other applicants, the alcohol sub-permit fee shall be $50.00 for beer and/or wine, $50.00 for all other types of alcoholic beverages, and $100.00 for beer and/or wine and other alcoholic beverages, per day, per location where alcohol is served. 
(3)  The applicant must obtain a license to serve alcohol at the outdoor event from the State of Georgia, and must supply the city with a copy of said license no later than three business days prior to the outdoor event. 
(c)  If the outdoor event is utilizing an alcohol pourer that has not already obtained a city-issued liquor license, the applicant must obtain an alcohol pourer license utilizing the standard procedures established by the city. These procedures do not include involvement by the SEM or the chief of staff. Once the applicant receives the alcohol pourer license, it shall then proceed with the procedure set forth in subsection 142-32(b) above to receive an alcohol sub-permit for the outdoor event. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-33. - Amplification sub-permit. 
(a)  An amplification sub-permit is required where an amplification device will be utilized at an outdoor event located on public property, or at a permitted outdoor event located on private property. 
(b)  There is no fee for an amplification sub-permit. 
(c)  The amplification sub-permit application shall be submitted to the SEM with the outdoor event application. 
(d)  If the outdoor event is located in a city park, the SEM shall forward the amplification sub-permit application to the department of parks and recreation. If the outdoor event is located on private property, or on public property other than a city park, the SEM shall forward the amplification sub-permit application to the department of police, special operations section. The department of parks and recreation, and the department of police respectively shall be the sole decision-makers of whether to issue a sub-permit. 
(e)  The department of parks and recreation, and/or the department of police shall consider the time and location requested in the application in determining whether to approve utilization of the sound amplification systems requested in the sub-permit application. The departments shall also consider the regulations of the Atlanta Noise Ordinance, Atlanta Code of Ordinances section 74-129 through 74-160, where applicable, but shall not apply these regulations to outdoor festivals or other outdoor events that are explicitly exempted from the noise ordinance mandates. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) 
Sec. 142-34. - Amusement sub-permit. 
(a)  An amusement sub-permit is required to operate a ride or amusement at any outdoor event. Where the outdoor event occurs in a park, the only type of outdoor event eligible for an amusement sub-permit is an outdoor festival. Rides and/or amusements are not permitted in parks absent a permitted outdoor festival and amusement sub-permit. 
(b)  Applicants shall submit the amusement sub-permit application and fee to the SEM. The amusement sub-permit fee shall be established in writing by the director of the bureau of buildings, but in no event shall be less than $25.00 per event. The amount of the fee shall not be based upon the number of rides and/or amusements. 
(c)  The amusement sub-permit application and fee shall be submitted to the SEM with the outdoor event application. Where the outdoor event application is due less than 30 days prior to the outdoor event, the amusement sub-permit application must none-the-less be submitted to the SEM no later than 30 days before the outdoor event. 
(d)  The SEM shall submit the amusement sub-permit application to the bureau of buildings. If the amusement sub-permit involves a park, the SEM shall also submit the amusement sub-permit application to the bureau of parks. The bureau of buildings, and the bureau of parks where applicable, shall be the sole decision-makers of whether to issue the sub-permit. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-35. - Banner sub-permit. 
(a)  A banner sub-permit is required for all outdoor events that will have one or more banners at the outdoor event. 
(b)  There is no fee for a banner sub-permit. 
(c)  The banner sub-permit application shall be submitted to the SEM with the outdoor event application. Where the outdoor event application is due less than 30 days prior to the outdoor event, the banner sub-permit application must none-the-less be submitted to the SEM no later than 30 days before the outdoor event. 
(d)  The SEM shall forward the banner sub-permit application to the fire rescue department's inspection division, and the fire rescue department shall determine whether the sub-permit shall be granted. The fire rescue department shall be the sole decision-maker of whether to issue a sub-permit. The sub-permit shall be issued upon the fire rescue department's determination that each banner at the outdoor event is composed of material that meets the National Fire Protection Association 701 standards. This determination may be made in one of two ways: 1) the applicant provides a certificate of flammability from the banner's fabric manufacturer stating that the material meets the National Fire Protection Association 701 standards; or 2) the fire rescue department performs a test upon a sample of the banner material to determine whether it meets the National Fire Protection Association 701 standards. 
(e)  The applicant's sub-permit application must indicate whether the applicant is seeking the sub-permit along with the issuance of the outdoor event permit or at the time of set-up of the outdoor event. For issuance of the sub-permit along with the issuance of the outdoor event permit, the applicant shall submit a sample of the banner material along with the sub-permit application, and where available, the certificate of flammability from the banner's fabric manufacturer. For issuance of the sub-permit at the time of set-up, the fire rescue department will obtain copies of the certificate of flammability from the banner's fabric manufacturer and/or will test the banner fabric on site at the outdoor event. At any outdoor event, the fire rescue department shall have the authority to require that a banner be taken down upon a finding that the banner does not meet the National Fire Protection Association 701 standards. 
(f)  Where the banner is to be attached to a light pole or other such pole or object erected in any city street, sidewalk, or other city right-of-way, regardless of the owner of the light pole or other object, this outdoor events chapter shall not apply to the permitting of the banner. Instead, the applicant must proceed according to the regulations set forth in Atlanta Code of Ordinances, section 138-60, including applying for and obtaining a permit from the commissioner of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-36. - Electricity sub-permit. 
(a)  An electricity sub-permit is required where supplemental electricity will be utilized at an outdoor event located on public property; or where electricity will be utilized at an outdoor event located on private property, but only when this chapter requires said private property outdoor event to be permitted. For purposes of this section 142-36, "supplemental electricity" shall mean all electrical devices except for electrical outlets mounted on the public property by the city and grounded extension cords. Supplemental electricity shall include without limitation generators and additional electrical wiring. 
(b)  The electricity sub-permit fee shall be established in writing by the director of the bureau of buildings, but in no event shall be less than $50.00. 
(c)  Applicants may obtain an electricity sub-permit in one of two ways. The first option is that the applicant may obtain an electricity sub-permit directly from the bureau of buildings electrical division. The second option is that the applicant may obtain an electricity sub-permit as part of her/his outdoor event application process. 
(d)  Where the applicant chooses to obtain an electricity sub-permit directly from the bureau of buildings electrical division, the applicant shall submit an electricity sub-permit application to the SEM with the outdoor event application that merely states that the sub-permit is being obtained directly from the bureau of buildings electrical division. The applicant need not provide any other information or an electricity sub-permit fee to the SEM. 
(e)  Where the applicant chooses to obtain an electricity sub-permit as part of the outdoor event application process, s/he shall submit the electricity sub-permit application, including the necessary fee, to the SEM with the outdoor event application. Where the outdoor event application is due less than 30 days prior to the outdoor event, the electricity sub-permit application must none-the-less be submitted to the SEM no later than 30 days before the outdoor event. The SEM shall submit the electricity sub-permit application to the bureau of buildings electrical division, and said division shall be the sole decision-maker of whether to issue an electricity sub-permit. 
(f)  All electricity sub-permits shall be issued based on the plans submitted either directly to the bureau of buildings electrical division or with the sub-permit application, but the sub-permit shall be subject to inspection of the electrical service by the bureau of buildings at the outdoor event at the time that the service commences. 
(g)  The city shall have the right to terminate the use of supplemental electricity at an outdoor event where the host fails to meet the requirements of this section 142-36, including without limitation where the host utilizes an extension cord that is not grounded. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-37. - Emergency services sub-permit. 
All outdoor events must have an emergency services sub-permit. The emergency services sub-permit is issued after the applicant's emergency services and fire safety plan has been approved by the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department. There is no fee for an emergency services sub-permit. The requirements and procedures for obtaining this sub-permit are set forth in section 142-21 above. The fire rescue department shall be the sole decision-maker of whether to issue the sub-permit. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-38. - Food and beverage sub-permit. 
(a)  A food and beverage sub-permit is required for all outdoor festivals where food and/or beverages will be served. A food and beverage sub-permit is also required for any other outdoor event where food and/or beverages will be served and where the county in which the outdoor event is located regulates the type of food and/or beverage service that will occur at the outdoor event. For purposes of this article, "beverage" includes water but does not include alcoholic drinks. 
(b)  There is no fee for a food and beverage sub-permit. 
(c)  The food and beverage sub-permit application shall be submitted to the SEM with the outdoor event application. Where the outdoor event application is due less than 30 days prior to the outdoor event, the food and beverage sub-permit application must none-the-less be submitted to the SEM no later than 30 days before the outdoor event. The food and beverage sub-permit application must include a certificate from Fulton County showing that the county has approved the serving of food and/or beverages at the outdoor event. Where the outdoor event is occurring in DeKalb County, the application must include a certificate from DeKalb County showing that the county has approved the serving of food and/or beverages at the outdoor event. Where the county in which the outdoor event is occurring does not require a certificate for the type of food and beverages being served at the outdoor event, the applicant shall indicate this fact on the sub-permit application. 
(d)  The SEM shall forward the food and beverage sub-permit application to the fire rescue department's special operations division. The fire rescue department shall be the sole decision-maker of whether to issue the sub-permit. In determining whether to approve or deny the sub-permit application, the fire rescue department shall determine solely whether the applicant has met the food and beverage permitting standards required by the county in which the outdoor event is occurring. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-39. - Portable restroom sub-permit. 
(a)  A portable restroom sub-permit is required for all outdoor events located in Fulton County that are required by Fulton County to provide portable restrooms, for all outdoor events located in DeKalb County that are required by DeKalb County to provide portable restrooms, or that wish to provide portable restrooms. In addition, where the Fulton County Health Standards applied to for-profit organizations would require portable restrooms for the applicant's outdoor event, if the applicant were a for-profit organization located in Fulton County, the applicant must obtain a portable restroom sub-permit. 
(b)  There is no fee for a portable restroom sub-permit. 
(c)  The portable restroom sub-permit application shall be submitted to the SEM with the outdoor event application. Where the outdoor event application is due less than 30 days prior to the outdoor event, the portable restroom sub-permit application must none-the-less be submitted to the SEM no later than 30 days before the outdoor event. 
(d)  The portable restroom sub-permit application must include the name of the portable restroom company providing the service, the number of portable restrooms being provided, the desired location of the portable restrooms, the desired time of delivery and removal of the portable restrooms, and a copy of the contract between the applicant and the portable restroom company. It must also include a certificate from either Fulton or DeKalb County, depending upon the location of the outdoor event, showing that the county has approved the use and quantity of portable restrooms at the outdoor event. 
(e)  For Class A, B, and C outdoor festivals located in a park that contains public restrooms, the sub-permit application must also include a specific plan for cleaning and re-stocking the restrooms every two hours. By way of example, said plan may include evidence that the cleaning and re-stocking responsibility is part of the proposed outdoor festival's cleaning contract or evidence of assignment of outdoor festival staff to perform the responsibility. 
(f)  The SEM shall forward the portable restroom sub-permit application to the fire rescue department's EMS and special operations divisions. The fire rescue department shall be the sole decision-maker of whether to issue a sub-permit, but the exact terms of the sub-permit shall be determined by the office of parks or the department of public works, where applicable, as set forth below in subsections (g) and (h) of this section 142-39. In determining whether to approve or deny the sub-permit application, the fire rescue department, at a minimum, shall apply the health standards that Fulton County requires for for-profit organizations. The fire rescue department shall require, at a minimum, that these for-profit health standards be met, regardless of whether the applicant is a non-profit or for-profit entity. The fire rescue department shall have the right to require more portable restrooms than would be required by Fulton County should the fire rescue department determine that public health mandates the greater quantity. 
(g)  If the sub-permit application indicates that the portable restroom(s) will be located in a park, the SEM shall forward the application to the office of parks, which shall establish the exact location for the portable restrooms, and the time of portable restroom delivery and removal. For Class A, B, and C outdoor festivals located in a park that contains public restrooms, the office of parks shall also determine whether the applicant's plan regarding said restrooms, as required pursuant to section 142-39(e) above, is acceptable. Where the plan is deemed unacceptable by the office of parks, the director of said office, or her/his designee, shall work with the applicant to modify the plan. 
(h)  If the sub-permit application indicates that the portable restroom(s) will be located on city right-of-way, but not in a park, the SEM shall forward the application to the department of public works, which shall establish the exact location for the portable restrooms, and the time of portable restroom delivery and removal. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-40. - Solid waste sub-permit. 
(a)  A solid waste sub-permit is required for all outdoor events that are required by Fulton County or DeKalb County, depending upon the location of the outdoor event, to provide a solid waste plan. In addition, where the Fulton County Health Standards applied to for-profit organizations would require a solid waste plan for the applicant's outdoor event, if the applicant were a for-profit organization located in Fulton County, the applicant must obtain a solid waste sub-permit. 
(b)  There is no fee for a solid waste sub-permit. Where an outdoor event utilizes the city's office of solid waste services for solid waste services, however, the bureau shall assess a solid waste fee, as described in section 142-22(f). 
(c)  The solid waste sub-permit application shall be submitted to the SEM with the outdoor event application. Where the outdoor event application is due less than 30 days prior to the outdoor event, the solid waste sub-permit application must none-the-less be submitted to the SEM no later than 30 days before the outdoor event. The solid waste sub-permit application must include the name of the company providing solid waste services, the types of services being provided by the company, and a copy of the Applicant's agreement with the solid waste company. This information must be submitted even if the provider of solid waste services is the city's office of solid waste services. The application must also include a certificate from Fulton County or DeKalb County, depending upon the location of the outdoor event, showing that the county has approved the solid waste plan for the outdoor event. 
(d)  The SEM shall forward the solid waste sub-permit application to the office of solid waste services. The office of solid waste services shall be the sole decision-maker of whether to issue a sub-permit. In determining whether to approve or deny the sub-permit application, the office of solid waste services, at a minimum, shall apply the health standards that Fulton County requires for for-profit organizations. The office of solid waste services, at a minimum, shall require that these for-profit health standards be met, regardless of whether the applicant is a non-profit or for-profit entity. The office of solid waste services shall have the right to require more solid waste services than would be required by Fulton County should the office of solid waste services determine that public health mandates the additional services. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-41. - Temporary structures sub-permit. 
(a)  A temporary structures sub-permit, is required where the outdoor event includes use of a temporary structure that is: 
(1)  A tent that is 200 square feet or larger; or 
(2)  Two or more tents that are closer than 12 feet apart, regardless of the size of the tent; or 
(3)  A non-tent that is 120 square feet or larger; or 
(4)  Any type of temporary structure that is 100 square feet or larger and will be located inside of a park; or 
(5)  Any type of temporary structure, regardless of size, that will contain a cooking device that uses electricity, gas, or a flame. 
(b)  Applicants shall submit the following fees with the temporary structure sub-permit application: 
(1)  Tents that are 200 square feet or larger, or are closer than 12 feet apart, require a fee of $66.00, and the chief of staff or his designee shall forward this fee to the fire rescue department. This fee is a flat fee that shall apply regardless of how many tents will be erected during the outdoor event. 
(2)  Non-tent temporary structures that are 120 square feet or larger require two fee payments which cannot be combined. The first fee is $50.00, which the chief of staff or his designee shall designate as belonging to the bureau of buildings. The second fee is $66.00, and the chief of staff or his designee shall forward this money to the fire rescue department. These fees are flat fees, and apply regardless of how many temporary structures will be created and/or erected during the outdoor event. 
(3)  Temporary structures that will contain a cooking device, as described above, and that are smaller than 120 square feet, require a fee of $66.00 per event regardless of how many temporary structures will be created and/or erected during the outdoor event, and the chief of staff or his designee shall forward the fee to the fire rescue department. 
(4)  Temporary structures that are 100 square feet or larger and will be located inside of a city park require no fee, unless the temporary structure also meets the criteria set forth in subsection (b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(3) above. 
(c)  The temporary structure sub-permit application, including necessary fees, shall be submitted to the SEM with the outdoor event application. 
Where the outdoor event application is due less than 30 days prior to the outdoor event, the temporary structures sub-permit application must none-the-less be submitted to the SEM no later than 30 days before the outdoor event. For temporary structures that are 120 square feet or larger, as part of the sub-permit application, the applicant must submit a copy of liability insurance covering the temporary structure. 
(d)  OSE shall submit the temporary structure sub-permit application to each of the following departments or bureaus, as applicable, and said departments and bureaus shall be the decision-makers of whether to issue a sub-permit. Temporary structures that qualify for more than one of the categories described below in this section shall follow the procedure below for each of the categories that apply to the temporary structure. 
(1)  Where the structure is a tent that is 200 square feet or larger, or is two or more tents located less than 12 feet apart, the SEM shall forward the sub-permit application to the fire rescue department. The fire rescue department must approve the issuance of a sub-permit in order for the temporary structure to be permitted. The fire rescue department may forward a copy of any sub-permit application to the bureau of buildings for consideration if the department, in its sole discretion, deems bureau of buildings approval to be a prerequisite to giving the department's approval for that particular application; and 
(2)  Where the structure is a non-tent, 120 square feet or larger, the SEM shall forward the sub-permit application to the fire rescue department and the bureau of buildings. If the structure is 200 square feet or larger, the plans submitted with the sub-permit application must indicate approval by a Georgia Registered Professional Engineer or Architect. Both the fire rescue department and the bureau of buildings must approve the issuance of a sub-permit in order for the temporary structure to be permitted; and 
(3)  Regardless of size, where the structure will contain a cooking device that uses electricity, gas, or a flame, the SEM shall forward the sub-permit application to the fire rescue department. The fire rescue department must approve the issuance of a sub-permit in order for the temporary structure to be permitted; and 
(4)  Where the structure is 100 square feet or larger and will be located inside of a city park, the SEM shall forward the sub-permit application to the department of parks and recreation, and the department's commissioner must provide written approval of the structure, including its location, in order for the temporary structure to be permitted. 
(e)  For any temporary structure that is listed in section 142-41(a)(1), (2), (3), or (5), a sub-permit shall be granted only if the temporary structure is certified as flameproof by the fire rescue department's fire marshal's office. 
(f)  All temporary structure sub-permits shall be issued based on the plans submitted with the sub-permit application, but shall be subject to inspection upon actual set-up of the temporary structure, and are subject to revocation if the city determines that public safety is jeopardized. A report of the results of said inspection(s) shall be submitted to the SEM. For temporary structures that are 120 square feet or larger, the director of the bureau of buildings, or her/his designee, and the fire chief, or her/his designee, shall make a complete inspection of the erected temporary structures and premises to determine their safety. Said city officials shall make certain that the proper equipment and exits are installed for the safety of the public. The fire chief shall place such officers and members of the fire rescue department around the premises as the fire chief deems necessary. The police chief shall assist the fire chief in carrying out the fire chiefs' orders and instructions. 
(g)  In the event that a permitted temporary structure shall be located in the public right-of-way, the SEM shall send written notice of this fact to the department of police within three business days of the issuance of the sub-permit. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) 
Sec. 142-42. - Water sub-permit. 
(a)  A water sub-permit is required for all Class A, B, and C outdoor festivals and all assemblies that include organized group movement from one location to another, including without limitation races, walks, marches, and parades. 
(b)  There is no fee for a water sub-permit. 
(c)  The water sub-permit application shall be submitted to the SEM with the outdoor event application. 
(d)  The SEM shall forward the water sub-permit application to the fire rescue department's special operations division. The fire rescue department shall be the sole decision-maker of whether to issue the sub-permit. In determining whether to approve or deny the sub-permit application, the fire rescue department shall determine solely whether the applicant has met the fire rescue department's standards regarding availability of free water to outdoor event attendees. The fire rescue department shall create a set of standards by which it determines whether the availability of free water is acceptable, and shall apply the standards uniformly for all applicants. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Secs. 142-43—142-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OUTDOOR FESTIVALS 

Sec. 142-50. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the outdoor festivals article, which is a subsection of the outdoor events chapter. All of the definitions, requirements and other provisions set forth in article I through article IV of this chapter shall apply to the outdoor festivals article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-51. - Additional definitions. 
In addition to the words, terms and phrases set forth in section 142-2 above, the following words, terms and phrases, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Certification shall mean a signed document by the applicant attesting that a notice of intent to hold an outdoor festival has been sent by registered mail or by hand delivery to the city council president and the district council member for the areas affected by the outdoor festival. 
(b)  Commercial means any part of the net earnings derived from the outdoor festival or from any publicity or promotion resulting from the outdoor festival inures to the benefit of any private shareholder, individual or for-profit corporation, as such term is defined by the Official Code of Georgia. 
(c)  Festival gathering area means the entire area of the outdoor festival for which the host is responsible under the terms of this article V, including the following elements: the festival production area, all vending locations connected with the outdoor festival, the area where the anticipated crowd can reasonably be expected to locate itself upon arrival at the outdoor festival, and a perimeter in every direction from the outer limits of the foregoing elements a distance of: 
(1)  The greater of three blocks or 1,500 feet for all Class A events. 
(2)  The greater of two blocks or 1,000 feet for all Class B events. 
(3)  The greater of one block or 500 feet for all Class C events. 
(4)  200 feet for Class D and E events. 
All of the area within this perimeter shall be considered part of the festival gathering area; provided, the festival gathering area will not extend beyond physical features such as walls, ravines, railroad tracks and major highways, which presence creates a true and actual barrier to outdoor festival attendees. 
(d)  Festival monitor means the person(s) employed by the city to act as a liaison between and among the city and its departments and offices, conservancies, and the host during the outdoor festival, beginning with the set-up phase of the outdoor festival and continuing until the completion of the cleanup phase of the outdoor festival. The festival monitor is supervised by the SEM, except that the SEM shall not supervise those employees of the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs that are monitoring the set-up and take-down of an outdoor festival located in a park. 
(e)  Festival production area means the area or areas, not necessarily contiguous to each other, which are central to the production of the outdoor festival, and which are erected and/or utilized by the host for the production of the outdoor festival, including, but not limited to, stages, barricades, parked vehicles, booths, tents or other temporary or permanent structures, and/or utility poles, and including but not limited to the area immediately surrounding those items and/or locations. 
(f)  Internal security plan means a plan submitted by the applicant to the SEM, along with the outdoor festival application, that sets forth the applicant's plans for providing security to public and private property, performers, entertainers, exhibitors, speakers, attendees, or other persons in the festival gathering area. The term Internal Security Plan does not apply to any plan for public safety personnel necessary to provide for the protection of an outdoor festival and its attendees from hostile members of the public or counter-demonstrators, or for traffic control outside the festival gathering area, or for general law enforcement in the vicinity of the festival gathering area. 
(g)  Noncommercial means the net earnings derived from the outdoor festival or from any publicity or promotion resulting from the outdoor festival inure exclusively to the benefit of any group, organization or civic league that: 1) is not organized for profit; and 2) is operated for, and whose proceeds are expended exclusively in support of charitable, educational, religious, scientific, social welfare, or literary purposes; and 3) has no part of its net earnings inuring to the benefit of any private shareholder, individual or for-profit corporation, as such term is defined by the Official Code of Georgia. 
(h)  Outdoor festival means an outdoor public celebration or gathering which lasts for greater than three hours, and: 
(1)  Meets the definition of outdoor event; and 
(2)  Lasts for 90 or fewer consecutive days; or lasts for 13 or fewer consecutive weeks where the outdoor event occurs on no fewer than three days out of each consecutive week. Outdoor events that do not meet one of these criteria shall be treated as separate outdoor events; and 
(3)  Is reasonably expected to have more than 250 people gather in a public park and/or on a public street and/or on other public rights-of-way owned by or located in the City of Atlanta; or is reasonably expected to have more than 500 people gather on privately-owned property; and 
(4)  Includes entertainment, amusement rides, dancing, music, dramatic productions, art exhibitions, other exhibits or displays, parades, road races, the sale of merchandise, the sale of food and/or alcohol, or any combination of the foregoing; and 
(5)  Requires the erection of stages, barricades, utility poles, booths, tents, or other temporary structures, or the use of parked vehicles or of permanent structures, or any combination of the foregoing; and 
(6)  By necessity, as determined by the chief of staff, requires for its successful execution the provision and coordination of municipal services to a degree significantly over and above that which the city routinely provides under ordinary everyday circumstances; and 
(7)  Is not an outdoor event where the entire duration of the outdoor event involves organized movement from one location to another, such as a parade, including preparation for or clean up of the same, unless the moving outdoor event is contained completely within a city park and does not require the blocking off of any part of the park. 
(A)  Where an outdoor event meets the definition of outdoor festival, and includes a discreet component whereby there is organized group movement from one location to another at least in part on public property, for example a parade, the moving component only shall be treated as an assembly, as described in article VI of this chapter the applicant must receive an assembly permit for the moving component of the outdoor event if: 
i)  the moving component occurs, at least in part, in a park, on public streets, sidewalks, other public rights-of-way, or other non-park public property; and 
ii)  the moving component requires closure of all or part of a park, a public street, sidewalk, other public right-of-way, and/or other non-park public property for public safety purposes, as determined by the department of parks and/or police. 
In addition, the applicant must receive an outdoor festival permit for the non-moving component of the outdoor event. 
(B)  Where an outdoor festival requires an assembly permit for a moving component of the outdoor festival, the applicant shall submit its assembly application to the SEM at the same time it submits its outdoor festival application. 
(C)  Where an outdoor event meets the definition of outdoor festival, except that it involves movement from one location to another, and said movement is not a discreet component of the outdoor event but rather the sole or primary focus of the outdoor event, the entire outdoor event shall be deemed an assembly, not an outdoor festival. 
(i)  Site plan shall mean a map showing in detail the layout of the outdoor festival area, showing the festival production area in detail, and specifying the boundaries of the overall festival gathering area. The site plan shall also include the location of portable toilets to be provided, and show the number of such toilets at each location, the location of tents and all other temporary structures, first aid stations, EMS mobile personnel, ambulances, public water sources, vendors, activity areas, staging areas, stages, trash receptacles, fencing (if applicable), entry and exit points if the outdoor festival is gated, and any other items requested by the SEM. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-52. - Overview of outdoor festival requirements. 
(a)  The outdoor festivals article applies to outdoor events occurring on public and/or private property. 
(b)  Any person, organization, corporation or other group wishing to have an outdoor festival must obtain an outdoor festival permit. The procedure for obtaining an outdoor festival permit is set forth in subsection (d) below. 
(c)  To obtain an outdoor festival permit, the applicant shall submit all required documents and fees to the SEM, including but not limited to an outdoor festival application and any necessary sub-permit applications, an internal security plan (see section 142-55 below), a site plan, and a certification (see section 142-56 below). The only application that shall not be filed with the SEM is an application for the applicant to receive a city-issued liquor license, as set forth in section 142-32 above. 
(1)  The outdoor festival application must be accompanied by a non-fundable application fee, the amount of which is set forth in section 142-60(a) below. 
(2)  The outdoor festival application must be filed at least 90 days prior to the beginning of the outdoor festival. 
(3)  The applicant must meet all requirements set forth in articles I through IV of this chapter, including but not limited to submitting sub-permit applications and fees where necessary. 
(4)  Where the outdoor festival is scheduled to last for greater than one calendar week, the applicant must obtain a new outdoor festival permit for each new calendar week. 
(A)  The outdoor festival classification for each of the outdoor festival permits, as described in section 142-59 below, shall be determined based upon the total number of people anticipated to attend the outdoor festival over the entire duration of the week for which the permit is being issued. An outdoor festival fee shall be paid for each permit. 
(B)  The applicant must submit to the city only one outdoor festival application and only one application fee, regardless of the number of weeks over which the outdoor festival occurs. 
(d)  Outdoor festival permits include the right to vend, and the applicant need not obtain a separate vending permit. This right to vend does not preclude authorized vendors from vending at their authorized locations during the outdoor festival. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-53. - Festival districts. 
(a)  Festival districts are hereby established as shown on the map included at the end of this chapter, which delineates the boundaries of such districts. The map showing such boundaries shall be available at all times from the SEM for review by applicants and the general public. 
(b)  The purpose of such festival districts shall be to establish the policy of the city with regard to the allocation of its resources and with regard to the burdens placed upon the different neighborhoods and areas of the city. The city, in determining the location and boundaries of such districts, shall include in each such district one or more outdoor festival sites, such as parks. The city shall also consider the location and boundaries of police zones, where appropriate. 
(c)  No more than one Class A or Class B outdoor festival shall be permitted to occur in the same festival district at the same time, nor within 100 yards of another outdoor festival of a Class A or Class B size, if outside the same district. 
(d)  The chief of staff, after consultation with the SEM, the commissioner of the department of parks and recreation, and the chief of police, or their designees, may designate certain festival districts as having special limitations, such as a limitation on the frequency of permitted outdoor festivals within a particular district or within a particular park or special event site, if in the opinion of the chief of staff there are special considerations warranting such limitations, such as traffic, public safety, or limitations contained in any master plan adopted by the city council for such venue or district. Any such limitations, to be effective, must be noted in writing by the chief of staff on the face of the festival district maps provided for in subsection (a) above, and shall be separately signed and dated by the chief of staff. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) 
Sec. 142-54. - Festival monitors. 
(a)  The city shall hire festival monitors to staff Class A, B, and C outdoor festivals, and may hire festival monitors to staff other outdoor festivals if the chief of staff or her/his designee deems there is appropriate reason to do so. Festival monitors shall be assigned to each of these permitted outdoor festivals by the SEM. Wherever possible, festival monitors will be assigned to the same festival district for consistency. At all times and for each shift when an outdoor festival is being staffed by festival monitors, the SEM shall designate one of the festival monitors as the senior monitor. The host shall provide the senior monitor with a phone number at which the host or her/his designee can be reached at all times throughout the outdoor festival, including without limitation set-up and take-down of the outdoor festival. 
(b)  It shall be the festival monitors' responsibility, in coordination with the SEM, to monitor the activities of the host and those working with the host on the outdoor festival site, in order to insure that the terms and conditions of the outdoor festival permit are observed, except that where the outdoor festival is located in a park, the office of parks shall be responsible for monitoring the set-up and take-down of the outdoor festival. In the event of a material violation of the outdoor festival permit or of this chapter, or of an applicable law, whereby the festival monitor reasonably believes that the violation constitutes a threat to public safety or to the public welfare, the festival monitor is authorized to report the violation to the appropriate public safety, law enforcement or appropriate department personnel for immediate action. In the event of other material violations, the festival monitor shall make a written report of such violation and shall submit such report to the senior monitor as quickly as possible. The senior monitor shall: 
(1)  inform the host verbally of the need to remedy the violation immediately; 
(2)  provide the host with a copy of the festival monitor's written report; and 
(3)  submit a copy of the written report to the SEM for consideration in future applications by the outdoor festival's applicant or host. However, notwithstanding the requirement of making such written reports and following the protocol above, the each festival monitor shall be authorized to require the host to cease and desist the action or behavior that is in violation of the outdoor festival permit, of this chapter, or of any applicable law. 
(c)  A festival monitor trust fund shall be established and maintained such that after receiving of an outdoor festival permit fee, the trust fund shall accept a portion of such fees to accomplish the purposes set forth in this section. The festival monitor trust fund may also be utilized to pay the costs of assigning one City of Atlanta Fire Rescue Emergency Medical Technician and one City of Atlanta Fire Marshal or Fire Inspector to an outdoor event, as set forth in section 142-21(f) of this chapter. The trust fund shall be managed by the chief of staff or her/his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-55. - Internal security plan. 
(a)  All applicants for an outdoor festival must submit an internal security plan that is approved by the chief of police or her/his designee prior to being issued an outdoor festival permit. 
(b)  For Class A, B, and C outdoor festivals, the applicant must have at least one security officer for every 1,500 anticipated attendees at any given time. These officers must all be off-duty law enforcement officers. The chief of police or her/his designee shall have the authority to require more off-duty law enforcement officers per anticipated attendees, as long as such determination is made pursuant to the criteria set forth in subsection 142-55(g) below. 
(c)  The applicant may use private security guards or "t-shirt" security in the festival production area in addition to, but not in lieu of, the number of off-duty law enforcement officers required by the chief of police or her/his designee. 
(d)  The internal security plan must show that all off-duty law enforcement officers utilized by the applicant have jurisdictional authority to enforce city ordinances and state law. In addition, the internal security plan must show that all off-duty law enforcement officers to be used for internal security are POST-certified. In the event that the applicant can document her/his attempts and inability to retain the required number of POST-certified personnel, the chief of police or her/his designee shall permit the applicant to utilize private security personnel, but only to the extent that the applicant can not obtain POST-certified off-duty law enforcement officers. 
(e)  The internal security plan must show that all private security personnel contracted for by the applicant, if any, are licensed by the State of Georgia Board of Private Detective and Security Agencies, and are employed by companies licensed by the State of Georgia Board of Private Detective and Security Agencies. 
(f)  No active Atlanta Police Officer may author an internal security plan for an outdoor festival unless that officer is the applicant for such outdoor festival. S/he may, however, advise an applicant on security issues, including without limitation the internal security plan. The internal security plan must list all persons who participated in creating the internal security plan, including without limitation all Atlanta Police Officers who gave advice regarding or participated in developing the plan. No officer who gave advice regarding or participated in developing the internal security plan may have any role in determining whether the internal security plan should be approved. 
(g)  Upon receiving the internal security plan, the SEM shall forward the plan to the Atlanta Police Department. The chief of police or her/his designee shall be responsible for determining whether to approve or deny the Internal Security Plan. In determining the adequacy and appropriateness of any internal security plan, the chief of police or her/his designee shall be guided solely by considerations of the number and qualifications of off-duty law enforcement officers necessary to provide internal security to the festival gathering area, as indicated by experience with similar events. To this end, the police chief or her/his designee may consider the advice and counsel of public safety professionals and persons with expertise in handling or promoting similar events. Consideration of similar events shall include, without limitation, consideration of the location, the time of day or night, the sale or non-sale of alcohol, the number of locations of alcohol sale/distribution if any, the number of street closings if any, the internal security needs of similar events, and the internal security needs of other outdoor events sponsored by the host. This consideration shall not include the message of the proposed outdoor festival, the content of any speech, the identity or associational relationships of the applicant and/or host, nor any assumptions or predictions as to the amount of hostility which may be aroused in the public by the content of the speech or message conveyed by the proposed outdoor festival. The police chief or her/his designee shall forward the decision regarding the internal security plan to the chief of staff within 20 business days of receiving a copy of the plan. The chief of staff shall not issue an outdoor festival permit until s/he receives written approval of the internal security plan from the police chief or her/his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-56. - Certification. 
A copy of the certification, without the attachments, shall be submitted to the SEM with the outdoor festival application. If the notices are delivered by hand, a receipt must be obtained from the recipient. The applicant should retain these receipts and/or the registered mail receipts and be prepared to produce them to the SEM upon demand. The applicant may notify the council president and the affected district council member by email provided all such emails are copied to the SEM. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-57. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of the completed outdoor festival application and application fee required in section 142-60(a) below, the SEM shall forward copies of the application to the departments of police, fire and rescue, public works, parks, recreation and cultural affairs, planning and community development, the downtown ambassadors, and any impacted conservancies who have current unexpired agreements with the city in those cases where the festival is in a park, for their review. A copy shall also be forwarded to the council member representing the district in which the outdoor festival is proposed to be held, and to the council president. The persons designated in each such department for such review shall review the application, endorse their comments thereon, including the number of extra personnel hours estimated to be required for each department, and return the comments to the SEM within five business days from receipt. The SEM shall retain the forwarded comments in the application's file. In addition, within five business days of receipt of the application, the SEM shall arrange to have consideration of the application placed on the appropriate NPU agenda as expeditiously as possible. At said NPU meeting, the applicant shall present information about the outdoor festival to the NPU. The applicant must receive a recommendation from the NPU regarding the approval of the outdoor festival permit, and the SEM shall retain the recommendation and any related comments from the NPU in the application's file. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-58. - Considerations regarding approval or denial of an outdoor festival permit. 
The chief of staff and any other city representative evaluating an outdoor festival application, shall be guided by the factors set forth in section 142-12 above in determining whether to approve an outdoor festival permit, whether to approve the time, manner and place requested, whether to deny the permit as requested and propose a modified time, manner and place, or whether to deny the permit altogether. In addition, the chief of staff shall consider the following criterion: 
(a)  No outdoor festival application shall be submitted to the SEM earlier than 60 days after the conclusion of an outdoor event that is the same as or substantially similar to the outdoor festival described in the new application. Any application in violation of this provision shall be denied. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-59. - Outdoor festival classification. 
Each outdoor festival shall be categorized as a Class A, Class B, Class C, Class D, or Class E outdoor festival. In addition, each outdoor festival shall be categorized as commercial or non-commercial. 
(a)  For classification purposes, the chief of staff shall evaluate the application by the anticipated number of persons attending the outdoor festival over the entire period of the outdoor festival. In estimating this number, no regard shall be given to any estimate of the number of persons who may be anticipated to be in the vicinity of the outdoor festival as counter-demonstrators or to show hostility to any message the outdoor festival may be perceived as having. Nor shall there be any consideration of any of the factors set forth in section 142-12(b) above. Unless such estimate shall appear to have been made in palpable bad faith or otherwise grossly in error, the chief of staff shall be guided by the estimate provided by the applicant. If the chief of staff determines not to adopt the estimate given by the applicant, s/he shall state the reasons in writing on the permit. The definition of each class of outdoor festival is as follows: 
(1)  Class A outdoor festival. An outdoor festival at which the attendance is anticipated to be 50,000 persons or more over the entire period of the outdoor festival. 
(2)  Class B outdoor festival. An outdoor festival at which the attendance is anticipated to be between 20,000 and 49,999 persons over the entire period of the outdoor festival. 
(3)  Class C outdoor festival. An outdoor festival at which the attendance is anticipated to be between 10,000 and 19,999 persons over the entire period of the outdoor festival. 
(4)  Class D outdoor festival. An outdoor festival at which the attendance is anticipated to be between 2,000 and 9,999 persons over the entire period of the outdoor festival. 
(5)  Class E outdoor festival. An outdoor festival on public property at which the attendance is anticipated to be between 250 and 1,999 persons over the entire period of the outdoor festival, or an outdoor festival on private property at which the attendance is anticipated to be between 500 and 1,999 persons over the entire period of the outdoor festival. In addition, where an outdoor event is anticipated to have fewer than 250 attendees on public property, or fewer than 500 attendees on private property, but otherwise meets the definition of outdoor festival, and where the outdoor event provides activities that are open to the public, for example entertainment or vending, such that the number of participants may thereby increase, the outdoor event may be considered a Class E outdoor festival. 
(b)  For the purpose of determining whether an outdoor festival is commercial or non-commercial, the chief of staff shall consider materials offered by the applicant. Should the applicant choose not to provide or be unable to provide documentation of its non-commercial status, the outdoor festival shall be assumed to be commercial. The non-commercial status of an outdoor festival shall be determined by: 
(1)  The existence of a determination letter from the Internal Revenue Service identifying the applicant as an entity recognized as one described in section 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (or as amended); or 
(2)  The review of tax returns filed by the applicant as it relates to the outdoor festival, showing that the proceeds of the applicant are expended exclusively in support of charitable, educational, religious, scientific or literary purposes, or for civic leagues or organizations not organized for profit but operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare; or 
(3)  The prior history of the outdoor festival over at least the past three years evidencing that the outdoor festival has consistently been non-commercial, as evidenced by past applications, conduct, previous related outdoor events, and/or appropriate documentation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-60. - Fees. 
The application and permit fees for outdoor festivals shall be determined as set forth below. Nothing contained in this section shall authorize the chief of staff to determine and/or assess fees for an outdoor festival application or permit based on any of the criteria set forth in section 142-12(b) above. The fees to be charged for an outdoor festival application and permit shall be used strictly to reimburse the city for the costs of administration and other city services needed for the outdoor festival, and shall not be for the purpose of revenue production. 
(a)  Application fee. Every outdoor festival application shall be accompanied by the appropriate application fee. The application fee for each outdoor festival classification shall be as follows: 
(1)  Commercial outdoor festival. 
Class A outdoor festival application fee = $150.00 
Class B outdoor festival application fee = $150.00 
Class C outdoor festival application fee = $100.00 
Class D outdoor festival application fee = $100.00 
Class E outdoor festival application fee = $ 100.00 
(2)  Non-commercial outdoor festival. 
Class A outdoor festival application fee = $ 100.00 
Class B outdoor festival application fee = $ 100.00 
Class C outdoor festival application fee = $ 50.00 
Class D outdoor festival application fee = $ 50.00 
Class E outdoor festival application fee = $ 50.00 
(b)  Permit fee. After the chief of staff approves the issuance of an outdoor festival permit, the applicant may obtain such permit by agreeing to accept the classification and conditions imposed in accordance with this article and by paying the applicable outdoor festival permit fee, which fee shall be determined according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Commercial outdoor festival. 
Class A outdoor festival permit fee = $ 15,000.00 
Class B outdoor festival permit fee = $ 8,000.00 
Class C outdoor festival permit fee = $ 5,000.00 
Class D outdoor festival permit fee = $ 2,500.00 
Class E outdoor festival permit fee = $ 500.00 
(2)  Non-commercial outdoor festival. 
Class A outdoor festival permit fee = $ 9,000.00 
Class B outdoor festival permit fee = $ 3,000.00 
Class C outdoor festival permit fee = $ 1,500.00 
Class D outdoor festival permit fee = $ 750.00 
Class E outdoor festival permit fee = $ 250.00 
(c)  Refunds. The chief of staff determines the category of outdoor festival based upon the anticipated number of attendees, as described in section 142-59(a) of this chapter. The city shall not provide any refund of any portion of the outdoor festival application fee and/or permit fee in the event that the actual number of attendees is fewer than the anticipated number of attendees. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-61. - Acceptance of outdoor festival permit. 
The chief of staff or her/his designee shall notify the applicant upon approval of the outdoor festival permit. The outdoor festival permit shall not be issued, and the applicant may not obtain the permit unless the applicant fulfills the conditions imposed by this chapter, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Payment of the applicable permit fee and any other fees required pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Proof of insurance. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a permit for any Class A, Class B, or Class C outdoor festival, the applicant must provide the SEM with a certificate of insurance evidencing a fully paid public liability damage insurance policy procured from a company licensed to do business in Georgia. This policy must protect the City of Atlanta, its officers, agents, the outdoor festival and its contractors from any and all claims, damages to property, and or bodily injury which may result from or in connection with any of the operations carried on by the host, and must list the City of Atlanta as an additional named insured. Insurance limit requirements are as follows: 
(A)  $1,000,000.00 bodily injury total; 
(B)  $500,000.00 bodily injury to any one person; and 
(C)  $100,000.00 property damage. 
(2)  The SEM shall forward the certificate of insurance to the city's bureau of risk management within three business days of receiving the certificate. The bureau of risk management shall review the certificate and provide written feedback to the chief of staff regarding the insurance coverage within ten business days of the bureau's receipt of the certificate. The outdoor festival permit shall not be issued until the bureau of risk management provides the chief of staff with written approval of the outdoor festival insurance coverage. 
(c)  Indemnification agreement. Prior to the issuance of an outdoor festival permit, the applicant must sign a statement agreeing to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the City of Atlanta and its officers, agents and employees from any and all suits, claims, actions, liabilities of every kind, and damages to persons or property on claims that arise from the permitted event, unless the suit, claim, action, liability, or damages are caused by the negligence or intentional misconduct of the city, its officers, agents, or employees, or unless the applicant is prohibited by law from executing indemnification agreements. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-62. - Notice of outdoor festival. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a Class A, B, or C outdoor festival permit by the chief of staff, the SEM shall send a copy of the permit to the following: 
(a)  The mayor; 
(b)  The council president; 
(c)  The council member of the affected district; 
(d)  The city attorney; 
(e)  The police chief; 
(f)  The fire and rescue chief; 
(g)  The commissioner of the department of parks and recreation; 
(h)  The commissioner of the department of public works; 
(i)  The director of the office of solid waste services; and 
(j)  Commissioner of the department of city planning. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17) 
Sec. 142-63. - Prohibited conduct during outdoor festivals. 
Prohibited conduct for outdoor festivals that occur in city parks is set forth in Atlanta Code of Ordinances section 110-76. For all outdoor festivals not occurring in city parks, it shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts, or to permit a minor child in her/his custody to do any of the following acts in the festival production area: 
(a)  Ride, drive or operate bicycles, motorcycles, mopeds or any other motor vehicles, or ride skateboards or skates. These items may be carried into or through the festival production area. This provision shall not apply to emergency medical personnel, nor to officials or employees of the City of Atlanta acting in their official capacity, nor to vendors restocking their merchandise, nor to vendors providing sanitation services for the outdoor festival. In addition, this provision shall not apply to outdoor festival workers. 
(b)  Bring in, carry, or in any way possess, play or operate any radio, musical instrument or similar device which is producing or reproducing sound in such a manner as to be plainly audible to other persons in the festival production area, other than the operator of the device. This provision shall not apply to persons performing in the outdoor festival. All radios and musical devices with earphones are permitted. 
(c)  Engage in outdoor cooking in any area except an area designated for grilling by the Atlanta Fire and Rescue Department. This provision shall not apply to authorized outdoor festival vendors. 
(d)  Be in possession of any alcoholic beverage at an outdoor festival located on public property, unless the alcoholic beverage was purchased or otherwise obtained from an authorized vendor of the outdoor festival. 
(e)  Pets are prohibited during Class A, B, and C outdoor festivals. Pets are permitted during Class D and Class E outdoor festivals. The pet prohibition set forth in this provision shall not apply to those animals where the animal's owner can demonstrate that the animal is part of a performance, exhibit, or other activity conducted as part of the outdoor festival. Nor shall said prohibition apply to any guide dog especially trained for the purpose of accompanying a totally or partially blind person or a deaf person, or a service dog especially trained for the purpose of accompanying a physically disabled person. Lastly, said prohibition shall not apply to any dog trained and licensed by and in the possession of the Atlanta Police Department or any other law enforcement agency, or a horse utilized by the city's mounted police patrol. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-64. - Outdoor events at Hurt Park sponsored by Georgia State University. 
Hurt Park is located within the heart of the Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia by and on behalf of Georgia State University ("Georgia State University") campus. Based upon the unique programming needs of a vibrant campus, the following provisions shall apply to outdoor festivals and other outdoor events sponsored by Georgia State University at Hurt Park. 
(a)  Additional definitions. In addition to the words, terms and phrases set forth elsewhere in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section 142-64 only, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(1)  90-day permit shall mean a non-exclusive 90-day outdoor festival permit issued by the City to Georgia State University that authorizes Hurt Park festivals and other outdoor events that are sponsored by Georgia State University. 
(2)  Permitted event shall mean an outdoor event that is performed pursuant to this section 142-64 and authorized by a 90-day permit, including without limitation outdoor festivals and large gatherings. 
(3)  Park shall mean Hurt Park, located in Atlanta at 25 Courtland Street N.E., at the intersection of Edgewood Avenue and Courtland Street. 
(4)  University shall mean Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia by and on behalf of Georgia State University. 
(b)  The university shall be allowed to obtain a non-exclusive 90-day outdoor festival permit from the city that will authorize all outdoor festivals and other outdoor events sponsored by the university in Hurt Park during that 90-day period, without notifying the city or receiving an individual event permit for any specific large gathering, outdoor festival, or other outdoor event occurring during that time, subject to and except as set forth in the provisions established in this section 142-64. The city may issue the 90-day permit at any time after receiving the university's application, without waiting for 90 days to pass. The university may apply for a new 90-day permit at least 30 days prior to the expiration of an existing 90-day permit, so that there is no lapse in the city's authorization of university events in the park. The university's new application shall highlight any changes from the immediately preceding application. Upon submission of its first 90-day permit application, the university shall pay to the city a $100.00 application fee. Thereafter an application fee will be required only if there is a material change in the university's application (other than the dates during which the permit is effective). Nothing in this section 142-64 shall require the city to grant the university a 90-day permit. The city shall have sole discretion regarding issuance of this type of permit, provided that a decision to deny the permit shall not be based upon any of the factors set forth in section 142-12(b). 
(c)  The university shall perform or provide the following for each permitted event: 
(1)  Sparks Hall shall be unlocked and available during each permitted event in order to provide access to lavatories and water fountains. 
(2)  The university fire safety officer shall perform all necessary banner permitting for permitted events. In addition, the university fire safety officer shall approve the fire safety plan for every permitted event, and may do so without review or approval from the city fire marshal if the permitted event: 
a.  Has tents that are no larger than ten feet by ten feet, or has no tents at all; 
b.  Has no tents that are closer together than 12 feet, 
c.  Has no grilling or other open flame activity, regardless of whether the activity is within or outside of tents: 
d.  Does not include use of fireworks; 
e.  Does not include exhibits with compressed gases, with flames or with ovens, such as glass blowing; and 
f.  Has fewer than 2,000 attendees. 
(3)  Where a permitted event does not meet all of the requirements set forth in subsection (c)(2)(a) through (f) above, the university shall submit a fire safety plan for the permitted event to the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department for a sub-permit. The plan must be submitted at least ten business days prior to the permitted event. In addition to other potential requirements, the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department shall mandate that the university provide one or more crowd control managers where expected attendance is greater than 2,000. The university will be required to monitor crowd size during the permitted event and respond appropriately should there be an unanticipated increase in participants or should an overcrowding condition arise. The university shall utilize its own fire safety officers to implement compliance with all fire safety laws. 
(4)  The university shall provide at least one first aid station and at least two emergency medical technicians-intermediate for a permitted event that exceeds 1,999 attendees. The University must submit a medical safety plan to the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department for a sub-permit where the permitted event exceeds 9,999 attendees. 
(5)  The university shall provide one 55-gallon trash receptacle and one 55-gallon recycling receptacle for every anticipated 100 attendees at the permitted event. Where the permitted event includes sale and/or distribution of food and/or beverages, the university shall increase this number to five trash and five recycling 55-gallon receptacles per 100 people. The university shall: monitor the waste and recycling receptacles throughout the permitted event to make certain that they do not overflow, and shall empty them as needed: dispose of refuse; dispose of recyclables to a location that processes them; at the conclusion of the permitted event, provide litter control and remove other debris from the park and from the areas within 200 feet surrounding the park; and pressure wash surfaces of the park after the permitted event if needed. Where a permitted event includes grilling, the university shall also provide coal disposal bins in the grilling area(s), and shall be responsible for safely disposing of the coals at the end of the permitted event. 
(6)  The university shall provide police coverage by university police officers or other post-certified public safety officers with a minimum ratio of the following: 
a.  For large gatherings with fewer than 250 attendees: The amount of police coverage (if any) shall be determined at the discretion of the university. 
b.  For large gatherings with greater than 250 attendees: One officer per 250 attendees. 
c.  For outdoor festivals: One officer per 250 attendees. 
d.  For a large gathering or outdoor festival that includes distribution of free food as part of the event: One officer per 100 attendees. 
e.  For outdoor festivals that include consumption, distribution, and/or sale of alcohol: One officer per 100 attendees. 
(7)  Where a permitted event includes a lane or street closure, the university must submit a public safety plan for the permitted event to the Atlanta Police Department for a sub-permit. In addition to other potential requirements, the Atlanta Police Department will mandate that the university provide one or more traffic control officers to monitor the closure. The officers must be either university police officers or other post-certified public safety officers. 
(8)  Immediately prior to the submission of each 90-day permit application, the university shall submit plans to the city's bureau of buildings regarding the stage and/or other temporary structures that may be utilized during permitted events, but only if the university's plans have changed since the previous 90-day permit was issued. Where no changes have been made, the university shall provide a letter to that effect to the city's bureau of' buildings. The bureau of buildings will determine which structures may be permitted for the full 90 days, even if the university has not made changes to its plans. The bureau of buildings will provide the temporary structure sub-permit to the university, and the university will present the sub-permit to the mayor's office of special events to be included with the university's 90-day permit. For temporary structures that are not covered by the 90-day permit, the university must receive a temporary structures sub-permit from the bureau of buildings prior to use. 
(9)  The university may, use amplified sound during permitted events, but only on weekends and federally recognized holidays. and on weekdays between 12:00 p.m. through 1:30 p.m. and from 6:00 p.m. through 11:00 p.m. At all other times, any and all sound produced by a permitted event may not be plainly audible outside the perimeter of the park. 
(10)  No alcohol shall be allowed in the park except during outdoor festivals. Where an outdoor festival includes consumption, distribution, and/or sale of alcoholic beverages, the university shall obtain all necessary licenses and permits from the governmental jurisdictions of purview. 
(11)  Where an outdoor festival includes an amusement and/or ride, the university must submit an amusement sub-permit application to the office of parks and the bureau of buildings and receive a sub-permit from each as applicable. 
(12)  Except as described herein, the university shall not be required to obtain any further sub-permits for its permitted events unless set forth in writing by the chief of staff or her/his designee, after consultation with the university. 
(d)  The university shall abide by the following rules throughout the duration of each 90-day permit: 
(1)  Hurt Park shall remain a park that is owned by the City of Atlanta and the university shall keep the park open to the public at all times, including without limitation during events authorized pursuant by the 90-day permit. This provision notwithstanding, the city shall have the right to close Hurt Park at its discretion; provided, however, the city provides reasonable prior notice to the university as may be practicable. 
(2)  The university shall abide by the United States Constitution's First Amendment, and shall not interfere with speech and other forms of expression protected thereby, except as otherwise authorized by the First Amendment and resulting applicable case law. 
(3)  The university shall be responsible for making certain that all permitted events comply with the applicable laws and rules established by the Fulton County Health Department. 
(4)  The university shall comply with all other applicable laws, including without limitation the city's laws regarding conduct prohibited inside of city parks. The university shall enforce such prohibitions amongst all attendees of permitted events. 
(5)  The rules set forth in this outdoor events chapter shall apply to all permitted events, except to the extent that those rules are specifically modified by this section 142-64. These rules shall include, without limitation, reimbursement of the city for the cost of restoration services and supplemental services should they be required. 
(6)  The city may permit other outdoor festivals or outdoor events in Hurt Park, which are not sponsored by the university, but will communicate closely with the university to avoid scheduling conflicts. The university will not be responsible for providing any services during non-university events, except as otherwise agreed upon by the university and the city. 
(7)  The city shall provide an updated calendar to the university indicating all non-university festivals and other outdoor events that have received a permit to occur in Hurt Park, including the date, time, nature and anticipated attendance of the event. The city shall provide the university with at least 30 days advance notice of outdoor festivals and at least 21 days advance notice of large gatherings. The university shall not hold any large gatherings or outdoor festivals in the park during permitted non-university events therein (unless it obtains the city's prior written consent), provided that the city gives the university the prescribed advance notice. The university shall provide the city, as soon as practicable, any events that should be added to the calendar. The city will assume that any other large gathering or outdoor festival that occurs in Hurt Park is a university sponsored permitted event, and the university shall be responsible for all restoration or other repair costs arising there from, unless the university notifies the Chief of the Atlanta Police Department, or her/his designee, both by email and by telephone, that an unauthorized event is occurring. The notice must occur while the event is in progress. Where the university provides such notice, and where the event was in fact not sponsored by the university, or one of its departments/units, or a student group or organization officially recognized by the university, the university shall not be responsible for restoration and repair costs arising from the event. 
(e)  The university shall be required to pay the city for all applicable sub-permit fees, including without limitation street closure sub-permits and temporary structure sub-permits. The city shall also charge the university a permit application fee, but only as described in subsection 142-64(b) above. The city shall not charge the university any permit fees for its Hurt Park outdoor events, but only if the university provides certain maintenance and other services for Hurt Park, as spelled out in a memorandum of understanding between the city and the university. Where the memorandum of understanding fails to be in effect for three consecutive months or more, the university may not receive a new 90-day permit until a memorandum of understanding is executed. 
(f)  The city shall have the right to modify the requirements set forth in this section for any particular permitted event based upon the description of the permitted event and reasonable safety, sanitary, park maintenance, or other similar issues related thereto, provided that those reasons are compliant with the regulations set forth in code section 142-12(b). 
(Ord. No. 2010-44(10-O-1220), § 1, 7-27-10) 
Secs. 142-65—142-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ASSEMBLIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-04(08-O-2030), § 2, approved January 31, 2009, repealed Art. VI, §§ 142-80—142-86, which pertained to assemblies. Section 2 also enacted provisions designated as a new Art. VI, §§ 142-80—142-88, to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 142-80. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the assembly ordinance, which is a subsection of the outdoor events ordinance. All of the definitions, requirements and other provisions set forth in article I through article V of this chapter shall apply to the assembly ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04(08-O-2030), § 1, 1-31-09) 
Sec. 142-81. - Definitions and clarifications. 
In addition to the words, terms and phrases set forth in sections 142-2 and 142-51 above, the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  "Assembly" means any outdoor event that: 
(1)  Involves an organized group that: moves from one location to another upon any city street, sidewalk, park or other city-owned right-of-way; has a common purpose, design, destination or goal; and consists of persons, animals or vehicles, or a combination thereof. Examples include without limitation a march, parade, promenade, or procession of any kind. Should the moving outdoor event be immediately followed by one hour or less of stationary activity, such as a speaker, the stationary activity shall be deemed part of the moving activity. Where the stationary activity exceeds one hour, it shall be deemed a separate outdoor event that requires separate permitting if applicable; and 
(2)  Requires the temporary closure or obstruction of all or a portion of any city street, sidewalk, park or other city-owned right-of-way. When at least a four-foot width of sidewalk remains unobstructed during an outdoor event, and where the Atlanta Police Department and/or the department of public works, office of transportation determine that the sidewalk will be passable during said outdoor event, no temporary closure of said sidewalk shall be required; and 
(3)  Meets at least two of the following three criteria: (A) Has greater than seventy-four people; (B) Travels for greater than two blocks if on a city street or sidewalk, or is in a city park; and (C) Moving portion of the outdoor event lasts for greater than one hour; and 
(4)  Does not fit into any of the following exclusions: 
(A)  Funeral processions; 
(B)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in education classes, provided this conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or 
(C)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its agency; or 
(D)  The city street, sidewalk, park and/or city-owned right-of-way being closed is adjacent to property owned by another governmental entity, and/or owned by an accredited college or university, on which an event is occurring at approximately the same time that the city property is being closed. 
(b)  "Block" means one side of a rectangular area surrounded by streets and usually containing buildings, measured from corner to corner. 
(c)  "Street closure permit" means the permit that is required for any non-construction-related event, of any size, indoor or outdoor, for which all or a portion of: (1) any city street including without limitation a lane, and/or (2) any other city-owned right-of-way other than sidewalks, and/or (3) any city street and/or right-of-way (or portions thereof) plus the adjacent sidewalk(s), will be temporarily closed or obstructed, and where the event does not meet the definition of "assembly" or fit into any of the exceptions listed in section 142-81(a)(4) above. 
(d)  "Sidewalk closure permit" means the permit that is required for any non-construction-related event, of any size, indoor or outdoor, for which: (1) all of any city sidewalk will be temporarily closed or obstructed; or (2) a portion of any city sidewalk will be temporarily closed or obstructed, such that the closure or obstruction leaves less than a four foot width of the sidewalk unobstructed, and/or the office of transportation and/or the Atlanta Police Department determines that the sidewalk will not be passable during said closure or obstruction; and 3) the event does not meet the definition of "Assembly" or fit into any of the exceptions listed in section 142-81(a)(4) above. Where the sidewalk is closed for the reasons set forth in this subsection 142-81(d), but said sidewalk is adjacent to a street or other right-of-way that will be closed pursuant to a street closure permit, the sidewalk closure shall be included in the street closure permit, and no separate sidewalk closure permit shall be required. 
(e)  Clarifications: Necessity of assembly permit versus street closure permit or sidewalk closure permit during certain types of events. 
(1)  Where an outdoor festival or large gathering: i) has a discreet component that involves organized group movement from one location to another, and ii) the organized group movement meets the definition above of assembly, then the moving component alone shall be considered an assembly. The applicant must receive an outdoor festival permit or large gathering permit, as appropriate, for the non-moving component of the outdoor event, and an assembly permit for the moving component of the outdoor event. 
(2)  Where an outdoor event: i) requires the closure of a city street, sidewalk, park, or other right of way; and ii) meets the definition of outdoor festival or large gathering, except that it involves movement from one location to another; and iii) said movement is not a discreet component of the outdoor event but rather the sole or primary focus of the outdoor event, then the entire outdoor event shall be deemed an assembly, not an outdoor festival or large gathering, and an assembly permit shall be required. 
(3)  Where an outdoor event: i) meets the definition of outdoor festival or large gathering; and ii) is non-moving, and requires the temporary closure or obstruction of all or a portion of any city street, sidewalk, park or other public right-of-way, (e.g. a block party, or an outdoor festival on private property that expands into the sidewalk and/or street), except for within one hour after the moving component of an assembly ends as described in subsection 142-81(a)(1), then the host must obtain a street closure permit and/or sidewalk closure permit for the closure in addition to the outdoor festival permit or large gathering permit, as appropriate. 
(4)  Where any event that is not an assembly: i) is permitted or unpermitted; and ii) is indoor and/or outdoor; and iii) requires the temporary closure or obstruction of all or a portion of any city street, sidewalk, park or other public right-of-way; and iv) where the closure will accommodate something that is incidental to the event rather than part of the event (e.g. a party inside of a residence or other building requires closure of a street to accommodate parking or to accommodate an entranceway for guests), then the host must obtain a street closure permit and/or sidewalk closure permit for the closure. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04(08-O-2030), § 1, 1-31-09) 
Sec. 142-82. - Overview of assembly requirements. 
(a)  The assembly ordinance applies to outdoor events occurring at least in part on public property. 
(b)  Any person, organization, corporation or other group wishing to have an assembly must obtain an assembly permit. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any assembly, unless an assembly permit has been obtained from the city. 
(c)  The procedure for obtaining an assembly permit is as follows: 
(1)  Unless the assembly is associated with an outdoor festival as described in section 142-81(c)(1), the applicant shall submit all required documents and fees to the SEM no fewer than 30 days prior to the assembly, including but not limited to an assembly application, any necessary sub-permit applications, and a map showing in detail the route to be traveled and the portions of streets, sidewalks and/or parks to be closed. 
(A)  In the event that a sub-permit application has a deadline greater than 30 days, the applicant shall abide by the requirements of the sub-permit, as set forth in Article IV above. 
(B)  Where the assembly is a discreet portion of an outdoor festival, as described in section 142-81(c)(1), the assembly application must be filed simultaneously with the outdoor festival application. 
(C)  There shall be no exceptions to the time deadlines set forth above, unless the timing of the assembly is based upon the occurrence of an identifiable event or decision, the date of which could not have been predicted with certainty, including but not limited to an announcement regarding a military action, an announcement of a court decision, or a death. If the assembly occurs within one week of the identifiable event, the 30-day requirement for filing the application shall be waived. 
(i)  The host or organizer of such an assembly shall file an assembly application with the SEM via hand delivery or email as quickly as possible. The application shall be considered as set forth in section 142-83. 
(ii)  This waiver shall not apply to sub-permit applications except for an emergency services sub-permit, an amplification sub-permit, and a banner sub-permit. 
(2)  The applicant must meet all other requirements set forth in sections I through V of this chapter. 
(3)  The assembly application shall be accompanied by the appropriate application fee. For assemblies with an anticipated attendance of below 10,000 attendees, the application fee shall be $50.00. Assemblies with an anticipated attendance of 10,000 people or more shall have an application fee of $100.00. For purposes of this subsection, attendance shall be determined based upon the anticipated number of participants plus spectators, but in no event shall attendance be calculated based upon the anticipated number of counter-demonstrators. 
(4)  The assembly application shall be accompanied by a $100.00 refundable sanitation bond, or a sanitation bond of greater value as set forth in subsection 142-22(f)(3)(A). The sanitation bond requirement may be waived if the Host has performed or held an Assembly at least once during the past three consecutive years and completed all clean-up and cooperated fully with the city during each of these events. 
(d)  Assembly permits include the right to vend, and the applicant need not obtain a separate vending permit for activity occurring during the time that the assembly permit is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04(08-O-2030), § 1, 1-31-09; Ord. No. 2009-33(09-O-0805), § 8, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 142-83. - Additional considerations regarding approval of assembly permit. 
The assembly permit shall be granted-at the discretion of the chief of staff after her/his consideration of the factors set forth in section 142-12 above, but only after s/he receives a security plan approved by the chief of police or her/his designee, an emergency services and fire safety plan approved by the fire chief or her/his designee, and a recommendation from the commissioner of the department of watershed management, the department of public works and/or the department of parks and recreation, or any of their designees, as may be appropriate. In considering whether to grant the assembly permit, the chief of staff, the police and fire chiefs, and the commissioners mentioned above shall evaluate the public safety, traffic, and sanitation effects of such closing, and shall require that reasonable steps be taken, where possible, to minimize the adverse effect such closings may have upon the public. To minimize impact upon public safety and traffic, the police chief or her/his designee shall recommend denial of assembly requests where the outdoor event is to occur on a weekday that is not a federal holiday, unless s/he reasonably determines that the outdoor event will create negligible traffic delays and public safety concerns. Upon granting the assembly permit, the chief of staff shall authorize the closure of the appropriate city streets, sidewalks, rights of way, and/or parks, or portions thereof, to accommodate the assembly. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04(08-O-2030), § 1, 1-31-09; Ord. No. 2009-33(09-O-0805), § 9, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) 
Sec. 142-84. - Contents of assembly permit. 
In addition to those items set forth in section 142-13 above, if the assembly permit is granted, the permit must include, at a minimum: 
(a)  The location by streets and/or parks of any assembling areas for the assembly; 
(b)  The time at which units of the assembly will begin to assemble at the assembling area or areas, and the approximate conclusion time of the assembly; 
(c)  The maximum length of the assembly in miles or fractions thereof; 
(d)  The route to be traveled, turn by turn, and including the starting point and the termination point; 
(e)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the assembly; and 
(f)  An attached map illustrating the exact route to be utilized by the assembly. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04(08-O-2030), § 1, 1-31-09) 
Sec. 142-85. - Street closure permits and sidewalk closure permits. 
Any person, organization, corporation or other group wishing to temporarily close or obstruct all or a portion of a city-owned street or right-of-way, or a city sidewalk, for an event that is not an assembly and that does not fit within the exceptions of section 142-81(a)(4), must obtain a street closure permit or sidewalk closure Permit as applicable. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any such event unless a street closure permit or a sidewalk closure permit has been obtained from the chief of police or her/his designee. 
(a)  Any person or entity wishing to obtain a street closure permit or a sidewalk closure permit shall submit a completed street or sidewalk closure permit application to the chief of police or her/his designee at least ten days prior to the event to guarantee review, and shall submit a $50.00 application fee therewith. The Atlanta Police Department will reasonably attempt to review an application submitted after that deadline, but only where said review does not interfere with other priorities of the department. No application fee for the street or sidewalk closure permit shall be due when said closure is part of an outdoor festival that is permitted or whose permit is pending. An application fee shall be due when the closure is part of a large gathering that is permitted or whose permit is pending. 
(b)  A street closure permit and a sidewalk closure permit may not be used to authorize an assembly. 
(c)  Street closure permits and sidewalk closure permits issued pursuant to this Article VI may not be used to authorize or accommodate valet parking. 
(d)  The street closure permit and sidewalk closure permit shall be granted at the discretion of the chief of police or her/his designee. The determination of whether to issue the permit shall be made after the decision-maker's consideration of the factors considered by the chief of staff regarding outdoor events, as set forth in section 142-12 above, and after an evaluation of the public safety and traffic effects of such closing. 
(e)  When granting a street or sidewalk closure permit, the chief of police shall require that reasonable steps be taken, where possible, to minimize the adverse effect that such closing(s) may have upon the public. To minimize impact upon public safety and traffic, the police chief or her/his designee shall recommend denial of a street closure permit application where the closure is to occur on a weekday that is not a federal holiday, unless s/he reasonably determines that the closure will create negligible traffic delays and public safety concerns. 
(f)  Upon granting the street closure permit or the sidewalk closure permit, the chief of police or her/his designee shall have the authority to close the appropriate city-owned streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, or portions thereof, to accommodate the permit request. 
(g)  The police chief or her/his designee shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles at or near the location where the closure or obstruction will occur. The permit recipient, at the direction of the Atlanta Police Chief or her/his designee may be required to post city-approved "no parking" signs in the designated locations. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation of such signs. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04(08-O-2030), § 1, 1-31-09; Ord. No. 2009-33(09-O-0805), §§ 6, 10, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 142-86. - Notice by the chief of police. 
Within two business days of recommending the approval of an assembly permit or approving a street closure permit or a sidewalk closure permit, the chief of police or her/his designee shall send a copy of such recommendation or permit to the Clerk of the Atlanta City Council for distribution to the impacted councilmember, to the Chair of the Atlanta Planning and Advisory Board, and to the city coordinator of the NPU system for distribution to the neighborhood planning unit in which the closure is occurring. Said recommendation or permit shall include the streets, sidewalks, rights of way, parks, or portions thereof to be closed, and the dates and times of such closure. In addition, where a street closure permit or sidewalk closure permit is granted, the chief of police or her/his designee shall also notify the SEM, the fire chief, the commissioners of the department of parks and recreation, the department of watershed management, and the department of public works as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04(08-O-2030), § 1, 1-31-09; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) 
Sec. 142-87. - Notice by the special events manager. 
(a)  In the event that the chief of staff grants an assembly permit, s/he shall be authorized to direct the police chief and/or the commissioner of the department of public works and/or the commissioner of the department of parks and recreation, in writing, to close the appropriate streets, sidewalks, rights of way, and/or parks, or portions thereof, to accommodate the assembly. This written direction shall be sent by the SEM along with the copy of the assembly permit, as described in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  Within two business days of the issuance of an assembly permit by the chief of staff, the SEM shall send a copy of the permit to the following, or their designees: 
(1)  The mayor; 
(2)  The city attorney; 
(3)  The police chief; 
(4)  The fire chief; 
(5)  The commissioner of the department of parks and recreation; 
(6)  The commissioner of the department of public works; 
(7)  The commissioner of the department of city planning; 
(8)  The Clerk of the Atlanta City Council for distribution to the impacted councilmember; 
(9)  The Chair of the Atlanta Planning and Advisory Board; and 
(10)  The city coordinator of the NPU system, for distribution to the neighborhood planning unit in which the assembly will occur. 
(c)  Where the police chief or her/his designee recommends approval of an assembly and the chief of staff denies the assembly, the SEM shall send notice of said denial within one business day to the Atlanta Chief of Police or her/his designee, to the Clerk of the Atlanta City Council for distribution to the impacted councilmember, to the Chair of the Atlanta Planning and Advisory Board, and to the city coordinator of the NPU system for distribution to the neighborhood planning unit in which the assembly was requested to occur. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04(08-O-2030), § 1, 1-31-09; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17) 
Sec. 142-88. - Prohibited conduct during assemblies. 
(a)  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any assembly, or with any person vehicle or animal participating in or used in an assembly. 
(b)  No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising an assembly when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as an assembly, unless specifically authorized to do so by Atlanta Police Department Personnel. 
(c)  The police chief shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles at or near the location where an assembly is being conducted, and/or along the route of an assembly. The host, at the direction of the Atlanta Police Chief or her/his designee shall post Atlanta Police Department approved "no parking" signs in the designated locations at least 48 hours prior to the time that the street will be closed. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation of such signs. A person will be liable for parking on a street only if "no parking" signs are posted. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person at any assembly to carry or possess any weapon, as defined below. For purposes of this article, and notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, "weapon" means any pistol, rifle, shotgun or other firearm of any kind, whether loaded or unloaded, air rifle, air pistol, paintball gun, paintball rifle, explosive, blasting cap(s), knife, hatchet, ax, slingshot, blackjack, metal knuckles, mace, iron buckle, ax handle, chains, crowbar, hammer, or any club, bludgeon or any other instrumentality used, or intended to be used, as a dangerous weapon. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess at any Assembly, any sign, poster, plaque or notice unless such sign, poster plaque, or notice is constructed solely of a cloth, vinyl, paper or flexible cardboard material no greater than one-quarter (¼) inch in thickness. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess at any assembly, any length of lumber, wood or wood lath unless it is one-fourth (¼) inch or less in thickness and two inches or less in width or if not generally rectangular in shape, such object shall not exceed three-quarters (¾) inch in its thickest dimension. Both ends of the length of lumber, wood or wood lath shall be blunt and shall not be pointed. Exceptions from this section include (1) lumber or wood used to support or control puppets, so long as the lumber or wood is not detached from the puppets; and (2) stilts, defined as two poles with footrests off the ground on which someone balances or walks, so long as each stilt does not exceed 15 feet in length and two inches by two inches in width. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess at any assembly, any length of metal, or other similar hard or stiff material, whether solid or hollow, unless the person is carrying a flagpole and is a participant in a portion of the assembly that utilizes flags. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess at any Assembly any length of plastic, except that hollow plastic may be used to support a sign, banner, placard or other similar display if: (1) the hollow plastic does not exceed three-quarter (¾) inch in its thickest dimension; (2) the hollow plastic does not exceed one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch in wall thickness; (3) the hollow plastic is not filled with any material, liquid, gas or solid; and (4) both ends of the length of the hollow plastic shall be blunt, and not pointed. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess at any assembly, glass bottles, glass jars or glass containers of any kind, unless such glass container is a vial required to hold medication needed and utilized by an assembly participant, where such medication is customarily stored in a glass vial. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess at any assembly, balloons filled with any material or substance other than air, oxygen or helium. Such materials and substances include, but are not limited to, water, paint, or any other liquid, solid or gas. 
(k)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess at any assembly, bricks, stones, rocks, or pieces of asphalt or concrete. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw similarly hard and heavy materials during an assembly. 
(l)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess spray paint cans at any assembly. 
(m)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess at any assembly, any projectile launcher or other device which is commonly used for the purpose of launching, hurling or throwing any object, liquid, material or other substance, including, but not limited to, so-called Supersoaker-type water guns and water cannons. Nothing in this subsection is intended to prohibit or restrict those participating in parades, demonstrations, rallies or assemblies from possessing sufficient amounts of water or other liquids designed and intended for human consumption during such events. 
(n)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess at any assembly, any so-called "sleeping dragon device", with the intent or ability to use the device to deny or obstruct the public's ability to freely move about on roadways, sidewalks, or into or out of buildings. For purposes of this subsection, a sleeping dragon device shall mean a section of pipe, or a container, filled with weighted material, handcuffs, chains, carabiners or other locking devices used to lock a person or persons or other objects. 
(o)  It shall be unlawful to throw items from a moving vehicle that is part of an assembly. 
(p)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a disabled person from carrying, possessing or using a wheelchair, cane, walker, or similar device necessary for providing mobility so that the person may participate in an assembly. 
(q)  Nothing in this section is intended to authorize the possession or use of materials, weapons or devices that are otherwise prohibited by any other federal, state or local law or regulation. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the carrying or possession of items and materials that have the potential to be used as weapons to cause physical or property damage, and whose possession might not otherwise be prohibited by federal, state or local law. 
(r)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit duly authorized law enforcement officers acting in their official capacity from carrying or possessing materials, weapons and/or devices used in the performance of law enforcement duties. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04(08-O-2030), § 1, 1-31-09) 
Sec. 142-89. - Parking meter reimbursement. 
The recipient of an assembly permit or any other outdoor event permit, or a street closure permit, shall pay the city a parking meter reimbursement fee where the permit results in the closure of a street on which parking meters are located. The fee shall be applied only where the meter parking is disallowed for greater than one calendar day, where a calendar day is defined as 12:00 a.m. through 11:59 p.m. The fee shall be $5.00 per each calendar day, subsequent to the first day, per parking meter space that cannot be utilized by the public, as calculated by the department of public works, office of transportation. Said parking meter reimbursement fee must be paid by the permit applicant prior to her/his receiving the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2009-33(09-O-0805), § 13, 6-23-09) 
Secs. 142-90—142-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OUTDOOR EVENTS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 

Sec. 142-100. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to all outdoor events occurring, at least in part, on public property, excluding outdoor festivals and assemblies, which are set forth in articles V and VI above. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-101. - Fewer than seventy-five attendees. 
(a)  An outdoor event occurring on public property, with an expected attendance of fewer than 75 people, and that is not an assembly or an overnight event, does not require an outdoor event permit, and no outdoor event application need be filed. 
(b)  Where such outdoor event includes an activity that requires a sub-permit, as set forth in article IV above, the applicant must file a sub-permit application with the SEM and be issued a sub-permit prior to performing said activity. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2013-62(13-O-1243), § 3, 11-27-13 ) 
Sec. 142-102. - Park facility reservation permits-any number of attendees. 
(a)  An outdoor event with one person or greater that requires the use of a park outdoor facility, such as a park pavilion, shall file a facility reservation application with the SEM or with the office of parks. This section 142-102 shall not apply to sports facilities located on city property that are being used for their intended purpose, as reasonably determined by the commissioner for the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs, as set forth in section 142-3(f) of this chapter. 
(b)  Decisions of whether to grant a park facility reservation permit shall be made by the office of parks. Where a facility reservation application is accepted by the SEM, the SEM shall forward the application within one business day to the office of parks for processing and permit issuance if appropriate. After a facility reservation application has been processed by the office of parks, the bureau, within one business day, shall forward the processed application and permit, if any, to the SEM for informational and calendaring purposes, and the SEM shall maintain the file on such outdoor event. 
(c)  The department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs shall maintain written procedures for obtaining a park facility reservation permit, and said procedures shall be placed in the department's policies and procedures manual, provided to the SEM, and provided to the public upon request. 
(d)  Park facility reservation permits are granted on a first come, first served basis, based upon the time at which an application is received by the office of parks. A park facility reservation permit may be denied for the reasons set forth in section 142-12 above. Where the office of parks receives competing Applications for substantially the same time and place, the office shall apply the considerations regarding granting of a permit, as set forth in section 142-12(a), and the other subsections of section 142-12. In addition, the office shall give priority to applications from city residents, or applications on behalf of groups whose primary location is inside the City of Atlanta. 
(e)  A facility reservation application may be submitted no more than 90 days and no fewer than 14 days before a scheduled event. 
(f)  There is no application fee for a facility reservation application. 
(g)  A refundable sanitation bond of $100.00 may be required to obtain a park facility reservation permit, as set forth in section 142-22(f)(3) and 110-3(e)(2). 
(h)  Facility reservation permit fees are required to be paid, as set forth in section 110-3 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(i)  During times when an outdoor park facility is not reserved, members of the public may use the outdoor park facility on a first come, first served basis. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-103. - Large gathering—More than seventy-five attendees. 
(a)  A large gathering is an outdoor event on public property that lasts for more than one hour, has more than 75 attendees, and does not meet the definition of outdoor festival nor assembly. In addition, the term 'large gathering' shall include an overnight event of any size, even with an attendance of fewer than 75 people, provided that the overnight event meets all other elements of the large gathering definition. 
(b)  Anyone wishing to hold a large gathering must receive a large gathering permit. Except as set forth in subsection (b)(2) below, anyone wishing to obtain a large gathering permit must file an application with the SEM. 
(1)  Any application for a large gathering to be held on any public property other than a park shall be processed by the SEM. The chief of staff shall issue the permit if s/he approves the application. 
(2)  Any application for a large gathering to be held, at least in part, in a park, shall be filed with the SEM or with the office of parks. The application shall be processed by the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs' office of parks, and the office shall issue the permit if the application is approved. Where a large gathering application is accepted by the SEM, the SEM shall forward the application to the office of parks within one business day for processing and permit issuance if appropriate. After a large gathering application has been processed by the office of parks, the office shall forward, within one business day, the processed application and permit, if any, to the SEM for informational and calendaring purposes, and the SEM shall maintain the file on such outdoor event. 
(c)  Except as set forth in subsection (1) and (2) below, a large gathering application must be filed at least 30 days prior to the outdoor event so that the city can provide adequate solid waste and security services. 
(1)  If the large gathering includes an activity that requires a sub-permit, the applicant must file the sub-permit application with the SEM within the timeframe set forth in article IV above. 
(2)  If the timing of the large gathering is based upon the occurrence of an identifiable event or decision, the date of which could not have been predicted with certainty, including but not limited to an announcement regarding a military action, an announcement of a court decision, or a death, and if the large gathering occurs within 48 hours of the identifiable event, the 14-day requirement for filing the application shall be waived, as long as the large gathering does not interfere with nor impede the flow of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic. This waiver shall not apply to overnight events or to sub-permit applications. 
(A)  The host or organizer of such a large gathering shall notify the SEM that the assembly shall be occurring, and shall provide as much information as possible about the large gathering, including but not limited to location, date, time, and approximate size, so that the city can attempt to provide adequate services for the large gathering. 
(B)  The notification described in subsection (2)(A) shall be made by hand delivery, telephone and/or email, and shall be made within two hours of the decision to hold the large gathering. 
(d)  The application fee for a large gathering is $50.00. Where the large gathering occurs, at least in part, in a city park, the application fee shall be deposited in an account to be utilized solely by the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs to offset the department's administrative costs associated with large gatherings. An application fee owed for a large gathering that meets the criteria of section 142-103(c)(2) above may be paid within five business days after the large gathering occurs. 
(e)  There is no permit fee for a large gathering permit, except that, where a large gathering includes the reservation of a park facility, a park reservation facility permit fee will be applied, as set forth in section 110-3 of the Atlanta Code of Ordinances. 
(f)  A large gathering permit does not include the privilege to vend. 
(g)  A permit to hold a large gathering in a park does not include the privilege to erect any temporary structure or tent. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2009-33(09-O-0805), §§ 1—3, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2013-62(13-O-1243), §§ 2, 3, 11-27-13 ) 
Secs. 142-104—142-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OUTDOOR EVENTS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 

Sec. 142-110. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to all outdoor events occurring, at least in part, on private property, excluding outdoor festivals, which are set forth in article V above. This article addresses the need for outdoor event permits and sub-permits only. Nothing in this article shall eliminate the need for compliance with all other applicable laws and City Code requirements, including but not limited to Building Code requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-111. - Fewer than 75 attendees. 
(a)  An outdoor event occurring on private property, with an expected attendance of fewer than 75 people, does not require an outdoor event permit, and no outdoor event application need be filed. 
(b)  Where such outdoor event includes an activity that requires a sub-permit, as set forth in article IV above, the applicant must file a sub-permit application with the SEM and be issued a sub-permit prior to performing said activity. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-112. - Private outdoor events at residence. 
(a)  An outdoor event occurring on private property, at a building that is used as a residence at the time of the outdoor event, regardless of the number of attendees, does not require an outdoor event permit, and no outdoor event application need be filed. 
(b)  If such outdoor event has greater than 75 attendees and occurs at a residential building that is not being used as a residence at the time of the outdoor event, and if the outdoor event does not qualify as an outdoor festival, then the outdoor event shall be treated as a private large gathering, as described in section 142-115 below. 
(c)  Where such outdoor event includes an activity that requires a sub-permit, as set forth in article IV above, the applicant must file a sub-permit application with the SEM and be issued a sub-permit prior to performing said activity. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-113. - Private outdoor events at churches and schools. 
Where an outdoor event occurs on private property, at a building that is located in an area zoned as residential, (R1 through R5, or RG1 through RG6), but where the building is not intended to be a residence, (including without limitation, a church, synagogue, mosque, or school): 
(a)  Where the property is utilized on a regular basis, but in no case less than a weekly basis, for conducting classes and/or worship services, and where the outdoor event has no greater than 500 attendees, no outdoor event permit is required and no outdoor event application need be filed. 
(b)  Where the property is utilized on a regular basis, but in no case less than a weekly basis, for conducting classes and/or worship services, and where the outdoor event has greater than 500 attendees but does not qualify as an outdoor festival, the outdoor event shall be treated as a private large gathering, as described in section 142-115. 
(c)  Where the property is not utilized on a regular basis for conducting classes and/or worship services, and where the outdoor event has greater than 75 attendees, the outdoor event shall be treated as a private large gathering, as described in section 142-115. 
(d)  Where any of the outdoor events described in this section include an activity that requires a sub-permit, as set forth in article IV above, the applicant must file a sub-permit application with the SEM and be issued a sub-permit prior to performing said activity. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-114. - Private outdoor events on commercial properties. 
(a)  An outdoor event occurring on a commercial property, where the outdoor event does not qualify as an outdoor festival, and where the outdoor event is in compliance with the zoning of the commercial property, does not require an outdoor event permit, and no outdoor event application need be filed. For purposes of this section 142-114 only, vacant lots shall not be deemed to be commercial property. 
(b)  Where such outdoor event includes an activity that requires a sub-permit, as set forth in article IV above, the applicant must file a sub-permit application with the SEM and be issued a sub-permit prior to performing said activity. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall eliminate the need for the holder of an outdoor event on commercial property to meet the Building Code requirements for said property. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 142-115. - Private large gathering—More than 75 attendees. 
(a)  A private large gathering is an outdoor event on private property that lasts for more than one hour, has more than 75 attendees, does not meet the definition of outdoor festival, and does not meet the criteria set forth in section 142-112(a), 142-113(a) or 142-114 above. 
(b)  Anyone wishing to hold a private large gathering must file a private large gathering application with the SEM and must receive a private large gathering permit. 
(c)  Except as set forth in subsection (1) and (2) below, a private large gathering application must be filed at least 30 days prior to the outdoor event. 
(1)  If the private large gathering includes an activity that requires a sub-permit, the applicant must file the sub-permit application with the SEM within the timeframe set forth in article IV above. 
(2)  If the timing of the private large gathering is based upon the occurrence of an identifiable event or decision, the date of which could not have been predicted with certainty, including but not limited to an announcement regarding a military action, an announcement of a court decision, or a death, and if the assembly occurs within 48 hours of the identifiable event, the 14-day requirement for filing the application shall be waived, as long as the private large gathering does not interfere with nor impede the flow of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic. This waiver shall not apply to sub-permit applications. 
(A)  The host or organizer of such a private large gathering shall notify the SEM that the private large gathering shall be occurring, and shall provide as much information as possible about the private large gathering, including but not limited to location, date, time, and approximate size, so that the city can attempt to provide adequate services for the private large gathering. 
(B)  The notification described in subsection (2)(A) shall be made by telephone and/or email, and shall be made within two hours of the decision to hold the private large gathering. 
(d)  The application fee for a private large gathering application is $50.00. 
(e)  There is no permit fee for a private large gathering permit. 
(f)  A private large gathering permit does not include the privilege to vend. 
(Ord. No. 2006-66, § 15, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2009-33(09-O-0805), §§ 4, 5, 6-23-09) 
ARTICLE IX. - SHARED USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY DURING OUTDOOR EVENTS 

Sec. 142-116. - Definition. 
In addition to the words, terms and phrases set forth in the previous articles of this Chapter 142, for purposes of this Article IX only, "Permitted Public Property Event" or "PPPE" shall mean an outdoor event, other than an assembly, located on public property, authorized by permit pursuant to this Chapter 142. This article shall not apply to any portion of an outdoor event that occurs on public property that is not open to the general public during the event. 
(Ord. No. 2012-13(12-O-0358), 3-28-12) 
Sec. 142-117. - Prohibited conduct. 
In addition to any other rules set forth in this Chapter 142 and other applicable laws, it is unlawful for any person to engage in any of the following at any permitted public property event: 
(a)  Conduct that substantially prevents any person who is attempting to view, hear or meaningfully participate in a PPPE from doing so. 
(b)  Conduct, including creation of a physical obstacle, which substantially impedes access to a PPPE stage, vendor, speaker, or PPPE entertainment or other programming. 
(c)  Conduct that substantially hinders the ability to access, enter or exit the PPPE venue. 
(d)  Conduct that substantially interferes with the ability of the host to set-up the PPPE or assembly in the manner and locations indicated on the approved site plan, or to take-down the PPPE or assembly. 
(e)  Entrance of a PPPE venue that requires passage through a security checkpoint without consenting to personal inspection by a magnetometer or wand, and without consenting to inspection of personal belongings. For purposes of this subsection 142-117(f), "personal belongings" includes backpacks, duffel bags, sleeping bags, purses, coolers, bulky apparel items and other personal items large enough to conceal or contain items that are prohibited in the venue. 
(f)  Possession or consumption of alcohol in a park during a permitted outdoor festival where the permit includes prohibition of alcohol, and where signs regarding the prohibition are posted at the park during the PPPE. 
(g)  Possession or consumption of alcohol in a park during a permitted outdoor festival where the alcohol was not purchased or obtained from an official outdoor festival vendor, where the limitation on obtaining alcohol is included in the outdoor festival permit, and where signs regarding the limitation are posted at the park during the PPPE. 
(h)  Failure to discontinue participation in an assembly after being instructed to do so by the assembly host or her/his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2012-13(12-O-0358), 3-28-12) 
Sec. 142-118. - Warning. 
No person may be arrested for violating Code section 142-117 until s/he has received an oral or written warning to cease the prohibited conduct from an on-duty member of the Atlanta Police Department or from an off-duty post-certified security officer performing security services at the PPPE or assembly. If the violator fails to comply with the warning issued, s/he shall be subject to arrest for violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-13(12-O-0358), 3-28-12) 
Chapter 146 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-906 et seq.; alcoholic beverage excise taxes, § 10-141 et seq.; businesses, ch. 30. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 146-1. - Financial institutions business license tax. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "gross receipts" means the same as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. Notwithstanding any other section of chapter 30 pertaining to businesses, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(c)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. The returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. 
(d)  The due date of taxes levied by this section shall be April 1 of each subsequent year. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-12001, 14-12002) 
Sec. 146-2. - Gross premises tax on life insurers. 
There is levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premium upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. As used in this section, the term "gross direct premiums" means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by chapter 30, article XIV of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5181(d)) 
Sec. 146-3. - Gross premiums tax on other insurers. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross direct premiums means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
Insurer means any insurer other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1). 
(b)  Levy. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is levied an annual tax based upon the gross direct premiums on each insurer doing business in the city at the rate of 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5181(e)) 
Secs. 146-4—146-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Nontaxable status of urban homesteading property, § 54-64. 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 146-26. - Levy. 
(a)  Purposes. For the purposes of raising revenues for the support and maintenance of the city government, for the purpose of raising revenue for the payment of principal and interest on the bonded indebtedness of the city, for the purpose of providing improvements for the public parks and for the purpose of raising revenue for the support and maintenance of education, the taxes set forth in this article are levied and assessed, such levies and assessments to continue each year until amended or repealed. 
(b)  General levy . An ad valorem tax at the rate of 13.61 mills less an amount equal to 4.77 mills for the rollback of 2017 sales tax revenue, less an amount equal to 0.99 mills for millage equivalent rate rollback to yield a net ad valorem tax at the rate of 7.85 mills on every $1,000.00 or any part thereof of the value of all real and personal property which under the laws of this state is subject to taxation within the corporate limits of the city for this purpose, is hereby levied. 
(c)  Bonded indebtedness . An ad valorem tax at the rate of 1.88 mills on every $1,000.00 or any part thereof of the value of all real and personal property, which, under the laws of this state is subject to taxation within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of raising revenue for the payment of principal and interest on bonded indebtedness for the City of Atlanta, is here by levied. An ad valorem tax at the rate of 0.00 mills on every $1,000.00 or part thereof of the value of all real and personal property, which, under the laws of this state is subject to taxation within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of raising revenue for the payment of principal and interest on bonded indebtedness for the Atlanta Board of Education, is hereby levied. 
(d)  Parks . An ad valorem tax at the rate of 0.50 mills on every $1,000.00 or any part thereof of the value of all real and personal property which under the laws of this state, is subject to taxation within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of raising revenue for the improvement of the public parks of the city, is hereby levied. 
(e)  Education levy . An ad valorem tax at the rate of 20.740 mills on every $1,000.00 or any part thereof of the value of all real and personal property which under the laws of this state is subject to taxation within the corporate limits of the city for this purpose, is hereby levied. 
(f)  Special tax district . An ad valorem tax at the rate of 1.168 mills on every $1,000.00 or any part thereof of all real and personal property within that portion of the City of Atlanta lying in DeKalb County, which under the laws of this state is subject to taxation within the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta in DeKalb County, is hereby amended to read as follows hereby levied. 
(g)  Components listed on bills. The tax commissioner of Fulton County, by copy of this section, is requested to specifically list all components of the bonded indebtedness levy of the city, and the board of education and the general levy of the city, as set forth in subsections (b), (c) and (e) of this section, on tax bills to be rendered to citizens of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4041; Ord. No. 1995-04, § 1, 2-27-95; Ord. No. 1996-09, § 1, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 1996-33, § 1, 6-5-96; Ord. No. 1997-11, § 1, 2-20-97; Ord. No. 1997-28, §§ 1, 2, 5-27-97; Ord. No. 1997-38, § 1, 6-18-97; Ord. No. 1998-40, § 2, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1999-54, §§ 1, 2, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 2001-40, § 1, 6-8-01; Ord. No. 2001-49, § 1, 7-10-01; Ord. No. 2002-13, § 1, 3-5-02; Ord. No. 2002-51, § 1, 6-20-02; Ord. No. 2003-79, § 1, 6-24-03; Ord. No. 2004-37, § 1, 6-30-04; Ord. No. 2005-36, § 1, 6-23-05; Ord. No. 2006-52, § 1, 7-24-06; Ord. No. 2007-34(07-O-0871), § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 2008-54(08-O-1153), § 1, 6-27-08; Ord. No. 2010-30(10-O-0880), § 1, 6-30-10; Ord. No. 2010-55(10-O-1695), § 1, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 2011-28(11-O-0747), § 1, 7-9-11; Ord. No. 2011-41(11-O-1267), § 1, 9-28-11; Ord. No. 2012-32(12-O-0401), § 1, 6-27-12; Ord. No. 2012-33(12-O-0662), § 1, 7-11-12; Ord. No. 2013-29(12-O-1018), § 1, 6-26-13; Ord. No. 2013-37(13-O-1191), § 1, 8-28-13 ; Ord. No. 2014-25(14-O-1173), § 1, 6-25-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-39(14-O-1390), § 1, 9-11-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-33(15-O-1135), § 1, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-39(15-O-1300), § 1, 7-22-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-20(16-O-1148) , § 1, 6-29-2016; Ord. No. 2016-27(16-O-1356) , § 1, 9-15-16; Ord. No. 2017-53(17-O-1172), § 1, 9-18-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-60, § 1, 10-16-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-22(18-O-1203), § 1, 6-27-18 ; Ord. No. 2018-31(18-O-8-1396), § 1, 8-15-18 ; Ord. No. 2018-37(18-O-1482), § 1, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 146-27. - Assessment and collection of taxes. 
All matters related to the assessment and collection of all taxes due the city shall be done on behalf of the city by the Tax Commissioner of Fulton County, pursuant to contract by and between the city and such county as confirmed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1 and powers attendant thereto, all in conformity with the laws of this state. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4052) 
Sec. 146-28. - Notice of changes of address. 
(a)  Required. The owners of real estate located within the city are required to notify the Fulton County Tax Commissioner of a street address of the owner at which the owner may receive service of process or other legal notices. Notice shall be given upon such forms as may be approved by the Fulton County Tax Commissioner or its designee, giving all the information called for by such forms. If owners of real estate fail to provide the Fulton County Tax Commissioner with a current address for receipt of legal notices or fail to notify the Fulton County tax commissioner within ten days after any change of address, the address on file with the Fulton County Tax Commissioner will be deemed to be a valid address for service of any legal notice. 
(b)  Form of notice. It is made the duty of the Fulton County tax commissioner or the designee thereof to develop a form to be used by owners of real estate in reporting the address information as required in this section. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4043.1) 
Sec. 146-29. - Collection of delinquent county taxes. 
The council shall have the power and authority to authorize the chief financial officer and the chief financial officer's bureau directors to collect delinquent county taxes and to qualify as deputy tax commissioner of Fulton County if and when the city shall enter into a contract under the constitution and laws of the state to collect such taxes or to perform any incidental services in connection therewith. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4010) 
Sec. 146-30. - Issuance, direction and record of tax executions. 
If any person who is a citizen of the city or who has property subject to taxation within the limits of the city shall fail, refuse or neglect to pay the taxes imposed according to law or this Code or the ordinances of the city, execution shall issue for the tax, which execution shall bear interest in the name of the mayor and shall be entered on the books of the department of finance. The chief financial officer shall levy on the goods, chattels, lands and tenements of the defendant or so much thereof as shall be sufficient to satisfy the demand and costs, which execution shall bind all the property of the defendant. It shall be the duty of the chief financial officer and the city attorney jointly to review all executions for taxes and to determine which executions will be recorded. Further, it shall be the duty of the city attorney to record executions for taxes on the general execution docket in the office of the clerk of the superior court. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4048) 
Sec. 146-31. - Records of tax sales. 
The chief financial officer shall keep a book of record of all city tax sales, showing the owner of the property, the amount bid, the amount of the tax and the amount of the cost. The chief financial officer shall also keep and carefully file the deeds made on such sales to the city, with execution attached, and copies of the newspapers in which the respective sales were advertised. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4058) 
Sec. 146-32. - Bidding for city at tax sale. 
(a)  The municipal revenue collector shall designate some employee to attend all tax sales, who shall act for the city in bidding the amount of tax and costs on property sold by the chief financial officer or by the tax commissioner of Fulton County for taxes owed the city, where no bids in that amount are made on behalf of private individuals or corporations. When such property is sold by the tax commissioner of Fulton County, the amount as bid by the city of taxes and costs, together with expenses and commissions, shall be paid to the tax commissioner of Fulton County by the chief financial officer of the city. 
(b)  The chief financial officer is further authorized to pay to the tax commissioner of Fulton County, the costs of advertising parcels of land to be sold by such tax commissioner for nonpayment of taxes owed to the city, when the sale of such parcels is not consummated due to deficiencies in the advertisement, defective legal descriptions of such parcels, court injunctions against such sales and other related reasons. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4059) 
Sec. 146-33. - Foreclosure of right to redeem property bought by city at tax sale. 
When the city has bought property at a tax sale, the chief financial officer may give the notices provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-4-45 to foreclose the right to redeem such property from sale. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4060) 
Sec. 146-34. - Disposition of property bought by city at tax sale. 
After the right to redeem property bought by the city at a tax sale has been foreclosed as provided by section 146-33, it shall be added to the surplus property of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4061) 
Sec. 146-35. - Report of property redeemed. 
It shall be the duty of the chief financial officer to report to the Fulton County tax commissioner the names of all persons who redeem property through the chief financial officer, and it shall be the duty of the Fulton County tax commissioner to list such property as the property of the person so redeeming it. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4063) 
Sec. 146-36. - Sale of property bought by city for taxes. 
(a)  Generally. The chief financial officer may sell all property bought by the city at tax sales after the expiration of one year from the date the property is bid in for the city on account of taxes or street improvements. 
(b)  Conduct of sale. The sale shall be before the city hall on a regular sale day and shall be to the highest and best bidder for cash. All such property shall be sold subject to the right of any person having an interest in the property to redeem it under the laws of the state. 
(c)  Advertisement. All such property shall be advertised once a week for four weeks in the paper authorized to carry the city's advertisements, but the advertisement shall be in abbreviated form and shall show only the deed number, the street number and the name of the last owner. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4065) 
Sec. 146-37. - Applications for exemption from or refund of taxes. 
Before any petition or application for exemption from the payment of any kind of taxes, fi. fas. or costs or for the refund of any taxes or costs already collected by the city shall be considered by the council, the facts claimed as the basis for such exemption or refund shall be set forth in such petition or application, which shall be under oath. In the consideration of all such claims the committee having such under consideration shall be authorized to summon witnesses, including the applicant, and examine them under oath. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4067) 
Sec. 146-38. - Preferential assessments for landmark historic properties. 
(a)  The preferential ad valorem property tax assessments for landmark properties authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.3 shall be available to income producing property that meets all of the following criteria. 
(1)  For the purpose of this ordinance the term "landmark property" shall mean: a contributing structure located in an area designated as a Landmark District pursuant to Chapter 20 of Part 16 of this code; or a building not in a Landmark District which has been individually designated as a Landmark Building or Site pursuant to Chapter 20 of Part 16 of this Code; 
(2)  For the purpose of this ordinance, the term "income producing" shall mean a building used or intended to be used for non-residential purposes that would be permitted under the current zoning of the building; a multi-family apartment or condominium building; or a mixed use building containing both commercial and residential uses so long as the permitted commercial uses exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the structure. Single-family residential structures, duplexes or triplexes which are used as rental property or single family residential structures which rent rooms or which contain a home occupation, are specifically excluded from the definition of income producing property of the purposed of obtaining the preferential ad valorem property tax assessments for landmark properties; 
(3)  Any qualifying building must be in standard condition which for the purpose of this ordinance means a building that has no violations of the city code as to its condition and the condition of the site on which the building is located. 
(Ord. No. 2009-69(09-O-1916), § 1, 11-24-09) 
Land development code reference— Historical preservation, § 6-4041 et seq. 
Sec. 146-39. - Level 1 Freeport exemptions. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2, as it may be amended from time to time, all the following types of tangible personal property are exempted from ad valorem taxation, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, including all such taxes levied for educational purposes and for state purposes, within the city: 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the State of Georgia. The exemption provided for herein shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing, or production operations in this state. 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the State of Georgia in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for herein shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date the property is produced or manufactured. 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside the State of Georgia and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into the State of Georgia from outside this state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside this state. The exemption provided for herein shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date the property is stored in this state. All property that is claimed to be exempt under the provisions of this subsection shall be designated as being in transit upon the official books and records of the warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, where this property is being stored. All official books and records shall contain a full, true, and accurate inventory of all such property, including the date of the receipt of the property, the date of the withdrawal of the property, the point of origin of the property, and the point of final destination of the same, if known. The official books and records of any warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, pertaining to any in transit property, shall be at all times open to the inspection of all taxing authorities of this state, the city, and the county. 
(4)  As used in this section, the following words, terms and phrases are defined as follows: 
a.  Destined for shipment to a final destination outside this state means, for purposes of this Level I Freeport Exemption, that portion or percentage of an inventory of finished goods which the taxpayer can establish, through a historical sales or shipment analysis, either of which utilizes information from the preceding calendar year, or other reasonable, documented method, is reasonably anticipated to be shipped to a final destination outside this state. Such other reasonable, documented method may only be utilized in the case of a new business, in the case of a substantial change in scope of an existing business, or in other unusual situations where a historical sales or shipment analysis does not adequately reflect future anticipated shipments to a final destination outside this state. It is not necessary that the actual final destination be known as of January 1 in order to qualify for the exemption. 
b.  Finished goods means, for purposes of this Level 1 Freeport Exemption, goods, wares, and merchandise of every character and kind, but shall not include unrecovered, unextracted, or unsevered natural resources, or raw materials, or goods in the process of manufacture or production, or the stock-in-trade of a retailer. 
c.  Foreign merchandise in transit means, for purposes of a Level 1 Freeport Exemption, any goods which are in international commerce where the title has passed to a foreign purchaser and the goods are temporarily stored in this state while awaiting shipment overseas. 
d.  Raw materials means, for purposes of this Level 1 Freeport Exemption, any material whether crude or processed that can be converted by manufacture, processing, or combination into a new and useful product, but shall not include unrecovered, unextracted, or unsevered natural resources. 
(b)  All types of tangible personal property as stated in subsection (a) of this section shall be exempted at 100 percent of the value of such property. 
(c)  Taxpayers desiring to make application for this exemption must do so on forms provided for this purpose by the finance department and must supply any additional information that may be requested which is necessary to determine the qualification for and amount of said exemption. 
( Ord. No. 2013-66(13-O-1400), § 1, 12-11-13 ) 
Editor's note— This section shall become effective as of January 1, 2015. 
Secs. 146-40—146-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30; community development, ch. 54. 
Land development code reference— Planning, § 6-3001 et seq. 

Sec. 146-51. - State law enactments. 
The Atlanta Urban Enterprise Zone Act (Ga. L, 1998, p. 4493), as amended, is incorporated by reference into the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4069(A); Ord. No. 1995-15, §§ 1, 2, 5-8-95; Ord. No. 1995-31, § 1, 6-25-95; Ord. No. 1995-33, §§ 1—5, 9, 6-25-95; Ord. No. 1996-23, §§ 1, 2, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 2005-78, §§ 1, 2, 11-14-05) 
Sec. 146-52. - Local eligibility requirements for designations. 
Set forth as follows are criteria which shall be used in the course of designating housing, commercial and industrial enterprise zones: 
(1)  All enterprise zones. 
a.  Proposed enterprise zones shall be consistent with the currently adopted comprehensive development plan of the city prior to the creation of the zone. 
b.  Proposed land use within enterprise zones shall comply with the city's zoning ordinance prior to zone creation. 
c.  The applicant for an enterprise zone must demonstrate to the city's satisfaction the economic necessity for the enterprise zone designation. 
d.  An existing zone may be expanded only if ten percent or more of the perimeter of the proposed addition is contiguous to the perimeter of the existing zone. 
e.  All zones shall be designed in such a way as to result in minimum displacement of occupants. All relocation costs associated with displacement as defined by state law resulting directly from the creation of the zone shall be borne by the applicant. 
f.  The department of planning, development and neighborhood conservation shall certify that the proposed zone has been subject to disinvestment. Such certification shall be based upon relevant, objective data, such as evidence that the ratio of new housing starts to existing inventory for the most recent five-year period is less for the census tract in which the proposed development would be located than for the city as a whole. 
g.  The applicant shall demonstrate that tax abatement is necessary to the financial feasibility of the proposed development by providing evidence that one of the following conditions has been met: 
1.  With regard to the development of housing for sale, fewer than 20 percent of the proposed units would be affordable without tax abatement for households whose income does not exceed the low-income level defined in section 146-52(2)b.1, based upon reasonable assumptions as certified by the department of planning, development and neighborhood conservation; or 
2.  With regard to the proposed development of income-producing property (including rental housing units, fewer than 20 percent of which would be affordable for low-income households without tax abatement), the proposed development without tax abatement would generate, on a cumulative basis over the first five years, either (a) a negative cash flow, or (b) a fixed-rate debt service coverage ratio of less than 1.20, or (c) a variable-rate debt service coverage ratio equivalent to said fixed-rate ratio, based upon reasonable assumptions as certified by the department of planning, development and neighborhood conservation. 
h.  No enterprise zone shall be approved if the applicant owes the city for undisputed water bills which are more than 90 days delinquent or the applicant owns real property not located within the proposed enterprise zone against which city-imposed liens are outstanding and unsatisfied. 
(2)  Housing and mixed-use residential/commercial enterprise zones. 
a.  Housing and mixed-use residential/commercial enterprise zones shall be used to promote the development of mixed-income neighborhoods. 
1.  Twenty percent of the total units to be provided shall reflect the same ratio of housing type and bedroom composition that is proposed throughout the zone, and shall be within the ability to pay of those households whose annual income does not exceed 60 percent of the median family income for the Atlanta metropolitan statistical area as most recently published by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and as adjusted for household size in accordance with HUD procedures. For said units, the property owner shall verify each tenant's household income at the time that said tenant initially executes a lease agreement. Furthermore, the property owner by January 31 of each year shall submit a report to the commissioner of planning, development and neighborhood conservation, indicating the household income of each tenant who executed a lease agreement during the previous calendar year. 
2.  Twenty percent of the units for sale shall reflect the same ratio of housing type and bedroom composition that is proposed throughout the zone, and shall bear purchase prices which do not exceed two and one-fifth times the median family income for the Atlanta metropolitan statistical area as most recently published by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
3.  Twenty percent of the units for rent, if any, shall reflect the same ratio of housing type and bedroom composition that is proposed throughout the zone, and shall bear monthly rents which do not exceed 30 percent of the low-income level defined in section 146-52(2)a.1 or, in the case of rental housing units that are being financed through federal low-income housing tax credits, said units shall bear monthly rents which do not exceed the maximum rents prescribed in Section 42, Internal Revenue Service Code, based upon the low-income level defined in section 146-52(2)a.1. 
4.  Five percent of all vacant units shall be available to Atlanta police officers and their families, regardless of their household incomes, at purchase prices which do not exceed the affordable level as defined in section 146-52(2)a.2, or at monthly rents which do not exceed the affordable level as defined in section 146-52(2)a.3, consistent with any maximum income restrictions that may apply to said units by virtue of their being financed through any federal, state, or local programs that promote the development of affordable housing. Said units shall count toward meeting the 20 percent affordable housing requirement set forth in section 146-52(2)a.1. 
b.  Affordable housing as defined in section 146-51 shall be dispersed throughout the housing enterprise zone as reflected on the approved site plan for each zone. 
1.  Industrial enterprise zones shall be limited geographically only by the general provisions of this section and by the requirements of subsection (2)b.1 [(2)a.1] of this section. 
c.  In order to qualify for tax abatement, owners of renter-occupied units who rehabilitate or replace their units during the ten-year life of the zone, must agree to first offer the rehabilitated or replaced units for rent to the same occupants or subsequent occupants for the remaining life of the zone at monthly rents which do not exceed 80 percent of the fair market rents for the city as established by the department of planning, development and neighborhood conservation. 
d.  The city shall assign preference to project-specific housing enterprise zones. However, in cases where the department of planning, development and neighborhood conservation has determined that a project-specific housing enterprise zone is not feasible, the city may create an areawide housing enterprise zone, provided that 50 percent or more of the land area in the proposed zone shall be committed to specific development projects. 
e.  Each applicant shall demonstrate, with verification from two or more lending institutions, that 30 percent or more of the units to be developed in the proposed zone are ready for construction to begin during the first year of the housing enterprise zone designation. 
f.  If HUD fails to publish such data for a period of one year or more, the commissioner of planning, development and neighborhood conservation shall publish annually a set of fair market rents for new construction by adjusting the most recently published HUD data in proportion to the residential rent component of the consumer price index as published annually by the United States Department of Labor, and such rents shall apply to new construction in housing enterprise zones for the purposes of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4069(B); Ord. No. 1995-33, §§ 6, 8, 6-25-95; Ord. No. 1997-51, §§ 1—6, 9, 10-14-97; Ord. No. 1998-22, § 1, 4-27-98; Ord. No. 2003-105, §§ 1—3, 11-10-03) 
Sec. 146-53. - Local procedures for designating enterprise zones. 
(a)  The administration and evaluation of enterprise zones shall be the responsibility of the department of planning, development and neighborhood conservation. The commissioner of planning, development and neighborhood conservation (referred to in this section as "the commissioner") shall receive, review and make written recommendations on each proposed enterprise zone. 
(b)  All applicants for enterprise zones shall submit applications to the commissioner of planning, development and neighborhood conservation on forms prescribed and promulgated by the commissioner of planning, development and neighborhood conservation or the commissioner's designee. The commissioner of planning, development and neighborhood conservation may establish additional procedural requirements for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this division. 
(c)  On the basis of such information, the department of planning, development and neighborhood conservation shall evaluate the application with respect to the requirements of this division and shall prepare a report on the results of said evaluation. The report shall include a statement from the chief financial officer assessing the fiscal impact of the proposed tax abatements, including estimates of anticipated increases in the tax digest due to the proposed development, and anticipated losses, due to abated taxes on land and improvements, for each year of the tax abatement period. 
(d)  Each year, within 30 days after receipt of the previous year's tax digest from the Fulton County Tax Commissioner, the chief financial officer shall recommend a limit on the total amount of tax abatements associated with urban enterprise zones, for approval by the mayor and council through an appropriate resolution. For each urban enterprise zone application to be considered by the mayor and council following the approval of such a resolution, the chief financial officer shall determine whether creation of the proposed urban enterprise zone would cause the total amount of tax abatements associated with urban enterprise zones to exceed said limit. 
(e)  There shall be no restrictions on the number of enterprise zone applications any one developer may submit during any one calendar year. 
(f)  An enterprise zone application may be filed with the commissioner of planning, development and neighborhood conservation at any point during the calendar year. However, any application for an enterprise zone which is requested to be created as of January 1 of the following year shall be submitted to the commissioner of planning, development and neighborhood conservation by June 30 to be considered for introduction in the council no later than August 31 of the current year. Any ordinance to create an enterprise zone shall contain, in the form of an attached exhibit, a statement signed by the commissioner of planning, development and neighborhood conservation certifying that the commissioner has received a complete application for the creation of the enterprise zone in accordance with the requirements of this subsection. 
(g)  All enterprise zone applications filed with the commissioner of planning, development and neighborhood conservation shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Name and mailing address of applicant. 
(2)  Street address of property. 
(3)  Legal description and survey plat of the property. 
(4)  Justification for creating or expanding zone based on "purpose" section of ordinance. 
(5)  Applicant's background and development/building experience. 
(6)  Financial ability to execute project. 
(7)  Site plan of proposed development; in case of areawide housing enterprise zones, the site plan of proposed development shall indicate that 50 percent or more of the land area in the proposed zone is committed to specific development projects. 
(8)  A set of preliminary architectural drawings, including but not limited to typical elevations, cross sections and identification of materials to be used. 
(9)  A construction schedule, including development phases, if any, and a statement from two or more lending institutions verifying the applicant's readiness to begin construction of 30 percent or more of the units to be developed during the first year of the development zone designation. 
(10)  On-site and off-site capital facilities required to support the project and sources of revenue for any such improvements. 
(11)  Extraordinary requirements for city services if any. 
(12)  Cost of land acquisition, if any, and sources of revenue. 
(13)  Sales price of all land and individual parcels. 
(14)  Estimate of investment, type of investment and phasing of investments. 
(15)  Statement of relation to current comprehensive development plan and zoning district classification. 
(16)  Statement of any federal, state or local government funds committed to the project. 
(17)  Statement from two or more lending institutions verifying that the tax abatement is necessary to the economic feasibility of the proposed development. 
(18)  For housing enterprise zones, the application shall also include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  Type of housing (single-family, multifamily, condominium, fee simple, etc.). 
b.  Number of units to be constructed and/or renovated. 
c.  Size of units. 
d.  Number of bedrooms per unit type. 
e.  Income range to be served. 
f.  Number of rental units and number of for sale units. 
g.  Sales price range and rental rate range. 
h.  Statement regarding neighborhood impact, including direct displacement of households within the zone and likelihood of future displacement of households in the immediate vicinity of the zone. 
(19)  For commercial and industrial enterprise zones, the application shall also include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  Total square footage of proposed development; 
b.  Proposed tenant mix; 
c.  The names of any businesses which contemplate relocation into the zone, if created; 
d.  Employment forecasts for proposed development; 
e.  Number and types of jobs available on the site; 
f.  Pay ranges of number and types of jobs available on the site; 
g.  Provisions for targeting of jobs to local city and county residents; 
h.  Letters of commitment from businesses contemplating relocation into the zone or expanding within the zone to hire low-income residents to fill job vacancies; 
i.  Estimates of tax revenue from non-freeport-eligible inventory of businesses to be located in the zone; 
j.  Letter of commitment from businesses to create new jobs within one year after opening of the business in the zone; and 
k.  Letters from two lending institutions regarding economic necessity for zone designation. 
(20)  A provision requiring the applicant to swear under oath and be signed by a notary, that all information is true and correct. The failure of an applicant to truthfully respond to any portion of the application shall subject the applicant to the temporary suspension of the ad valorem tax abatement in accordance with subsection (1) of this division. 
(h)  Each enterprise zone application shall be referred to the neighborhood planning unit in which the proposed zone is located, and such neighborhood planning unit shall have the opportunity to comment on whether or not the proposed zone should be created. 
(i)  Subsequent to the creation of the zone, the municipal clerk shall transmit a certified copy of the ordinance creating the zone to the commissioner of planning, development and neighborhood conservation. The commissioner of planning, development and conservation shall transmit to the county the ordinance along with any other data that the county may request in the course of its review of the zone for purposes of creating a county enterprise zone for the same area as the zone created by the city. 
(j)  Subsequent to the creation of the zone, the applicant or successor property owner shall submit annual reports to the commissioner of planning, development and neighborhood conservation regarding: 
(1)  The current value of tax exemptions for each year of the abatement period. 
(2)  The current market value of all improvements in the zone as compared to that value upon the effective date of the creation of the zone. 
(3)  For housing enterprise zones and mixed use zones for commercial and residential purposes the current number of housing units, types of housing units and sales price ranges and rental rate ranges in each zone as compared to the number, type of housing units and sales price ranges and rental rate ranges in each zone as compared to the number, types of housing and sales prices and rental rate ranges upon the effective date of the creation of the zone. 
(4)  For commercial, industrial and mixed-use commercial and industrial enterprise zones, the current type and amount of developed square footage; the names of all businesses located within each zone; the current number of jobs and the number created since relocating into or expanding within the zone; and the number of low-income residents of the city and county occupying the current total number of jobs. 
These data shall be transmitted to the commissioner of planning, development and neighborhood conservation by September 30 annually. The commissioner of planning, development and neighborhood conservation shall compile the data and forward a report to the municipal clerk by December 31 annually. The municipal clerk shall then prepare a final report to state and local agencies as well as to the Atlanta/Fulton County state legislative delegation as required by state law. 
(k)  For housing development zones, the commissioner of planning, development and neighborhood conservation or the commissioner's designee shall annually recertify the original certificate of occupancy issued for each housing enterprise zone to ensure continued use of the property for residential purposes and compliance with affordability requirements and shall submit a report of the commissioner's findings to the city council by September 30 of each calendar year. 
(l)  Failure of an applicant or successor property owner(s) to comply with the requirements of this division may result in a temporary suspension of the ad valorem tax abatement on the property or properties owned by the applicant or successor property owner. After notice, hearing and establishing a finding of fact of failure to comply, the council shall have the authority, by ordinance, to impose such sanctions against the applicant or successor property owner for each year of noncompliance. The suspension shall remain in effect until the noncompliance is remedied to the city's satisfaction and the applicant or successor property owner is reinstated in the zone by ordinance of the council and declared eligible to receive the remaining years benefits for the enterprise zone in which the property is situated. The suspension of tax abatement benefits on one or more properties shall not be construed as an action by the council to alter the size of an enterprise zone or the schedule of abatements for a zone. 
(m)  The commissioner of planning, development and neighborhood conservation may establish additional procedural requirements for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this division. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4069(C); Ord. No. 1995-33, §§ 7, 9, 6-25-95; Ord. No. 1997-51, §§ 7—9, 10-14-97; Ord. No. 1999-62, § 1, 8-25-99) 
Editor's note— The following urban enterprise zones have been created. None of the ordinances creating same are repealed by adoption of the Code. 
150 Northside Drive Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1996-01, approved 1-8-96. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2006. 
330 McGill Place Housing Urban Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1986-83, approved 10-9-86 and Ord. No. 1987-98, approved 5-22-87. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 1996. 
619 Edgewood Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2000-28 approved 5-23-00. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2010. 
666 Metropolitan Parkway Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2004-25 approved 5-25-04. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2014. 
810 Marcus Street Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-27, approved 5-21-01. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2011. 
933 Watkins Street Mixed-Use Residential/Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1998-61, approved 9-23-98. The zone is abolished exactly ten years from the date of construction commencement. 
Adamsville Place Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2004-21, approved 5-25-04. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2015. 
Adamsville Place Townhomes Phase I Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2004-212 approved 5-25-04. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2014. 
Allen Temple Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-25, approved 10-10-00. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2010. 
Alta West Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-36, approved 10-9-01. The zone expires as of December 31, 2011. 
AMAL Heights Townhomes Urban Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2008-12, approved 2-25-08. The zone is effective Jan. 1, 2008; abolished as of January 1, 2018. 
AMB Industrial Urban Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2008-13, approved 2-21-08. The zone is effective Jan. 1, 2008; abolished as of December 21, 2018. 
Athens Avenue Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-41, approved 11-27-01. The zone expires as of December 31, 2011. 
Arcadia Downs Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1998-96, approved 5-26-98. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2008. 
Atlanta Industrial Park Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1983-67, approved 4-21-83, Ord. No. 1984-62, adopted 11-21-84, Ord. No. 1988-70 approved 6-10-88, and Ord. No. 1990-12, approved 4-10-90. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2008. 
Atlanta Industrial Park Enterprise Zone—II. See Ord. No. 1985-55, approved 9-24-85. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2010. 
Auburn Avenue Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-58, approved 9-24-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2005. 
Auburn Avenue Warehouse Mixed-Use Residential and Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1997-31, approved 5-27-97. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2007. 
Auburn Glenn Mixed-Use Residential/Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-57, approved 4-28-03. The zone expires as of December 31, 2013. 
August Hills Apartments I LP Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-22, approved 10-10-00. The zone is abolished as of December 10, 2010. 
Bent Creek Redevelopment Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-110, approved 12-9-03. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2013. Amended by Ord. No. 2006-89, approved December 13, 2006. 
Black Bear Lofts Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1998-91, approved 10-27-98. The zone is abolished exactly ten years from the date of construction commencement. 
Brookside Park Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-68 approved 5-27-03. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2013. See Ord. No. 2007-76, approved December 11, 2007, eff. January 1, 2006. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2016. 
Camp In-Fill Housing and Rehabilitation Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1999-69, approved 9-29-99. The zone is abolished exactly ten years from the January 1st date of construction commencement. 
Candler Warehouse Site Industrial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-59, approved 9-24-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2020. 
Capitol View Industrial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1996-36, approved 6-10-96. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2021. 
Carlyle Park Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-46, approved 10-15-02. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2012. 
Carver Homes Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2000-27, approved 5-23-00. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2010. 
Carver Homes Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-18, approved 5-23-00. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2010. 
Castleberry Hill Mixed-Use Residential/Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-63, approved 10-7-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2005. See Ord. No. 2003-40, approved 10-24-01. See Ord. No. 2003-42, approved 5-14-02. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2012. 
Centennial Park North Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-65 approved 5-27-03. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2013. 
Centennial Place Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1999-56, approved July 12, 1999. The zone shall be abolished exactly ten years from the date of construction commencement. 
Columbia-Blackshear Senior Residences Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2005-63, approved 10-10-05. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2016. 
Constitution Avenue Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone See Ord. No. 2005-62, approved 10-10-05. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2016. 
Clark Atlanta University Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1989-93, approved 11-20-89. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 1999. 
Colonial Square Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1997-30, approved 5-27-97. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2007. 
Columbia Plaza Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1996-73, approved 10-14-96. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2006. 
Columbia Plaza Phase II Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1998-32, approved 5-12-98. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2006. 
Columbia Mechanicsville Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2005-34, approved 6-14-05. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2016. 
Columbia Senior Residences at Edgewood Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2005-76, approved 11-14-05. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2016. 
Columbia Senior Residences at Mechanicsville Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2005-33, approved 6-14-05. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2016. 
Columbia Senior Residences at MLK Village Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2005-43, approved 7-25-05. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2016. 
Cornerstone Terrace Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-43, approved 5-14-02. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2013. Amended by Ord. No. 2001-19, approved 5-11-04. 
Crescent Hills/Hammond Park Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-44, approved 7-9-02. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2013. 
Custer Avenue Subdivision Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-35, approved 10-9-01. The zone expires as of December 31, 2011. See Ord. No. 2003-45, approved 8-26-02. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2012. 
Dobbs Revitalization Project Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1999-84, approved 11-23-99. The zone is abolished exactly ten years from the January 1st date of construction commencement. 
Dogwood Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2004-23, approved 5-25-04. The zone expires as of December 31, 2014. Amended by Ord. No. 2006-92, approved December 12, 2006. 
Dome Commercial/Industrial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1999-39, approved 4-13-99. The zone is abolished exactly ten years from the date of construction commencement. 
Enclave At Renaissance Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1996-67, approved 8-26-96. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2006. 
Esquire Village Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1997-52, approved 10-14-97. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2007. 
Etheridge Courts Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-47, approved 10-15-02. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2012. 
Fairlie-Poplar Mixed-Use Residential/Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1997-75, approved 12-8-97. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2006. 
Fern Avenue Revitalization Project Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1999-68, approved 9-29-99. The zone shall be abolished exactly ten years from the January 1st date of construction commencement. 
Five Points Mixed-Use Residential/Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-57, approved 9-24-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2005. Amended by Ord. No. 1997-02, approved 10-13-97. 
Four Oaks Subdivision Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1989-94, approved 11-20-89. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 1999. 
Freeman Ford Building Mixed-Use Residential/Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1996-66, approved 8-26-96. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2006. 
Fulton Bag Mill Mixed Use Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-24, approved 5-21-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2006. 
Gates Park Crossing, LP Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2004-24, approved 5-25-04. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2014. See Ord. No. 2005-50, approved 8-15-05. 
General Motors Lakewood Assembly Plant Urban Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1983-80, approved 12-7-83. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2008. 
Grant Park Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1991-68, approved 12-10-91. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2001. 
Grant Park Village Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-72, approved 11-27-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2005. 
Greenlea Commons North Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-30, approved 6-12-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2006. 
Harris Homes Revitalization, Phases I & II, Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-69 approved 5-27-03. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2013. 
Highbury Court Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2004-09 approved 12-10-04. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2013. Amended by Ord. No. 2006-91, approved December 12, 2006. 
High Point Estates Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1999-44, approved 5-5-99. The zone is abolished ten years from the date of construction commencement. 
Hill Manufacturing Company Industrial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1996-72, approved 10-14-96. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2021. 
Hill Street Lofts Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-48, approved 10-15-02. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2012. 
Hillside Park Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1998-36, approved 5-12-98. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2008. Renamed as Peaks at West Atlanta Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-33, approved 7-24-01. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2011. 
Holly Ridge Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-50, approved 10-28-02. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2012. 
Hollywood Courts Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1998-28, approved 5-12-98. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2008. 
Hollywood West Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-67 approved 5-27-03. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2013. 
John Eagan Homes Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1997-55, approved 10-14-97. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2007. Amended by Ord. No. 1998-55, approved 9-16-98. Amended by Ord. No. 2004-18, approved 5-11-04. 
John Eagan Homes Phase II Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1999-42, approved 5-5-99. The zone is abolished ten years from the date of construction commencement. Amended by Ord. No. 2004-18, approved 5-11-04. 
John Hope Homes Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1997-56, approved 10-14-97. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2007. 
John Hope Homes Phase II Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1998-30, approved 5-12-98. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2008. 
Johnson Research and Development High-Technology Commercial/Industrial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2000-29, approved 5-23-00. The zone shall remain in existence for ten years from the first day of the calendar year immediately following the adoption of the ordinance creating the zone. 
Johnson Research and Development High-Technology Commercial/Industrial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-21, approved 5-23-00. The zone shall remain in existence for 10 years from the first day of the calendar year immediately following the adoption of this ordinance creating the Zone. 
Kimberly Courts Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1999-43, approved 5-5-99. The zone is abolished ten years from the date of construction commencement. 
Kimberly Courts Apartments Phase II Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-26, approved 10-10-00. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2010. 
Kings Manor Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1998-29, approved 5-12-98. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2008. 
Kingston Townhomes Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-29, approved 5-21-01. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2011. 
Lakewood Pointe Townhomes Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-23, approved 10-10-00. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2010. 
Laurel Ridge at Bolton Road Urban Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2008-11, approved 2-25-08. The zone is effective Jan. 1, 2008; abolished as of January 1, 2018. 
Legacy at Centennial Olympic Park Mixed-Use Residential/Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1997-33, approved 5-27-97. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2008. 
Legacy Superblock at Castleberry Hill Mixed-Use Residential/Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-52, approved 11-8-02. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2012. 
Lillie R. Campbell House Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2006-16, approved 4-25-06. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2016. 
Lofts at Underground Mixed-Use Residential/Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-28, approved 5-25-01. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2011. 
Margaret Mitchell Square Mixed-Use Residential/Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-65, approved 10-7-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2005. 
Marietta Street Mixed-Use Residential/Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-53, approved 12-10-02. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2012. 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Landmark District Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1994-70, approved 9-25-94, and Ord. No. 1995-55, approved 9-24-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2004. 
Martin Luther King Jr. Landmark District Phase II Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1997-35, approved 5-27-97. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2007. 
Mattress Factory Lofts Mixed-Use Residential/Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1998-63, approved 9-23-98. The zone is abolished exactly ten years from the date of construction commencement. 
McGill Park Condominiums Housing Urban Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1987-100, approved 12-7-87. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 1997. 
Mechanicsville Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-26, approved 5-21-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2006. 
Midtown Place Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1998-62, approved 9-23-98. The zone is abolished exactly ten years from the date of construction commencement. 
Mildred Place Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-37, approved 10-9-01. The zone expires as of December 31, 2011. 
Milltown Lofts Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-30, approved 5-25-01. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2011. 
Misty Amber Senior Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-51, approved 11-8-02. The zone expires as of December 31, 2012. 
MLK-Ashby Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-62, approved 10-7-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2005. 
MLK Village Tower Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2005-42, approved 7-25-05. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2016. 
New Carver Homes Phase II Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-24, approved 10-10-00. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2010. 
New Carver Homes Phase III Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-32, approved 6-8-01. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2011. 
North Avenue Apartments Housing Urban Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1987-1, approved 12-7-87. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 1997. 
North Grant Park Housing Urban Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1988-71, approved 9-8-88. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 1998. 
North Grant Park II Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1989-93, approved 11-20-89, and Ord. No. 1991-67, approved 12-10-91. The zone (as expanded) is abolished as of December 31, 1999. 
Northwest Atlanta-One Mixed-Use Commercial/Industrial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1997-54, approved 10-14-97. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2022. 
Northwest Atlanta-Two Mixed-Use Commercial/Industrial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1997-53, approved 10-14-97. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2022. 
Northwest Atlanta Two Commercial/Industrial Enterprise Zone Expansion. See Ord. No. 2003-31, approved 6-8-01. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2011. 
One West End One Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-61, approved 10-7-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2005. Renamed as Cornerstone Terrace Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-43, approved 5-14-02. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2013. 
Parcel 25 Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1992-32, approved 6-4-92. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2002. 
Park Place South Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-38, approved 10-9-01. The zone expires as of December 31, 2011. 
Park View at Coventry Station Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2006-10, approved 3-14-06. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2017. 
Parmalat-New Atlanta Dairies Business Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1997-57, approved 10-14-97. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2007. 
Peachtree/Kessler Residential/Commercial Mixed-Use Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1998-54, approved 7-13-98. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2009. 
Peaks at Martin Luther King Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-49, approved 10-15-02. The zone expires as of December 31, 2012. 
Peaks at West Atlanta Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-34, approved 10-9-01. The zone expires as of December 31, 2011. 
Peeples Street Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1989-95, approved 11-20-89. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 1999. 
Piedmont Commons Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1997-29, approved 5-27-97. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2007. 
Pittsburg Redevelopment Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-80 approved 7-12-03. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2013. See Ord. No. 2004-70 approved 10-18-04. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2014. See Ord. No. 04-73 approved 10-20-04. Amended by Ord. No. 2006-94, approved December 12, 2006. 
Ponce Springs Apartments Mixed-Use Residential/Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-39, approved 10-9-01. The zone expires as of December 31, 2011. Amended by Ord. No. 2004-30, approved 5-25-04. 
Post Renaissance Housing Enterprise Zone I. See Ord. No. 1990-68, approved (without mayor's signature) 10-3-90. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2000. 
Post Renaissance Housing Enterprise Zone II. See Ord. No. 1990-68, approved (without mayor's signature) 10-3-90. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2001. 
Provenance at Hollowell Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2004-26, approved 5-25-04. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2014. Amended by Ord. No. 2006-93, approved December 12, 2006. 
Renaissance Park, Phase III Housing Urban Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1988-69, approved 4-7-88. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 1988. 
Renaissance Square Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1997-36, approved 6-9-97. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2007. 
Reynoldstown In-Fill Housing and Rehabilitation Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1999-83, approved 11-23-99. the zone is abolished exactly ten years from the January 1st date of construction commencement. 
St. John's Place Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2004-27, approved 5-25-04. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2014. 
Santa Fe Villas Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-32, approved 9-25-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2006. 
Savannah At Washington Park Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-20, approved 5-23-00. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2010. 
Shawnee Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2003-66 approved 5-27-03. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2013. 
Southside Distribution Center Commercial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1988-77, approved 10-27-88 and Ord. No. 1992-66, approved 10-27-92. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2002. 
Southside Industrial Park—I Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1985-28, approved 5-28-85, and Ord. No. 1986-62, approved 11-7-86. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2010. 
Southside Industrial Park—II Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1988-24, approved 6-22-88. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2013. 
Southside Industrial Park Extension Industrial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1998-93, approved 11-20-98. The zone is abolished exactly ten years from the date of construction commencement. 
Space Center Industrial Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-54, approved 9-24-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2020. 
Springbranch Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1996-32, approved 6-10-96. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2006. 
Summerdale Commons Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-56, approved 9-24-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2005. 
Summerhill Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1992-65, approved 10-27-92 and Ord. No. 1992-78, approved 10-27-92. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2002. 
Techwood/Clark Howell Phase I Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-28, approved 6-12-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2006. 
Techwood/Clark Howell Phase II Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-28, approved 6-12-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2007. 
Techwood/Clark Howell Phase III and IV Housing Enterprise Zones. See Ord. No. 1996-71, approved 10-14-96. The phase III zone is abolished as of December 31, 2007. The phase IV zone is abolished as of December 31, 2008. 
Terry Street Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-29, approved 6-12-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2006. Expanded by Ord. No. 1997-32, approved 5-27-97. The zone is abolished December 31, 2005. 
The Ashton Village at Browns Mill Senior Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2008-09, approved 2-25-08. The zone is effective Jan. 1, 2008; abolished as of December 31, 2018. 
The Terraces at 183 Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2005-77, approved 11-14-05. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2015. Amended by Ord. No. 2006-90, approved December 12, 2006. 
The Villages at Browns Mill Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2008-10, approved 2-25-08. The zone is effective Jan. 1, 2008; abolished as of December 31, 2018. 
Tyler Place Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1998-31, approved 5-12-98. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2008. 
Villages at Carver Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2005-75, approved 11-14-05. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2017. 
Villages at Carver, Phase V Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2004-31, approved 6-14-04. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2014. 
Villages at Carver, Senior Building Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2004-32, approved 6-14-04. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2014. 
Vine City Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1991-66, approved 12-10-91. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2001. 
The Vineyards of Brown's Mill Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2004-28, approved 5-25-04. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2014. See Ord. No. 2007-75, § 3, approved December 11, 2007. 
Washington Street Apartments Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1998-92, approved 5-26-98. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2008. 
Welcome House SRO Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1991-75, approved 10-15-91. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2001. 
West Block Mixed-Use Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1995-25, approved 5-21-95. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2006. 
West End Housing Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 1991-74, approved 10-15-91. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2002. 
Oridan at Willis Mill Housing Urban Enterprise Zone. See Ord. No. 2011-22(11-O-0362), approved 6-29-11. The zone is abolished as of December 31, 2021. 
The effective date of all exemptions that were established pursuant to Ordinance 10-O-0499 shall be January 1, 2012. The Manor at Scott's Crossing Housing Urban Enterprise Zone (Phase 1), parcel number 17-0251-LL-185-0, shall expire on December 31, 2021. The Manor at Scott's Crossing Housing Urban Enterprise Zone (Phase 1) shall otherwise not be abolished except as provided in State law and shall comply with all applicable state and local UEZ law. 
Secs. 146-54—146-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL OR MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Hotels, lodginghouses and roominghouses, § 30-751 et seq. 
State Law reference— Hotel or motel occupancy tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 146-76. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bureau means the bureau of treasury, licensing and employee benefits of the department of finance. 
Guestroom means a room occupied or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy by one or more occupants, other than meeting rooms intended, designed and used for that purpose. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club or private club containing guestrooms and which is occupied or is intended or designed for occupancy by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. Furthermore, the term "hotel" shall not include any single room occupancy residence, as defined in section 170-2, in which at least 80 percent of the units to be provided bear weekly rents which do not exceed the fair market rents for the Atlanta metropolitan statistical area for single-room occupancy residences as most recently published by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any guestroom or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any guestroom in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including but not limited to the owner or proprietor of the premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, license to or any other person otherwise operating the hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days next preceding that date. The right of occupancy for at least 30 consecutive days is clearly established through the advance payment of 30 days' rent or a lease has been signed in excess of 30 days. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6177; Ord. No. 2011-14(11-O-0513), § 1, 5-11-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 146-77. - Administration of article. 
(a)  Authority. The chief financial officer shall administer and enforce this article for the levy and collection of the tax. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The chief financial officer shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of this article and the collection of the taxes under this article. 
(c)  License fee review board duties. The license review board created in section 30-26 shall constitute the license fee review board referred to in this subsection. It shall be the duty of the license fee review board to accept questions or disputes concerning the administration and implementation of this article and to advise the chief financial officer, the mayor and the council of its opinion on the various questions brought before it. 
(d)  Records required. Every operator renting a guestroom in this city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the chief financial officer may require. 
(e)  Examination of records; audits. The chief financial officer or any person authorized in writing by the chief financial officer may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting a guestroom to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(f)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of this article, the chief financial officer may require the filing of reports by any person having in the person's possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the chief financial officer when required by the chief financial officer and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date of occupancy and such other information as the chief financial officer may require. 
(g)  Confidentiality. The chief financial officer or any person having an administrative duty under this article shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof set forth or disclosed in any return or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having that administrative duty under this article, except in judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax levied and assessed by this article. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the terms included in the measure and amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6188) 
Sec. 146-78. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(b)  Any operator or other person who fails to register as required in this article or to furnish any return required to be made or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the chief financial officer or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report who makes any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due required by this article to be made, shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6190) 
Sec. 146-79. - Levied. 
There is levied and assessed and there shall be paid a tax of eight percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6178; Ord. No. 2011-32(11-O-1057), § 2, 7-27-11) 
State Law reference— Hotel/motel occupancy tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
Sec. 146-80. - Persons liable; extinguishment of liability. 
Every person occupying a guestroom in a hotel in this city is liable for the tax levied in this article. The person's liability is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to the city, except that a receipt from an operator maintaining a place of business in this city or from an operator who is authorized by the chief financial officer, under such rules and regulations as the chief financial officer may prescribe, to collect the tax and who is, for the purposes of this article, regarded as an operator maintaining a place of business in this city, which receipt is given to the occupant pursuant to section 146-81, is sufficient to relieve the occupant from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6179) 
Sec. 146-81. - Collection by operator; receipt to occupant; rules for collection schedules. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in this city, as provided in section 146-80, and renting guestrooms in this city not exempted under section 146-82 shall, at the time of collecting the rent from the occupant and on demand, give to the occupant a receipt therefor. For all transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that those credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The chief financial officer shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6180) 
Sec. 146-82. - Unlawful advertising regarding tax. 
It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any guest, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof levied in this article will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rental of the guestroom or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6181) 
Sec. 146-83. - Exemptions. 
No tax pursuant to this article shall be imposed upon the following: 
(1)  Permanent residents. 
(2)  Georgia state or local government officials or employees while traveling on official business and using guest rooms furnished for a period of one or more days. 
(3)  Persons who certify they are staying in a guest room as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty. 
(4)  Persons using meeting rooms and other such facilities or any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided without charge. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6182; Ord. No. 2017-10(17-O-1062), § 1, 3-15-17 ) 
Sec. 146-84. - Registration of operator; certificate of authority. 
(a)  Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register with the chief financial officer on a form provided by the chief financial officer. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. The privilege of registration shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of the tax levied in this article, regardless of registration. 
(b)  The registration shall set forth the name under which the person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of the person's place of business and other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the chief financial officer may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person, by a member or partner if ownership is by an association or partnership or by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration if ownership is by a corporation. 
(c)  The chief financial officer shall, after the registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and to come readily to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. The certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be returned immediately to the chief financial officer upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon the sale or transfer of the business at that location. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6183) 
Sec. 146-85. - Date due; returns; deductions for operators. 
(a)  Due date. The tax levied under this article shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of occupancy of any hotel in this city. All amounts of such taxes collected by any operator shall be due and payable to the chief financial officer monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period as set forth in section 146-76. 
(b)  Time of filing return. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the chief financial officer, in such form as the chief financial officer may prescribe, by every operator liable for the payment of the tax under this article. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period and such other information as may be required by the chief financial officer. 
(d)  Delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due, to the chief financial officer at 68 Mitchell Street, Suite 1101, Atlanta, Georgia 30303. 
(e)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8, art. I (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq.), the state Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6184) 
Sec. 146-86. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax. If the chief financial officer is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person under this article, the chief financial officer may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the chief financial officer's possession or that may come into the chief financial officer's possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or any fraction of a month from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the chief financial officer may offset overpayments for a period against underpayments for another period against penalties and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in section 146-87(c). 
(d)  Penalty for negligence or disregard for rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, a penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any section of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(f)  Notice of determination. The chief financial officer or the chief financial officer's designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of the chief financial officer's determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail the service shall be addressed to the operator at the operator's address as it appears in the records of the chief financial officer. For service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States post office. 
(g)  Time limit for mailing notice of deficiency determination. Except for fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules or regulations or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6185) 
Sec. 146-87. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return for the tax levied in this article, the chief financial officer shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the chief financial officer. Upon the basis of this estimate, the chief financial officer shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or more periods. 
(b)  Manner of computation. In making a determination, the chief financial officer may offset overpayments for a period against penalties and against the interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or any fraction of a month from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this article or rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent penalty provided in section 146-88. 
(e)  Notice. Promptly after making the determination, the chief financial officer shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination in section 146-86(f). 
(Code 1977, § 14-6186) 
Sec. 146-88. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay tax. 
Any person who fails to pay the tax levied under this article to the city or who fails to pay any amount of the tax required to be collected and paid to the city within the time required shall pay a penalty of 15 percent of the tax in addition to the tax or amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in section 146-87. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6187) 
Sec. 146-89. - Collection. 
(a)  Security. The chief financial officer, whenever deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this article, may require any person subject to this article to deposit with the chief financial officer such security as the chief financial officer may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the chief financial officer but shall not be greater than twice the person's estimated average liability for the period for which the person files returns, determined in such a manner as the chief financial officer deems proper or $10,000.00 whichever amount is the lesser. The amount of the security may be increased by the chief financial officer subject to the limitations provided in this subsection. The chief financial officer may sell the security at public auction, with the approval of the mayor and council, if it becomes necessary to do so in order to recover any tax or any amount required to be collected, interest or penalty due. Notice of the sale may be served upon the person who deposited the security personally or by mail; if by mail, service shall be made in the manner prescribed for service of a notice of a deficiency determination in section 146-86(f) and shall be addressed to the person at the person's address as it appears in the records of the chief financial officer. Upon any sale, any surplus above the amounts due shall be returned to the person who deposited the security. 
(b)  Action for collection. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the chief financial officer may bring an action in the courts of this state, of any other state or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(c)  Duty of successor of operator to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, the purchaser becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by the purchaser to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the chief financial officer shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at the purchaser's address as it appears on the records of the chief financial officer of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out the business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
(d)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or unlawfully collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset as provided in section 146-86(c). If the operator or person determines that the operator or person has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the chief financial officer, the operator or person will have three years from the date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the chief financial officer, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid or the operator's or person's administrators or executors. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6188) 
Secs. 146-90—146-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 146-111. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings respectively ascribed to them. 
Month or monthly period shall mean the calendar months of any year. 
Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern for the rental or lease for 31 or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including the total cash and nonmonetary consideration for the rental or lease including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
Rental motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in the State of Georgia. 
Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. 
Tax, Excise tax or taxes shall mean the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1996-25, § 1, 5-23-96) 
Sec. 146-112. - [Authority; rules and regulations; records.] 
(a)  Authority. The chief financial officer shall administer and enforce this article for the levy and collection of the tax. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The chief financial officer shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of this article and the collection of the tax under this article. 
(c)  Records required. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to this article shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the chief financial officer may require. 
(Ord. No. 1996-25, § 1, 5-23-96) 
Sec. 146-113. - [Excise tax levied; collection.] 
(a)  There is hereby assessed and levied an excise tax upon each rental charge collected by any rental motor vehicle concern when such charge constitutes a taxable event for the purposes of the sales and use tax as provided for under O.C.G.A. ch. 8, art. I, as amended. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be in the amount of three percent of the rental charge as defined herein. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be imposed only at the time when and the place where a customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. The customer who pays a rental charge that is subject to the tax levy as provided in this article shall be liable for the tax. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern. The tax shall be a debt of the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery for other debts. 
(b)  The rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the chief financial officer of the City of Atlanta, Georgia and the tax thus remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed by this article on the rental motor vehicle concern. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to the tax levied by this article shall be liable for the tax at the rate of three percent upon the rental charges actually collected or the amount of taxes collected from the customers, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 1996-25, § 1, 5-23-96) 
Sec. 146-114. - [Purposes for proceeds from tax.] 
The following projects and purposes for which the proceeds of the tax levied by this article are to be expended are specified as follows: 
(1)  Promoting industry trade, commerce and tourism. 
(2)  Capital outlay projects including but not limited to a new multipurpose enclosed arena suitable for basketball, hockey, and major entertainment events with concession facilities and in connection therewith, the acquisition construction and equipping of structured parking facilities, pedestrian plazas, pedestrian connections, the demolition of the current Omni Coliseum, the prepayment of outstanding revenue bonds used to finance or related to the Omni Coliseum, the reconfiguration of the Omni Plaza Marta entrance, and the acquisition of certain land and air rights related to any of the foregoing; and such other improvements as may be necessary to support the development of the new arena. 
(3)  Maintenance and operation expenses or security and public safety expenses associated with subsection (2) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1996-25, § 1, 5-23-96) 
Sec. 146-115. - [Exceptions.] 
No tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article on the rental charge associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: 
(1)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside the State of Georgia and returns it within the State of Georgia; 
(2)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in the State of Georgia and returns it outside the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 1996-25, § 1, 5-23-96) 
Sec. 146-116. - [Amount of tax allowed to be retained for expenses.] 
Each rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax imposed by this article shall be allowed to retain three percent of the tax due and collected and may retain that amount in the form of a deduction for expenses incurred in submitting, reporting and paying the amount of taxes due, if the amounts due are not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 1996-25, § 1, 5-23-96) 
Sec. 146-117. - [Statement required showing gross rental charges and taxes.] 
(a)  On or before the 20th day of each month following the month of June, 1996, the rental motor vehicle concern liable for the tax provided for herein shall transmit to the chief financial officer for the city, a statement showing the gross rental charges and gross taxes collected by authority of this article for each preceding calendar month. Along with said statement, the rental motor vehicle concern shall submit to the chief financial officer the net taxes due for that particular month. 
(b)  Failure to remit taxes by the due date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five percent of the tax then due and in addition to such penalty, interest thereon on the unpaid principal amount due, computed at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 1996-25, § 1, 5-23-96) 
Sec. 146-118. - Records. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and to collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are hereby required to keep a record of all rental charges for rental motor vehicles and taxes collected which are related thereto. Said records shall be open for inspection and copying by any duly authorized agent of the city during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 1996-25, § 1, 5-23-96) 
Sec. 146-119. - [Deficiency determinations.] 
(a)  If the chief financial officer is not satisfied with the return or returns of the excise tax provided for herein, or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any rental motor vehicle concern he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the determination made by the chief financial officer shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes found to be due by him. 
(c)  The chief financial officer or his designated representative shall give to the rental motor vehicle concern a written notice of any such determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail and if by mail the service shall be addressed to the operator or the owner of the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as the same appears in the records of the chief financial officer as provided to him by each rental motor vehicle concern. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by an addressee or agent of the addressee. 
(d)  Except in cases of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period in which the amount proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall expire last. 
(Ord. No. 1996-25, § 1, 5-23-96) 
Sec. 146-120. - Failure to make a return. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern fails to make a return, the chief financial officer shall make an estimate of the excise tax due. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the rental motor vehicle concern has failed to make the return and shall be based upon such information which is or may come into the possession of the chief financial officer. Written notice shall be given in the manner as prescribed above in section 146-119. 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount of any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 1996-25, § 1, 5-23-96) 
Sec. 146-121. - Audit authority. 
Duly authorized employees of the city upon exhibition of identification and during regular business hours may examine and copy the books, papers, records, financial reports equipment and other facilities if necessary of any rental motor vehicle concern in order to verify the accuracy of any return made pursuant to this article, or if no return is made by the rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain or determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 1996-25, § 1, 5-23-96) 
Sec. 146-122. - Withholding tax on sale of business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this article transfers or sells its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient amounts from the purchase price to cover the amount required to be paid pursuant to this article until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the chief financial officer or his designee showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business or rental motor vehicle concern fails to withhold from the purchase price as required herein such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount of the outstanding tax required to be withheld by him to the extent of such purchase price. 
(Ord. No. 1996-25, § 1, 5-23-96) 
Sec. 146-123. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  In addition to the interest charges and delinquent penalties specified in this article any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by the municipal court for the City of Atlanta in accordance with the limits established by the City Charter for the City of Atlanta. Such persons shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by that person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  The tax levied by this article shall be effective on the first day of June, 1996 and shall continue until its permissible existence shall expire as provided by law, or until otherwise terminated by the Georgia General Assembly or the Atlanta City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1996-25, § 1, 5-23-96) 
Chapter 150 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General authority relative to traffic, § 1-102(c)(37). 
Cross reference— Department of public works, § 2-461 et seq.; motor vehicle traffic at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, § 22-181 et seq.; automobile or motorcycle races, § 30-526 et seq.; motor vehicle repairs, § 58-36 et seq.; traffic in parks, § 110-86 et seq.; planning, ch. 118; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 138; vehicles for hire, ch. 162. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 150-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
All-terrain vehicle (ATV) means any motorized vehicle designed for off-road use which is equipped with four low-pressure tires, a seat designed to be straddled by the operator, and handlebars for steering [See O.C.G.A. Section 40-1-1(3)]. 
Bus lane means the portion of a roadway designated for use by buses. 
Central traffic district means all streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows: beginning at the intersection of North Avenue and Marietta Street; thence east on North Avenue to Piedmont Avenue; thence south on Piedmont Avenue to Capitol Avenue to Memorial Drive; thence west on Memorial Drive to Peachtree Street to Spring Street; thence north on Spring Street to Marietta Street; thence north on Marietta Street to North Avenue. 
Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Freight curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers. 
Lane-use control signals means special overhead signals having indications used to permit or prohibit the use of specific lanes of a street or highway or to indicate the impending prohibition of use. 
Limited access highway means every highway, street or roadway to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from except at points and in the manner determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the highway, street or roadway. 
Off road vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for or capable of cross-country travel on or immediately over land, water snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain and not intended for use predominantly on public roads. The term includes, but is not limited to four-wheel drive vehicles, low pressure tire vehicles, and non-highway tire vehicles (See O.C.G.A. § 40-7-3). 
Passenger curb loading zone means a place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
School crossing means a crossing commonly used by school children in going to and from school and so identified by appropriate signs. 
Temporarily handicapped person means a handicapped person whose disability or incapacity can be expected to last for not more than 180 days. 
(Code 1977, § 13-1001; Ord. No. 2013-53(13-O-1195), § 1, 10-30-13 ; Ord. No. 2014-29(14-O-1340), § 1, 7-16-14 ; Ord. No. 2017-39(17-O-1376), § 1, 7-6-17 ) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 150-2. - State law adopted by reference. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. tit. 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.), known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
Sec. 150-3. - Offenses by persons owning or controlling vehicles. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, it is unlawful for the owner or any other person renting or leasing a vehicle to the driver, employing the driver or otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle to require or permit the operation of the vehicle upon a street or highway in any manner contrary to this chapter. Fines for unlawful parking of rented or leased vehicles may be assessed against the company renting or leasing the vehicle to an individual or corporation. 
(Code 1977, § 13-1003) 
State Law reference— Liability of lessor of vehicles for traffic or parking violations, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-207. 
Secs. 150-4—150-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 150-26. - Temporary use parking lot permits. 
(a)  Before any lot or building may be used for off-street public parking pursuant to this section, the owner of the lot or the operator thereof must first obtain a permit from the department of public works' office of transportation for such use. 
(b)  The application form for the permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The address and location of the lot involved; 
(2)  The capacity of the lot; 
(3)  The square footage of the lot; 
(4)  Occupation tax certificate issued pursuant to chapter 30, (business license), unless otherwise exempted by city ordinance; 
(5)  Written verification from the bureau of buildings that the lot is in compliance with applicable zoning regulations. 
(6)  Two site plans will be attached to the application form. The site plans will be drawn to an engineer's scale such that the following are easily identified: 
(i)  The proposed location of entrances and exits to the facility; 
(ii)  The widths of access streets. 
(7)  A copy of either the warranty deed (if the applicant is the title holder) or lease agreement or management contract for the property upon which the proposed park-for-hire facility is to be located, which should contain the current names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner, leaseholder and/or property manager (as appropriate) of said property. 
(8)  Written verification from the chief of police or his/her designee that the Atlanta Police Department has received notice of the applicant's intention to operate a lot at the address and location specified in the application. 
(c)  A permit issued pursuant to this section shall be valid for no less than 45 days and no more than 180 days from the date of issuance. No earlier than 15 days prior to and no later than 30 days from the expiration date, the operator must contact the office of transportation to request renewal certification of their permit. The office of transportation shall then verify that the operations of the temporary use parking lot have not changed since the issuance of the permit (or since the last renewal). Once this has been determined, the renewal certification is approved. 
(d)  Any lot permitted under this Section shall provide and maintain the following: 
(1)  An onsite operator who shall remain on lot property during the time the lot is in operation; 
(2)  A permitted parking notice sign to be placed at the main entrance of the lot in such a manner so that it is easily viewable from the driver's seat of an entering vehicle and which shall be 30 inches × 30 inches, made of a waterproof material and shall include the following information: 
(i)  The name and cellular telephone number of the onsite operator of the facility; 
(ii)  The name of the permit holder; 
(iii)  Parking lot permit number; 
(iv)  Business license number; 
(v)  The name of the operator; 
(vi)  The physical street address of the lot; 
(vii)  The permit expiration date; and 
(viii)  The number of parking spaces permitted. 
(3)  Portable restrooms the number of which shall be based on the number of parking spaces permitted as follows, and which shall remain in place during the time the lot is in operation, and shall be removed within 24 hours of the conclusion of lot operations: 
1—50 spaces—3 portable restrooms 
51—100 spaces—4 portable restrooms 
101—150 spaces—6 portable restrooms 
151—200 spaces—8 portable restrooms 
200 spaces and above—10 portable restrooms 
(4)  Roping or fencing to surround the boundaries of the permitted lot and which shall remain in place during the time the lot is in operation. 
(5)  A fire extinguisher to be maintained on the premises of the lot by the onsite operator. 
(6)  Trash receptacle(s) adequate to ensure the receptacles do not become filled in any manner that causes or allows trash to overflow from the receptacle. It shall be the responsibility of the onsite operator of the lot to see that the lot is free of litter and debris at the end of the time the lot is in operation. It shall further be the responsibility of the onsite operator to properly collect, remove, and dispose of all trash, litter and debris at the conclusion of lot operations. 
(e)  Lots permitted under this section shall not provide monthly parking. 
(f)  Certain areas of the city are excluded from the issuance of temporary use parking lot permits issued under this section as follows: 
The area bounded on the north by Interstate 20; on the east by Connally Street, Ormond Street and Primrose Street; on the south by the CSX Railroad; and on the west by the Norfolk-Southern Railroad, Humphries Street, Gleen Street and McDaniel Street, and generally described as the neighborhoods of Mechanicsville, Peoplestown and Summerhill, with the exception of that parcel known as 496 Martin Street, SE for the remainder of the 1993 Atlanta Braves baseball season. 
(g)  Any violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Atlanta. 
(h)  Certain areas of the city shall be excluded from the issuance of Temporary Use Parking Lot Permits issued under this section for eight months following the approval of this section as follows: 
(1)  The Vine City neighborhood, described as the area bounded by Simpson Street, Northside Drive, Martin Luther King, Jr., Drive and Ashby Street, with the exception of the properties known as 90-124 Northside Drive and 30-158 Northside Drive, as well as properties within the following boundaries (as included in Exhibit "A" and narratively described herein): at a point which begins at the Southwest corner of Thurmond Street and Northside Drive traveling westward along the southern right-of-way of Thurmond Street to the Southeast corner of Maple Place and Thurmond Street; Thence traveling south along the eastern right-of-way to Maple Place to the Northeast corner of the intersection of Maple Place and Spencer Street; Thence traveling eastward along the Northern right-of-way of Spencer Street to a point parallel to the Southeast corner of the intersection of Spencer Street and Electric Avenue; Thence traveling south along the eastern right-of-way of Electric Avenue to a point at the Northeast corner of Electric Avenue and Carter Street; to also include the properties described by parcel numbers 1400830008115, 1400830008116, 1400830008044, 1400830007113 and 1400830007114, all of said properties being bounded by Carter Street on the north; Thence traveling northward to the Southwest corner of the intersection of Northside Drive and Thurmond Street to the point of beginning; and 
The property located at 566 Spencer Street. 
41 Griffin Street NW, Atlanta, GA 30314 (Parcel Identification Number 14 011000101806). 
595 Martin Luther King Junior Drive, Atlanta, GA 30314 (Parcel Identification Numbers 14 008300070996). 
660 Joseph E. Boone Boulevard, N.W., Atlanta, GA 30314 (Parcel Identification Number 14 011000030831). 
759 Martin Luther King Junior Drive NW, Atlanta, GA 30314 (Parcel Identification Number 14 011000091528. 
Property with Parcel Identification Number 14 011000091239 (located between 759 & 767 Martin Luther King Jr DR NW). 
765 Martin Luther King Junior Drive NW, Atlanta, GA 30314 (Parcel Identification Number 14 011000091247. 
767 Martin Luther King Junior Drive NW, Atlanta, GA 30314 (Parcel Identification Number: 14 011000091254. 
(2)  The English Avenue Neighborhood, described as the area bounded by Simpson Street, Northside Drive, North Avenue and Ashby Street with the exception of the property known as 505 Jones Avenue, N.W., Atlanta, Georgia 30318 (Parcel Identification Number 14-0082-0009-077-1). 
523 Joseph E. Boone Boulevard, N.W., Atlanta, Georgia 30318 (Parcel Identification Number 14-0082-0009-069-8). 
510 Jones Avenue, N.W., Atlanta, Georgia 30318 (Parcel Identification Number 14-0082-0009-071-4). 
517 Jones Avenue, N.W., Atlanta, Georgia 30318 (Parcel Identification Number 14-0082-0009-067-2). 
551-573 Cameron Alexander Boulevard, N.W., Atlanta, Georgia 30318 (Parcel Identification Numbers; 14-0082-0001-045-6; 14-0082-0001-091-0; 14-00820001-095-1; 14-0082-0005-076-7; 14-0082-0005-0007-2). 
440 Northside Drive, N.W., Atlanta, Georgia 30318 (Parcel Identification Number 14-0082-0005-053-6). 
341 & 345 Griffin Street, N.W., Atlanta, GA 30314 (Parcel Identification Numbers 14 011100091063 and 14 011100091071). 
601 Joseph E. Boone Boulevard, N.W., Atlanta, GA 30314 (Parcel Identification Number; 14 008200080830). 
707, 713, 717, and 721 Joseph E. Boone Boulevard, N.W., Atlanta, GA 30314 (Parcel Identification Numbers 14 011100091519, 14 011100091451, 14 011100091600, and 14 011100091592). 
At the conclusion of eight months following the passage of this Ordinance [ Ord. No. 2013-42(13-O-1218) ], September 12, 2013, applicants may apply for Temporary Use Parking Lot Permits in the above listed areas. 
(Code 1977, § 13-1009; Ord. No. 2010-60(10-O-1810), § 1, 10-27-10; Ord. No. 2010-61(10-O-1881), § 1, 11-9-10; Ord. No. 2011-42(11-O-1357), § 1, 9-28-11; Ord. No. 2013-42(13-O-1218), §§ 1, 3, 4, 9-12-13 ; Ord. No. 2017-91(17-O-1823), §§ 3, 4, 12-13-17 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-42(13-O-1218) shall become effective May 2014. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2014-23(14-O-1270) , § 1, amended § 3 of Ord. No. 2013-42(13-O-1218), to read "This Ordinance shall become effective on March 1, 2015." 
Sec. 150-27. - Experimental traffic control devices. 
The director, bureau of traffic and engineering may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 9-2001(a)) 
Sec. 150-28. - Prohibited signs, signals or markings declared nuisance. 
Every prohibited traffic sign, signal or marking is declared to be a public nuisance, and the police chief is empowered to remove it or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2006(d)) 
State Law reference— Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-25. 
Sec. 150-29. - Enforcement of handicapped parking. 
(a)  The police chief or the chief's designee shall have the authority to appoint any person who is a citizen of the United States, is of good moral character, has not previously been convicted of a felony and is a handicapped person as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-221(2) to enforce the sections of this chapter pertaining to handicapped parking. 
(b)  Each person appointed pursuant to this section shall complete an application, satisfactorily complete a course of training on handicapped parking enforcement and take and subscribe to an oath of office as prescribed by the police chief or the chief's designee. 
(c)  The application required by subsection (b) of this section shall show the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the immediate members of the family of the applicant, the applicant's marital status and shall have attached thereto a photograph of the applicant, together with sufficient fingerprints to definitely identify the applicant. The police chief or the chief's designee is specifically authorized to require additional information from the applicant. Upon receipt of the application required by subsection (b) of this section, the police chief or the chief's designee shall cause a complete and thorough investigation to be made of the applicant to determine the applicant's moral, physical and mental qualifications. 
(d)  Any person appointed and sworn shall have the power to serve citations for violations or failure to comply with handicapped parking laws of the city, in the same manner as any law enforcement officer of the state or any county or municipality of the state, subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  No person so appointed shall be deemed a peace officer or an employee of the state, county or municipality or receive any compensation therefrom. 
(2)  No appointed person shall be required to complete training as a peace officer. 
(3)  No appointed person shall have the power or duty to enforce other traffic or criminal laws. 
(4)  No person shall possess and carry firearms and other weapons for the purpose of enforcing handicapped parking laws; however, a person so licensed to carry a handgun will not be in violation of this section. 
(5)  No authorized person shall be entitled to any indemnification from the state, county or city for any injury or property damage sustained as a result of enforcement activities. Each authorized person shall specifically acknowledge that such person has no rights to any claim of injury or property damage resulting from handicap enforcement activities. 
(6)  No government, agency, department or officer of the state, county or city shall be liable or accountable for any act or omission of any person appointed to issue parking citations. Each authorized person shall specifically hold harmless the city, its employees and agents from liability for any such act or omission by such authorized person. 
(Code 1977, § 11-2062) 
State Law reference— Enforcement officers for handicapped parking restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-228. 
Secs. 150-30—150-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL RULES OF VEHICLE OPERATION 

Sec. 150-51. - Speed zones. 
(a)  Designation. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter or by ordinance, the city shall be divided into two speed zones. The inner zone shall consist of the area included within a circle, whose radius is 2½ miles centered on the intersection of Peachtree Street and Marietta Street at Five Points. The outer zone shall consist of all of the area of the city except the area included within the inner zone. 
(b)  Maximum speed permitted. Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with law, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle within the inner zone at a rate of speed in excess of 25 miles per hour or within the outer zone at a rate of speed in excess of 35 miles per hour, unless a higher rate of speed has been specifically authorized for the particular street by this chapter or an appropriate ordinance and appropriate signs are in place stating this authorized rate of speed. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2192) 
State Law reference— Speed generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-180 et seq.; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 150-52. - Minimum speed on controlled access highways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle within the city on any controlled access highway having not less than four traffic lanes at a speed of less than 40 miles per hour. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2193(c)) 
State Law reference— Minimum speed, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-184. 
Sec. 150-53. - Speed limit in parks. 
No person shall drive a motor vehicle in a park in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2194) 
State Law reference— Authority to set speed limits in parks, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(5). 
Sec. 150-54. - Maximum speed while driving past workers on streets, roadways. 
Unless otherwise posted with appropriate signs, the maximum rate of speed shall be 15 miles per hour when approaching or driving past persons working in the street or roadway, if the persons are city employees, public utility employees or those granted permission of the city, provided these workers have erected a sign stating the persons are working and the sign is in accordance with the specifications for highway construction and maintenance operations. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2198) 
Sec. 150-55. - Two-way left turn lanes. 
Where a special lane for making left turns at an intersection by drivers proceeding in opposite directions has been indicated by official traffic control devices: 
(1)  A left turn shall not be made from any other lane; and 
(2)  A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except when preparing for or making a left turn from or into the roadway. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2131(4)) 
State Law reference— Turning movements generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-120 et seq.; authority to regulate turning movements, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(9). 
Sec. 150-56. - Limitations on turning around. 
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district or upon any street between intersections. These turns may be made outside of a business district at intersections not controlled by a traffic signal. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2136) 
State Law reference— U-turns, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-121; authority to regulate turning movements, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(9). 
Sec. 150-57. - Human-powered or animal-powered vehicles prohibited on controlled-access highways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to push or drive any vehicle which is propelled by human or animal power upon the controlled access highways of the city. This shall include all bicycles, tricycles, pushcarts and animal-drawn vehicles of all kinds. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2197) 
Sec. 150-58. - Collisions with object upon, adjacent to street or highway. 
No driver of any vehicle shall operate it in such a manner so as to collide with any object legally placed upon or adjacent to any street or highway. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2302) 
Sec. 150-59. - Collision with parked vehicle. 
No driver of any vehicle shall operate it in such a manner so as to collide with any vehicle parked as set forth in section O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2231) 
Sec. 150-60. - Towing vehicles. 
No vehicle shall tow more than one other vehicle nor shall the connection between vehicles exceed 16 feet in length. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2293) 
Sec. 150-61. - Operation of vehicles upon public school play and recreation areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motorcycle, minibike, go-cart, automobile or other motorized vehicle upon the play areas or recreation areas of any public school unless the vehicle is the property of the city or the board of education or unless the operator of the vehicle has the written permission of the school principal or the superintendent of schools or the board of education. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2298) 
Sec. 150-62. - Motor trucks or trailers prohibited on certain areas during designated hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any motor truck or motor-drawn trailer, from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., to traverse any part of the area of the city bounded by Baker Street on the north, Courtland Street and Washington Street on the east, Garnett Street on the south and Spring Street on the west, exclusive of the boundary streets. Nothing in this section shall prevent any truck, when not accompanied by a trailer, from traversing any of the streets or areas described in this section solely for the purpose of making delivery or for the purpose of picking up or receiving goods, wares or merchandise for transportation, but this shall not include permission for trailers to enter, park or stand in that area for any purpose. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2299) 
Sec. 150-63. - Vehicle leaving street or roadway. 
No driver of any vehicle shall operate it in such a manner as to enter or leave any street or roadway, except at an intersection or at an alley or private drive. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2288) 
Sec. 150-64. - Driving on play streets. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon that street or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within the closed area. The driver shall exercise the highest degree of care in driving upon the street or portion thereof, and at no time shall the driver's speed exceed five miles per hour. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2292) 
Sec. 150-65. - Bicycle routes, bicycle lanes, and multi-use trails. 
(a)  (1)  Installation. The department of public works shall install designated bicycle routes and lanes along city streets in accordance with the city's comprehensive development plan. Said routes and lanes shall conform with the design standards and guidelines set forth by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) in the most recent version of its "Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities." The department of public works shall submit the proposed design of all bicycle routes and lanes to the department of planning, development and neighborhood conservation and to the Atlanta Bicycle Planning Committee for their review and comment prior to installation. Furthermore, the department of public works shall install proposed bicycle routes and lanes concurrent with the resurfacing or improvement of all streets along which a bicycle route or lane is proposed in the city's comprehensive development plan. 
(2)  Removal. Designated bicycle routes, bicycle lanes, and multi-use trails shall not be removed or substantially altered except as specifically authorized by the city council through an appropriate resolution. However, this provision shall not apply to the temporary removal of bicycle lanes or the temporary re-routing of bicycle routes as necessitated by street resurfacing, widening, or other construction activities. 
(b)  The following regulations apply to the use of bicycle lanes, bicycle routes, and multi-use trails: 
(1)  Persons operating motor driven vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to persons operating a bicycle upon a bicycle lane. 
(2)  Persons operating motor driven vehicles may operate in a bicycle lane or on a multi-use trail only for the purposes of making a turn, entering or exiting the roadway, or when required in the course of official duties. 
(3)  Persons shall not operate motor vehicles upon multi-use trails except when specifically allowed by law. 
(4)  Parking within a designated bicycle lane is prohibited. 
(5)  Persons shall not operate bicycles or motor driven vehicles (as allowed within this section), in excess of the posted speed limit. 
(6)  Persons shall not operate bicycles on a multi-use trail in a reckless manner, or in any other manner which endangers other users of the trail. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2336(c); Ord. No. 1995-48, § 1, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 1997-61, § 1, 10-27-97) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 1997-61 reads as follows: "The council further ordains that any previously designated bicycle lanes that have been removed, other than by action of the Atlanta City Council, shall be reinstalled." 
Sec. 150-66. - Use of traffic-control signal monitoring devices; penalty. 
(a)  The City of Atlanta elects to use traffic-control signal monitoring devices within the jurisdictional limits of the city as provided by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(f). 
(b)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty in the amount of $70.00 per violation if such motor vehicle is found, as evidenced by recorded images produced by a traffic-control signal monitoring device, to have been operated within the city limits in disregard or disobedience of a circular red or red arrow signal in violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a). 
(Ord. No. 2003-104, § 2, 11-10-03) 
Sec. 150-67. - Signage required for use of traffic-control signal monitoring devices. 
(a)  The department of public works shall erect signs on every highway that comprises a part of the state highway system at that point on the highway which intersects the jurisdictional limits of the city. 
(b)  The department of public works shall erect a sign on each public road on the approach to the next traffic-control signal for such road when a traffic-control device is monitoring such next signal for such road. 
(c)  Such signs shall be at least 30 inches by 30 inches in measurement and shall warn motorists that traffic-control signal monitoring devices are being employed. 
(Ord. No. 2003-104, § 3, 11-10-03) 
Sec. 150-68. - Reporting of traffic-control signal monitoring device use. 
The chief of police or his or her designee shall submit not later than February 1 of each year a report on traffic-control signal monitoring device use during the preceding calendar year to the governor, the lieutenant governor, the speaker of the house of representatives, the mayor, the members of city council, the director of the department of public works, the solicitor of the Municipal Court of Atlanta, and the Chief Judge of the Municipal Court of Atlanta. Such report shall include: 
(i)  A description of the locations where the traffic-control signal monitoring devices were used; 
(ii)  The number of violations recorded at each location and in the aggregate on a monthly basis; 
(iii)  The total number of citations issued; 
(iv)  The number of fines and total amount of fines paid after citation without contest; 
(v)  The number of violations adjudicated and results of such adjudications, including a breakdown of dispositions made; 
(vi)  The total amount of fines paid; and 
(vii)  The quality of the adjudication process and its results. 
(Ord. No. 2003-104, § 4, 11-10-03; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 16, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 150-69. - Contributing factor to a collision. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following term shall mean: 
(1)  "Mobile telephone" means cellular, analog, wireless, satellite or digital telephone capable of sending or receiving telephone messages without an access line for service. 
(2)  "Court" means the Municipal Court of the City of Atlanta. 
(b)  If a driver uses a mobile telephone while he or she operates a moving motor vehicle on the city's street system and it is proven that the mobile telephone's usage distracted the driver from safe operation of such a vehicle and was a contributing factor in any collision resulting in death, physical injury, and/or property damage; then the court is authorized to impose an additional fine up to $200.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court for the violation of the underlying traffic offense. The total fine amount shall not exceed the maximum fine amount allowed by section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-86, § 1, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 150-70. - Registered and licensed motor vehicles. 
All vehicles that are required to be registered and licensed under the laws of the State of Georgia are not subject to the restrictions regarding the use of all-terrain and off road vehicles as set out herein at sections 150-71 and 150-72. 
( Ord. No. 2013-53(13-O-1195), § 2, 10-30-13 ; Ord. No. 2017-39(17-O-1376), § 2, 7-6-17 ) 
Sec. 150-71. - Operation of all-terrain and off road vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate an ATV on the public roads and highways within the City of Atlanta. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate an ATV or off road vehicle as defined in this chapter, on any city sidewalk, city park, city trail, city shared multi-use path, city bicycle path, city recreation facility, and all other city property. (This section does not apply to authorized city employees/agencies in the performance of their duties (i.e. police officers, parks employees, etc.). Also, see section 110-59(a)(30) of the City Code which also prohibits the use of off road vehicles in city parks. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate an off road vehicle, as defined in this chapter, in the public right-of-way in residential zoning districts (designated as R-1 through R-5 districts) and in multi-family zoning districts (designated as RG and MR districts). These specific restrictions are authorized pursuant to the State of Georgia's "Off-Road Vehicle Act of 1975", Georgia Code Annotated §§ 40-7-1 through 40-7-6. 
(d)  No person shall operate an ATV or off road vehicle in a manner which violates the city's noise ordinance. 
(e)  Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit or interfere with the open access of sidewalks or public infrastructure to persons with disabilities, wheelchairs, or in any way conflict with the American with Disabilities Act. 
( Ord. No. 2013-53(13-O-1195), § 3, 10-30-13 ; Ord. No. 2017-39(17-O-1376), § 3, 7-6-17 ) 
Sec. 150-72. - Penalties. 
For any violations of this article, any person violating these provisions will be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  For a first violation, the penalty will be in the amount of $750.00. 
(2)  For a second violation, the penalty will be in the amount of $1,000.00. 
(3)  For a third violation, the penalty shall be a minimum of 30 days in jail, not to exceed six months. 
(4)  For all subsequent violations, the penalty shall be a minimum of 60 days in jail, not to exceed six months. 
( Ord. No. 2013-53(13-O-1195), § 4, 10-30-13 ; Ord. No. 2017-39(17-O-1376), § 4, 7-6-17 ) 
Secs. 150-73—150-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Parking lots and parking garages, § 30-1066 et seq.; fire lanes, § 78-66. 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 150-86. - Parking signs. 
(a)  Whenever any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, appropriate signs shall be erected giving notice thereof, and the regulations shall be effective only after the signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. At least one sign shall be erected in each block on each side of the street where parking is either prohibited or restricted. 
(b)  Whenever a particular section does not state that official parking control signs are required, the section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. The presence of signs shall not be required to enforce parking prohibitions of general application as provided for in this chapter or state law. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2221(a), (c)) 
Sec. 150-87. - Effect of change of regulations. 
When any change in official parking regulations is established upon any street, the new regulations shall become effective as follows: 
(1)  Vehicles which park in the area after the time of installation of the new signs or markings shall immediately be subject to the new regulation. 
(2)  Vehicles which are parked in the area at the time of installation of the new signs or markings shall become subject to the new regulation upon the expiration of the legal parking period granted by any previously existing signs or markings. 
(3)  In areas where parking regulations have not previously existed, the new regulation shall become effective ten hours after the installation of the signs or markings. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2223) 
Sec. 150-88. - Moving, impoundment of vehicles; sale of impounded vehicles, and immobilization of vehicles. 
(a)  Unlawful standing. Any police officer who finds a vehicle standing upon a street or highway in violation of this chapter may move the vehicle or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move it to a position off the roadway. 
(b)  Unattended vehicle on highway, bridge or tunnel. Any police officer may remove or cause to be removed to the nearest vehicle pound or other place of safety any unattended vehicle unlawfully left standing upon any highway, bridge, causeway or in any tunnel. 
(c)  Impoundment and immobilization. Any police officer, parking enforcement officer, or parking management service, as defined in Code sections 150-131(a), 150-131(b), and 150-131(c) may remove or cause to be removed to the nearest vehicle pound or other place of safety any vehicle found upon a highway when: 
(1)  Report has been made that the vehicle has been stolen or taken without the consent of its owner; 
(2)  The person in charge of the vehicle is unable to provide for its custody or removal; 
(3)  The person driving or in control of the vehicle is arrested for an alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to take the person arrested before a proper magistrate without unnecessary delay; 
(4)  The vehicle is stopped, except when traffic congestion makes movement impossible, on a controlled access highway which is a part of the national system of interstate and defense highways, for more than eight hours, unless the vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard, in which case it may be removed immediately; or 
(5)  The vehicle is without a current license tag, current registration or the proper inspection sticker. 
(6)  The vehicle is immobilized through the use of a vehicle immobilization device as defined at section 162-251 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances, and all associated tickets, fees and fines have not been paid in full to the City of Atlanta within 24 hours of immobilization. 
(d)  Authority to sell; notice. When any vehicle is left on the streets and it becomes necessary for the department of police to take charge of the vehicle in order to preserve the safety of travel on the streets and the department of police does take charge of the vehicle and removes the vehicle and places the vehicle in storage, the vehicle shall be safely kept for 60 days. If after 60 days the vehicle shall be unclaimed by a person making the necessary proof of title, the police chief shall, for two days, put an advertisement in the newspaper in which the city's advertisements are published, describing the vehicle to be sold and giving such information about the vehicle as will put the owner or other persons having knowledge thereof in possession of the facts, stating that the property is in the police chief's possession or control and that, at the expiration of 20 days, it will be exposed for sale. The advertisement shall also state the time and place the vehicle shall be sold and that the proceeds shall be turned in to the city treasury. However, the advertisement shall also state that, within 20 days of the last advertisement provided for in this subsection, any person making satisfactory proof of title or any person who shall claim title to the vehicle shall have the right to request a hearing before the police chief or the police chief's designee to establish, by evidence, proof of title to the vehicle claimed. Upon request for a hearing, the police chief or the police chief's designee shall, within ten days, set a time and place for the hearing and shall notify the person claiming title to the vehicle of the hearing. 
(e)  Conduct, record of sale. At the time named in the notice pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, the police chief or some officer authorized by the police chief, shall proceed to the place where the vehicle is stored and expose the vehicle for sale and sell the vehicle to the highest bidder for cash. A record shall be kept of such sale showing each vehicle sold, with a description corresponding to the advertisement, the name of the purchaser and the amount received therefor. 
(f)  Disposition of proceeds. The police chief shall turn the proceeds of the sale into the general fund of the city, keeping such a record thereof as may serve to identify the vehicle with the proceedings required in this section. The chief financial officer is authorized to pay to a wrecker or storage garage which has an agreement or contract with the city the towing and storage fees on impounded vehicles or the sales price of the impounded vehicle, if such should be less than the towing and storage fees, but less than $10.00 for each vehicle impounded. The payments made to a wrecker or storage garage shall be paid from and charged to a special appropriations account established with the general fund. 
(g)  Police use of vehicles. The vehicles which have been processed for sale at public auction, as provided by this section, may, in the discretion of the police chief, be utilized by the department of police for a period not to exceed 90 days before being subjected to sale, as otherwise provided by this section. 
(h)  Immobilization of vehicles. Any sworn police officer or parking enforcement officer may cause a vehicle to be immobilized if the vehicle has been issued a minimum of three unsatisfied delinquent parking tickets. The charge for the immobilization of vehicles under this section shall not exceed $50.00 per day for the removal of the vehicle immobilization device or devices. Neither the city nor its parking management service shall have liability for any damage, vandalism or theft of any immobilized vehicles. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2224; Ord. No. 2009-42(09-O-0765), § 1, 7-28-09) 
Sec. 150-89. - Penalty for violation of no parking area between certain hours. 
When a violation of a posted no parking area occurs between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m., the violation shall subject the violator to a minimum mandatory fine of $20.00 for each violation. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2222) 
Sec. 150-90. - On-street handicapped parking places in residential areas. 
(a)  The bureau of traffic and transportation shall install a handicapped parking place on the street adjacent to any dwelling wherein resides a handicapped person, provided that: 
(1)  The street is part of the municipal street system or an extension of a county road within the city's corporate limits. 
(2)  Such parking places will not disrupt the normal flow of traffic. 
(3)  The handicapped person resides in the applicable dwelling and intends to reside there indefinitely. 
(4)  The handicapped person has been issued a permanent handicapped parking permit or a disabled person's license plate by the state. 
(5)  The property on which the applicable dwelling sits has no driveway or other off-street parking capacity or because of terrain has off-street parking inaccessible to a handicapped person. 
(6)  The handicapped person requests such a space, in writing, or such a request is made on behalf of a handicapped person. 
(7)  The applicable dwelling was constructed prior to January 1, 1988. 
(b)  The handicapped person shall notify the bureau of traffic and transportation in writing when the handicapped person ceases to reside in the applicable dwelling. 
(c)  Nothing in this section creating handicapped parking places shall apply to any street or public road in the state highway system, including extensions thereof, into or through the city. 
(Code 1977, §§ 13-2256, 13-2257) 
State Law reference— Handicapped Parking Law, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-220 et seq. 
Sec. 150-91. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully and unnecessarily to fail or refuse to move such person's vehicle when it is stopped in such manner as to obstruct or impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic on the streets. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2227) 
Sec. 150-92. - Parking on narrow streets. 
Signs indicating no parking upon any street may be erected when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet or upon one side of a street as indicated by these signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2228(a)) 
Sec. 150-93. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon a roadway for: 
(1)  Displaying the vehicle for sale; 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by sudden emergency; in the emergency the vehicle shall be moved or towed away with all due haste; or 
(3)  Displaying advertising. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2234) 
Sec. 150-94. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-45(10-O-1227), § 1, approved July 27, 2010, repealed § 150-94, which pertained to all-night parking. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 150-95. - Parking in business district and certain other areas. 
(a)  Use of city agency or board of education parking lots. No person shall park a vehicle of any description in any parking lot operated and maintained by any city agency or by the board of education, except those having official business with the city or board of education and only in places therein and for the time designated by markings therein. 
(b)  Public pay parking in parking lots of city departments. Whenever the mayor and council have approved for public pay parking any parking lot operated and maintained by a city department, the lot may be used for that purpose when not required for normal city operations. The fees charged and the method of operation shall be determined by the department responsible for the lot. 
(c)  MARTA parking lots. No person shall park a vehicle of any description in any parking lot operated and maintained by the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority, except patrons while using the transit facility and employees and only in places therein and for time designated by markings therein. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2236; Ord. No. 2010-45(10-O-1227), § 2, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 150-96. - Parking in police parking lot or driveways. 
No person shall park a vehicle in the department of police parking lot or driveways unless the vehicle is city property. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2237) 
Sec. 150-97. - Restrictions for trucks, buses. 
(a)  Time limit for trucks. No person shall park or stand any truck or other freight-carrying vehicle, including any truck tractor, in excess of one-half ton capacity upon any public street or highway for longer than one hour at any time during the day or no person shall park any truck or other freight-carrying vehicle, including any truck tractor or their cabs, in excess of one-half ton capacity upon any public street or highway from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. during standard time and from 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. during day light savings time. 
(b)  Attendant required for certain trucks, buses. No person shall stop or stand any truck or bus with a body more than eight feet wide or ten feet high on any street or public place without the driver or chauffeur being actually present and in charge thereof. 
(c)  Time limit for idling. No person shall stop or stand any truck or bus on any street or public place and idle for more than 15 minutes. A violation of this subsection shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a minimum fine of $500.00. This limitation shall not apply under the following conditions: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles, utility company, construction and maintenance vehicles where the engines must run to perform needed work; 
(2)  Truck or bus is forced to remain motionless because of traffic conditions; 
(3)  Truck or bus is being used to supply heat or air conditioning necessary for passenger safety or comfort, and such truck or bus is being used for commercial passenger transportation or is a transit authority bus or school bus, in which idling shall be limited to a maximum of 25 minutes; 
(4)  If the ambient temperature is less than 32 degrees Fahrenheit, idling shall be limited to a maximum of 25 minutes; or 
(5)  Any vehicle, truck, bus, or transit authority bus in which the primary source of fuel is Natural Gas (CNG) or electricity shall be exempt from the idling limitations set forth in this section. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2238; Ord. No. 2001-8, § 1, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2002-84, § 1, 11-26-02) 
Sec. 150-98. - Parking vehicles carrying dynamite, propane gas or explosive substances near certain buildings. 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle carrying dynamite, propane gas or any other volatile or explosive substance for more than one hour within 200 feet of any building used for assembly or institutional or residential occupancy. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2239) 
Sec. 150-99. - Stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle on sidewalk or within five feet of the public right-of-way. 
(a)  No person, except as otherwise provided for in subsection (b) below, shall stop, leave standing or park any passenger vehicle, automobile, light truck, sport utility vehicle, or motorcycle, whether attended or unattended, on any portion of a sidewalk or other pedestrian access route adjacent to the public right-of-way within the city's municipal street system and on extensions of a county road system within the city's corporate limits, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or official traffic control device. Any person violating this section shall, on conviction, be punished, as follows: 

 
(b)  No person shall stop, leave standing or park any motor vehicle operated separately or in combination with any trailer or semitrailer which has either two axles with six or more tires or three or more axles or which has a gross weight in excess of 36,000 pounds, whether attended or unattended, on any portion of a sidewalk or other pedestrian access route adjacent to the public right-of-way within the city's municipal street system and on extensions of a county road system within the city's corporate limits, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or official traffic control device. Any person violating this section shall, on conviction, be punished, as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 2002-60, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2002-72, § 1, 10-15-02) 
Secs. 150-100—150-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOADING AND UNLOADING 

Sec. 150-111. - Pass required for parking of certain commercial vehicles in truck loading zones and without charge at metered parking spaces. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "commercial vehicles other than commercial trucks," means vehicles that are used primarily in the transportation of property for compensation, including but not limited to wreckers, tow trucks, station wagons and vans used for commercial purposes, but shall not include any vehicle having a gross weight of 10,001 pounds or over which is designed and used for the transportation of merchandise or freight and shall not include vehicles used primarily for the transportation of passengers. 
(b)  Commercial vehicles other than commercial trucks are authorized to park in areas of the city designated as truck loading zones and without charge at all metered parking spaces so long as a truck loading zone/parking meter pass is first obtained from the office of transportation as prescribed in this section, and only during loading and unloading of the vehicle. 
(c)  The pass, valid for 12 months, shall be issued upon payment of a yearly pass fee of $300.00. 
(d)  Every person desiring to obtain a pass required under this section shall make written application to the office of transportation upon forms to be prepared and approved by the office. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the nature of the vehicle, the nature and character of the business conducted by the applicant and the location of the commercial uses of the vehicle in the city. Such application shall be sworn to and subscribed to by the applicant before a notary public. Upon submission of the application and upon payment of a the yearly pass fee of $300.00, the pass shall be issued. Prior revocation of a pass under this section shall be grounds for not issuing a pass under this section. 
(e)  Any passholder while parked in a truck loading zone or in a space where a parking meter is installed shall have adhered to the windshield on the driver's side of the vehicle a three-inch by three-inch decal which shall be supplied to the passholder by the office of transportation. 
(f)  Any material omission, untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original or renewal application for a pass under this section shall be cause for the denial of the pass. If any pass has been granted under these circumstances, such shall constitute cause for the revocation of the pass. 
(g)  Every pass issued under this section shall be renewed annually on or before the anniversary of the date of issuance of the pass on forms prescribed by the office of transportation and upon payment of a renewal fee of $300.00. 
(h)  A pass issued pursuant to this section may be revoked or suspended upon the failure of any commercial vehicle permitted under this section to comply with this section. 
(i)  The office of transportation may revoke or suspend, for a definite or an indefinite period, any pass granted under this section whenever it shall be made to appear that the holder of such pass has violated this section or has made any false statement upon any application for a pass under this section. 
(j)  Prior to any suspension or revocation as set forth in subsection (f) of this section, it shall be the duty of the office of transportation to notify in writing any person holding the pass that the office of transportation has grounds for the revocation or suspension of such pass and further notifying such pass holder that the pass holder may, within a period of five days, appear to present any defense that the pass holder may have to the proposed revocation of such pass. The notice shall further advise the holder of such pass that failure to appear within such five-day period shall result in the revocation or suspension of the pass. Such notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the holder of such pass as the address appears from the files of the department of police. Such notice shall set forth the grounds upon which the proposed revocation or suspension is predicated. 
No passholder under this section shall be authorized to stand in an area designated as a truck loading zone or freight loading zone for any time beyond that authorized in section 150-114 of this chapter. 
(k)  Any commercial vehicles other than commercial trucks found standing or parked in a truck loading zone, or in a space where a parking meter is located, that is not displaying a pass issued under this section, shall be issued a citation which shall impose a fine in the amount of $100.00. If the said fine is not paid within a period of 14 days, the fine will be doubled to $200.00. 
(l)  The fee to replace a lost, stolen or damaged pass, or to issue a new pass for the purpose of substituting one permitted vehicle in place of another, shall be $20.00, and such replacement or substituted pass shall carry the same expiration date of the initial pass. 
(Code 1977, §§ 13-2240—13-2240.4; Ord. No. 2008-48(08-O-1002), § 1, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2015-23(15-O-1132), § 1, 5-27-15 ) 
Sec. 150-112. - Designation of curb loading zones. 
The location of a passenger and freight curb loading zone shall be designated by appropriate signs indicating the zone and stating the hours during which this division is applicable. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2241) 
Sec. 150-113. - Stopping, standing or parking in passenger curb loading zone. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, or passengers and drivers for the provision of off-street attendant parking services as defined and regulated by sections 150-120 through 150-131 in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to that curb loading zone are effective. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2242; Ord. No. 1997-22, § 1, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 2008-63(08-O-2418), § 1, 7-30-08) 
Sec. 150-114. - Stopping, standing or parking in freight curb loading zone. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a truck or a vehicle properly licensed as a commercial vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zone are in effect or stop, stand or park any other vehicle except for such unloading or loading of materials. 
(b)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when that stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter the zone. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2243) 
Sec. 150-115. - Designation of bus stops, taxicab stands and public carrier stands. 
All bus stops, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier motor vehicles located on public streets shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2244) 
Sec. 150-116. - Identification of bus stops. 
(a)  Length. A nonparking zone of 80 feet shall be created at all bus stops for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers. 
(b)  Marking. The nonparking zones shall be marked by signs and, in addition, the zones in all congested areas shall have the curbs painted yellow. This proper marking of zones shall be maintained by the companies operating buses in and out of these zones. 
(c)  Use. Buses or any vehicles parked in these zones to load or unload passengers shall pull as close to the curb as possible. 
(d)  Effect of section. This section does not prohibit buses from loading and unloading at platforms at loading zones where they are provided for that purpose in the street. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2245) 
Sec. 150-117. - Parking of buses, taxicabs. 
The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this section shall not prevent the driver of the vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers and except for making emergency repairs. This section shall not apply to common carriers stopping at regular designated passenger or layover locations. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2246) 
Sec. 150-118. - Use of bus and taxicab stands restricted. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when the stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed. However, the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when this stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter that zone. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2247) 
Sec. 150-119. - Discharging passengers on a controlled access highway. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to discharge passengers from that vehicle while the vehicle is on any part of a controlled access highway. 
(b)  Violation by passenger. It shall be unlawful for any passenger in a motor vehicle to disembark from the vehicle while the vehicle is on any portion of a controlled access highway. 
(c)  Applicability of section. This section shall not apply to a person whose automobile for any reason becomes inoperative while on a controlled access highway. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2248) 
DIVISION 2A. - VALET PARKING SERVICES PILOT PROGRAM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-10(10-O-0280), § 1, approved March 23, 2010, amended Div. 2A, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 2A pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 150-120. - Valet parking services program. 
(a)  A valet parking services program is established for the purpose of permitting and regulating on-street valet parking services. 
(b)  Geographic area: The valet parking services program shall be permitted within the boundaries of the City of Atlanta. 
(c)  This division, as well as all related and applicable code sections contained in Chapter 150 of the City's Code of Ordinances, are not applicable to the "airport," as that term is defined in Chapter 22, Article III, Division 1, section 22-56 of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10(10-O-0280), § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 150-121. - Definitions 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Attendant means a person who operates a vehicle between a pick-up/drop-off zone and a parking location on behalf of a valet parking service. Attendants are required to wear a badge, uniform or shirt which identifies the attendant as an authorized employee of the valet parking service. 
Permittee means a business owner permitted under this division to operate a valet parking service. The term includes any employee, agent or independent contractor of the person in whose name the permit is issued. Permits are issued to the business benefiting from the zone, not the valet parking service provider. 
Valet parking service means a business, or any part of a business, which provides a driver to operate a vehicle to and from a parking location so that the driver and passengers in the vehicle may unload and load at their immediate destination regardless of whether a fee is charged. 
Valet parking service pick-up/drop-off zone means a designated location where an attendant takes possession of a vehicle for the purpose of parking and returns the vehicle to the possession of the driver thereof. Said zones: 
a.  Shall be approved by the department of public works. 
b.  Shall be a length determined by the department of works, shall have a minimum length of 45 feet and a maximum length of 80 feet and may not exceed the length of the permittee's property frontage(s) on the city street(s) adjoining such property. 
c.  Shall exist only on city streets that are a minimum of 30 feet wide. 
d.  Shall be permitted only in the curb lane of the street. 
e.  May be permitted where parking meters are installed. 
f.  Shall not be permitted in an area in which parking is restricted for other use. 
g.  Shall not be located within 20 feet of a crosswalk or 30 feet of an intersection, whichever is greater. 
h.  Shall not be located within five feet of a driveway. 
i.  Shall not be located within three feet in front of or 40 feet behind a sign marking a designated bus stop. 
j.  Shall not reduce the unobstructed space for the passage of pedestrians to less than five feet unless a greater distance is required by the commissioner and warranted by special pedestrian traffic conditions. 
k.  Shall not be located within the area used by vehicle detection devices near signalized intersections. 
l.  Shall not be located on any street that is part of the Georgia Department of Transportation State Route System. 
m.  Shall not be permitted during peak hours of traffic, as determined for the subject street by the department of public works, office of transportation. 
n.  May be restricted from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. when the drop-off/pick up zone is located within 200 feet of a residential building or a mixed use building with a residential use. 
Valet parking service reservoir area means premises where a valet parking service parks vehicles. Said area: 
a.  Shall be approved by the department of public works. 
b.  Shall be appropriately zoned in accordance with the City of Atlanta Zoning Code. 
c.  Shall comply with the requirements set forth in the City of Atlanta Ordinance contained in Part 16 of the City of Atlanta Land Development Code and in particular at sections 16-28.014(1) and (3), section 158-30, and any other applicable code sections. 
d.  Shall be located within a 1,000 feet radius of the associated pick-up/drop-off zone. 
e.  Shall not be located within the public right-of-way. 
Valet parking service stand means a temporary removable structure located near the pick-up/drop-off zone that is utilized by the valet operator for the general conduct of the valet parking service, including the dispatch of attendants and the storage of keys, umbrellas and other items. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10(10-O-0280), § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 150-122. - Purpose. 
(a)  The department of public works office of transportation is authorized to issue permits for the operation of valet parking service on the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Other than permitting and regulating valet parking service, this ordinance does not remove or modify any current rules and regulations applicable to off-street attendant parking services. 
(c)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to permit a commercial establishment to substitute valet off-street attendant parking services for any parking requirements imposed by the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances including but not limited to the Zoning Ordinance contained in Part 16 of the City of Atlanta Land Development Code or in the provisions related to the control of alcoholic beverages contained in Chapter 10 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to give any person, whether or not a permittee, any property right in or to use any street. All permits issued and held under this division shall be subject to the superior right of the public to the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10(10-O-0280), § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 150-123. - Permit required. 
(a)  A permittee must keep on the premises of the permitted location a valet parking service permit at all times and may be subject to inspection by any authorized official of the City of Atlanta. 
(b)  All valet parking service permits shall be valid for one year from approval date. 
(c)  A permit renewal application must be submitted 30 days prior to permit expiration. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10(10-O-0280), § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 150-124. - Standards of operation. 
(a)  A permittee shall: 
(1)  Allow only employees and independent contractors who hold a valid state driver's license, and who are covered by insurance as required by section 150-126 of this division, to operate any vehicle in connection with the valet parking service; 
(2)  Maintain a valet parking service stand that meets the requirements of section 150-125 at each location where the permittee provides valet parking service; 
(3)  Operate the valet parking service in a manner that does not: 
i.  Use or occupy more of the public right-of-way than is allowed by the valet parking service permit; 
ii.  Unreasonably interfere with safe traffic operations of roadways, driveways and intersections; 
iii  Obstruct a pedestrian's use of a sidewalk; 
iv.  Obstruct a vehicle operator's ability to see any part of an intersecting road; or 
v.  Injure, damage, or create a hazard to persons or property; 
(4)  Not park or allow the parking of a vehicle in a valet parking service space, or allow the loading and unloading of goods, equipment, or merchandise, but shall only use the space for loading and unloading passengers; in no event shall a vehicle be allowed to remain in a valet parking service space for more than five minutes; 
(5)  Place no more than one valet parking service stand in the public right-of-way; 
(6)  Not place a sign identifying or advertising the service on a street or sidewalk unless the sign is located on the valet parking service stand or as provided for in section 150-125(c); 
(7)  At no time allow a vehicle to be unattended in a pick-up/drop-off zone; 
(8)  Continuously provide valet parking service during all hours of operation authorized in the permit; 
(9)  Only use an off-street parking location to park a vehicle accepted for valet parking service and shall not park the vehicle in the public right-of-way; and 
(10)  Notify the department of public works within ten days of a change in the location of off-street parking and provide the commissioner of public works with a signed agreement or other documentation showing that the permittee has a legal right to park vehicles at the new location. 
(b)  At all times other than the authorized hours of operation of a valet parking service, spaces reserved by the valet parking service shall be available for use by the general public on a first-come, first-served basis in accordance with posted signs and other traffic control devices, except where parking is restricted or prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10(10-O-0280), § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 150-125. - Valet parking service stand. 
(a)  A permittee shall provide one valet parking service stand at each permitted location. The valet parking service stand may be located in the public right-of-way at a location approved by the department of public works or within the adjacent building for whose benefit the valet parking service is provided. The valet parking service stand must be necessary to the general conduct of the valet parking service and shall be used for such purposes, including, but not limited to, the dispatch of valets and the storage of keys, umbrellas, and other items. 
(b)  A valet parking service stand shall: 
(1)  Occupy an area of the public right-of-way no greater than four feet by four feet with a minimum of five feet unobstructed pedestrian clear zone. 
(2)  Not be permanently affixed to the public right-of-way in any manner; 
(3)  Be easily moveable by one person; 
(4)  Be removed from the public right-of-way when the valet parking service is not being operated; 
(5)  Be secured and locked when left unattended; and 
(6)  Have affixed a sign not larger than four feet by four feet for the sole purpose of identifying the valet parking service indicating the name of the operator of the valet parking service and the fee for valet parking service, if any. 
(7)  Provide and maintain a trash receptacle. 
(c)  If the valet parking service stand is located within a building, the permittee shall provide a portable A-frame sign not larger than two feet by three feet for the sole purpose of identifying the valet parking service indicating the name of the operator of the valet parking service and the fee for valet parking service, if any. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10(10-O-0280), § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 150-126. - Insurance. 
(a)  A permittee shall procure, or cause to be procured, and keep continuously in full force and effect during the duration of valet parking service operations, and shall keep on file with the department of public works, a policy of comprehensive general liability insurance, business auto liability insurance, and garage keeper's insurance, on a certificate of insurance, issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to do business in this state and in the standard form approved by the insurance commissioner of the state. The insured provisions of the policy must include the city, and its officers and employees, as additional insureds and the coverage provisions must insure the public against loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of a valet parking service by the permittee. 
(b)  The comprehensive general liability insurance must be on a broad form and provide limits of liability for bodily injury and property damage in an amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence with a $2,000,000.00 aggregate. 
(c)  The business auto liability insurance must provide limits of liability for bodily injury and property damage in an amount not less than $500,000.00 combined single limit. The following extensions of coverage must be included. 
(1)  Comprehensive and collision coverage for physical damage. 
(2)  Coverage for vehicle storage. 
(3)  Coverage for a vehicle driven by or at the direction of the permittee. 
(4)  The garage keeper's liability insurance must provide limits of liability for "auto" and "other than auto" in an amount not less than $500,000.00 combined single limit. The other than collision coverage shall include "comprehensive" (all perils) coverage. 
(d)  Each insurance policy must state that it may not be canceled, materially modified or non-renewed unless the insurance company gives the department of public works 30 days advance written notice. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10(10-O-0280), § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 150-127. - Application. 
(a)  A business owner who desires to operate a valet parking service in the public right-of-way, shall submit an application for a permit to the commissioner of public works for that purpose. 
(b)  A joint application may be made for one valet parking service to provide service to two or more premises benefiting from the zone located in close proximity to the proposed valet parking service pick-up/drop-off zone. Said application must include required application information as detailed in this section for all owners and lessees. 
(c)  The application must be made by the owner(s) or lessee(s) of the premises benefiting from the proposed valet parking service and must contain the following: 
(1)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant; if the applicant is a lessee, the property owner; and any independent contractor the applicant will use to provide valet parking service. 
(2)  The proposed location of the valet parking service pick-up/drop off zone and any valet parking service stands. 
(3)  The proposed hours and days of operation of the valet parking service. 
(4)  The location of a valet parking service reservoir area to be used in connection with the valet parking service and a signed agreement or other documentation showing that the applicant has a legal right to park vehicles at that location; 
(5)  A traffic flow plan, including a map, describing the route(s) that vehicles will be driven between the proposed valet pick-up/drop-off zone and the valet reservoir area. 
(6)  Proof of insurance as required by section 150-126; 
(7)  Signed indemnity and release forms that indemnify the city and its officers and employees against all claims of injury or damage to persons or property arising out of the operation of the valet parking service by the permittee; 
(8)  Signed affidavit and photographic proof that upon submission of the application, the applicant did post notification of the application in a location visible to the public for a period of 30 days from application submittal. 
(9)  Signed affidavit stating that the permittee is a U.S. citizen or a legal alien as required for the Systematic Alien Verification of Entitlement (SAVE) program. 
(10)  A copy of a valid local business tax receipt issued by the city; and 
(11)  Any other information reasonably required by the commissioner of public works for the purpose of processing the application under the requirements of this division. 
(d)  The office of traffic and transportation shall forward notice of any completed application to the applicable City of Atlanta Neighborhood Planning Unit for informational purposes only. 
(e)  Upon submission of the application, the applicant shall post notification of the application at its place of business in a location visible to the public for a period of 30 days. 
(f)  After reviewing the application and upon receiving payment of all fees required by this division, the commissioner of public works may issue a valet parking service permit, unless the application is denied pursuant to section 150-130. 
(g)  A permittee desiring to change the location or hours of operation of a valet parking service must submit a new application to the commissioner of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10(10-O-0280), § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 150-128. - Fees. 
(a)  The commissioner of public works is hereby authorized to charge the following fees: 
(1)  A nonrefundable application fee of $300.00. 
(2)  An annual fee of $35.00 per linear foot of curbside space designated for valet parking service drop-off and pick-up zones. Said fees shall be due upon approval of the application. 
(3)  If the operation of the valet parking service requires use of metered parking spaces or area, the permittee shall also pay a fee of $8.00 per day per meter. If the valet service is operated at a location for a portion of a day, the parking meter fee shall be pro-rated based on the amount of time the location is used for valet service. 
(4)  The sign installation fee shall be $150.00 per sign, with the number of required signs to be determined by the department of public works office of transportation. Said fees shall be due and payable once a permit has been approved, but prior to installation of the required signs by the department of public works. Each sign shall indicate that the location is restricted for use by a valet parking service and state the days and hours of operation of the valet parking service 
(5)  No permit fee or sign fee shall be required for a valet parking service that is conducted completely on private property and the public right-of-way is only used for maneuvering vehicles. 
(6)  A permit renewal fee of $75.00. 
(b)  All application and permit fees collected for this purpose shall be deposited in Fund, Account, Center 1001 3222105 000002. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10(10-O-0280), § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 150-129. - Violations. 
(a)  An offense is committed if, without a permit issued by the commissioner of public works, a valet parking service is operated within the city on public right-of-way or on private property which requires the use of public right-of-way for maneuvering vehicles. 
(b)  An offense is committed if, at a time other than the hours and days of operation authorized by the permit, an employee, agent or independent contractor of the permittee operates a valet parking service within the city on public right-of-way or on private property which requires the use of public right-of-way for maneuvering vehicles. 
(c)  An offense is committed if the permittee fails to keep on the premises of the permitted location a valid valet parking service permit at all times. The permittee's business is subject to inspection at any time by any authorized official of the City of Atlanta. 
(d)  Offenses "a", "b" and "c" shall result in the issuance of a citation and a maximum fine of $1,000.00 per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10(10-O-0280), § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 150-130. - Denial, revocation or suspension of permit. 
(a)  The commissioner of public works shall deny a valet parking service permit or revoke without refund of any portion of any fees a valet parking service permit if: 
(1)  The applicant fails to comply with the requirements of this division or other applicable law; 
(2)  The applicant makes a false statement of material fact on an application for a valet parking service permit; or 
(3)  The commissioner of public works determines that the operation of the valet parking service would: 
i.  Endanger the safety of persons or property or otherwise not be in the public interest; 
ii.  Unreasonably interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
iii.  Unreasonably interfere with the use of a pole, traffic sign, traffic signal, hydrant, mailbox, or other object permitted at or near the proposed location of the valet parking service; or 
iv.  Unreasonably interfere with an existing use permitted at or near the proposed location of the valet parking service. 
(b)  The commissioner of public works or the Atlanta Police Department may temporarily suspend the operations of a valet parking service if the public right-of-way reserved by the valet parking service is needed for an emergency or temporary use, including, but not limited to, the construction, maintenance, or repair of a street or utility or special event. 
(c)  The City of Atlanta Police Department and department of public works parking enforcement personnel shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10(10-O-0280), § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 150-130.1. - Appeals and hearings. 
Other than with regard to the authority of the commissioner of public works to suspend or modify operations of valet parking service pursuant to the provisions of section 150-123, any aggrieved permit applicant or permit holder shall have the right to appeal the denial, suspension or revocation of a valet parking service permit. Such appeals shall proceed in the following manner. 
(a)  Appeal of application denial. An appeal of a denial of an application shall be submitted to the commissioner of public works. Such appeal shall be in the form of a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The appeal shall be filed with the commissioner of public works within ten business days after the notice of denial is issued. Notices which are given by mail shall be presumed to have been received three days after mailing. 
(1)  Appeals to the commissioner of public works shall result in the commissioner setting forth a time and place for a hearing on the appeal. Hearings shall be informal, and shall be scheduled within ten business days after receipt of the appeal. The determination of such hearing shall be made within ten business days thereafter, which determination shall either affirm or modify the permit denial. 
(2)  The commissioner's decision may affirm the original decision, may reverse and grant a permit, or may reverse and grant a permit with conditions. 
(3)  The hearing under this section shall be de novo. The application shall be evaluated in accordance with the criteria of this division. 
(4)  The written determination of the commissioner of public works upon the hearing as provided in this division shall be the final decision of the city in the matter, and shall be subject to review by the Superior Court of Fulton County by a petition setting forth an appeal and naming the City of Atlanta as the defending party. 
(b)  Appeal of permit suspension or revocation. An appeal of a suspension or revocation of a valet parking service permit shall be submitted by the permit holder to the license and permits unit of the Atlanta Police Department. Such appeal shall be in the form of a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The permit holder may include with the written appeal all evidentiary materials that the permit holder wishes to submit in support of the permit holder's position. The appeal shall be filed with the license and permits unit within ten business days after the notice of suspension or revocation is issued notices which are given by mail shall be presumed to have been received three days after mailing. 
(1)  Upon receipt of the appeal, the license and permits unit shall, within five business days, request the original written determination prepared by the commissioner of public works. Said written determination forwarded to the license and permits unit shall include all relevant documentation and information supporting the recommendation of the commissioner of public works. 
(2)  The commissioner of public works shall forward the determination to the license and permits unit within ten business days of receipt of the request from the license and permits unit. 
(3)  Upon receipt of the determination and supporting documentation from the commissioner of public works, the license and permits unit shall add the appeal to the agenda for the next regularly scheduled license review board meeting ("board") and shall notify the appellant in writing of the date, time, and location of said meeting. 
(4)  At the hearing before the board, the appellant may present evidence and testimony in support of the appellant's position. The commissioner of public works, or his designee, may then present evidence and testimony in support of the commissioner's position. 
(5)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall make a recommendation to the mayor supporting the action taken by the commissioner of public works, or modifying said action. 
(6)  The mayor shall approve, modify, or reject the recommendation of the board within 90 calendar days of receipt of a recommendation from the board. Upon review of the board's recommendation and the record created during the board hearing, if the mayor determines there exists the need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application back to the board for further hearing. In remanding the application back to the board, the mayor shall provide written instructions to the board and the license and permits unit identifying specific issues and/or matters the mayor requires the board to conduct further hearing upon. The appellant shall be provided with a five-day written notice stating the specific issues and/or matters to be addressed on remand, along with the place, date and time of the remand hearing. All matters remanded to the board shall be scheduled for further hearing before the board no later than 30 days after the date of remand. If the mayor does not make a decision to grant or deny an appeal within the 90 calendar days provided, and does not choose to remand the appeal to the license review board, the appellant shall be approved or denied wherein the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10(10-O-0280), § 1, 3-23-10) 
DIVISION 3. - PARKING METERS 

Sec. 150-131. - Enforcement. 
Enforcement of this division, including issuance of citations for vehicles parked in restricted areas, shall be the responsibility of parking enforcement officers, the parking management service, and/or the police chief, or designee. 
(a)  Parking enforcement officer means non-sworn personnel designated by the commissioner of the public works, and appointed by the police chief, or designee as code enforcement agents pursuant to section 98-1 of the Code of Ordinances, for the purpose of enforcing parking regulations including issuance of citations, towing of vehicles, and/or immobilization of vehicles parked in restricted areas. In order to enforce these code provisions, these employees must apply for and receive the status of code enforcement agent. 
(b)  Parking management service is the private vendor retained by the City of Atlanta that employs off duty or retired police officers to perform services described in subsection (c) below, and in addition, that employs non-sworn personnel (parking management agents) who are authorized to issue parking citations for vehicles that are illegally parked only in the following three instances: 
(1)  The issuance of citations for vehicles in violation of the provisions of Atlanta City Code Section 150-132 which provides for parking time limits at metered parking spaces. 
(2)  The issuance of citations for vehicles that violate in violation of the provisions of Atlanta City Code Section 150-133 which prohibits overtime parking at metered parking spaces. 
(3)  The issuance of citations for vehicles that are illegally parked on streets that are included in residential permit, including the issuance of citations for vehicles that are illegally parked, and the immobilization and impoundment of vehicles that are illegally parked; or 
(c)  Violations of the provisions of Atlanta Code of Ordinances Sections 150-132, which provides for parking time limits at metered parking spaces, and 150-133, which prohibits overtime parking at metered parking spaces, shall be deemed non-criminal. The imposition of a civil penalty pursuant to sections 150-132 and 150-133 shall not be deemed a conviction and shall not be made a part of the criminal record of the person upon which such a penalty is imposed. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2254; Ord. No. 2004-65, § 1, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 2006-68, § 1, 10-11-06; Ord. No. 2009-42(09-O-0765), § 2, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 2010-21(10-O-0735), §§ 1, 2, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 2010-28(10-O-1178), § 1, 6-30-10; Ord. No. 2019-02(18-O-1752), § 1, 1-16-19 ) 
Sec. 150-132. - Parking meter zones; time limits; fees. 
(a)  The designation of maximum time limits shall be determined by the commissioner of the department of public works, or his designee. Maximum time limits for metered streets may be set at: 
(1)  One-hour maximum limit. 
(2)  Two-hour maximum limit. 
(3)  Three-hour maximum limit. 
(4)  Four-hour maximum limit. 
(5)  Variable maximum times. 
i.  Maximum time limit before 5:00 p.m. is two hours. 
ii.  Maximum time limits after 5:00 p.m. and on weekends may be 3-hours or four hours. 
(6)  No maximum time limit. 
(b)  Days of parking meter enforcement are from Monday to Saturday. 
(1)  Upon written request, parking meter enforcement may be permitted on Sundays during special events or stadium events. 
(c)  Hours of parking enforcement are from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(1)  Reduced hours of enforcement may be utilized for areas where buildings have multiple uses which include both residential and commercial but do not historically have on-site parking. Reduced hours of enforcement are from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday to Friday. 
(2)  Upon written request from the neighborhood association and approval by the commissioner of the department of public works, or designee, parking enforcement hours may be extended until 2:00 a.m. to manage activity near nightclubs and bars. 
(d)  The period of time of parking in areas designated as parking meter time limits shall be registered by parking meters, and the charges which are reasonably necessary to defray the expenses incident thereto for this parking shall be as set out in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Such meters shall provide for maximum time limits as indicated on each meter, where the maximum time limit at parking meters shall be determined by the parking meter zone. The fee in each instance shall be at the rate of $1.00 per half an hour of time allowed. 
(f)  Vehicles which have purchased a currently valid truck loading zone/parking meter pass pursuant to Atlanta City Code Section 150-111(c) shall be permitted to park at all parking meter spaces in the City of Atlanta without charge for a period not to exceed the maximum time limit indicated on each meter or 30 minutes, whichever is more. 
(g)  The municipal court is authorized to impose a civil monetary penalty against persons who violate this section in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 for each such violation. 
(h)  Parking signage shall accurately reflect the City's Code of Ordinances provisions as applied to days and times of parking enforcement. If there is a conflict between on-street parking signage and associated parking meters with respect to days, hours of enforcement, and/or maximum parking times, the information contained in the parking signage shall apply. 
(i)  Within designated food truck areas, food trucks permitted in accordance with chapter 30, article XXIII shall not be subject to the parking time limits contained in this division, but must comply with all further provisions contained therein. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2249; Ord. No. 2001-95, § 1, 12-12-01; Ord. No. 2008-48(08-O-1002), § 2, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2010-05(10-O-0309), §§ 1, 2, 2-23-10; Ord. No. 2010-28(10-O-1178), § 2, 6-30-10; Ord. No. 2010-45(10-O-1227), § 3, 7-27-10; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 12, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2019-02(18-O-1752), § 1, 1-16-19 ) 
Sec. 150-133. - Overtime parking. 
(a)  No person shall park any motor vehicle in any area where a parking meter is installed for a longer period of time than has been paid for or the maximum time indicated for the area by an appropriate sign. 
(b)  When a violation as described in subsection (a) above occurs, a citation for overtime parking shall be issued and a fine of $35.00 shall be imposed. 
(c)  If the mandatory $35.00 fine set out in subsection (b) above is not paid in full within 14 days of the issuance of the citation, the fine shall increase from $35.00 to $70.00. 
(d)  If the $70.00 fine set out in subsection (c) above is not paid in full within 45 days of the issuance of the citation, the fine shall increase from $70.00 to $95.00. 
(e)  Should the violator elect to appeal the issuance of the citation described herein to the municipal court, the municipal court, pursuant to the provisions of section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances, is authorized to impose a civil monetary penalty against persons who violate this section in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 for each such violation. Upon the proper filing of an appeal within 14 days of the issuance of the citation, the late fees described in subsections (c) and (d) above will be suspended. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2250; Ord. No. 2010-28(10-O-1178), § 3, 6-30-10; Ord. No. 2012-31(12-O-0497), § 1, 6-27-12) 
Sec. 150-133.1. - Appeals. 
The appeal of parking citations shall be filed in the City of Atlanta Municipal Court within 14 days of the issuance of the citation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-28(10-O-1178), § 4, 6-30-10) 
Sec. 150-134. - Deposit of coins in connection with advertising scheme. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit coins in parking meters in connection with any advertising scheme or idea. The existence of any advertising materials on or in any parked vehicle advising the operator of the vehicle that such a deposit has been made in the meter shall be prima facie evidence of guilt on the part of the person doing the advertising. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2252) 
Sec. 150-135. - Use of funds. 
All the revenue derived from the installation and use of parking meters shall be used exclusively for the lease or purchase of the proper installations, for maintenance and operation of the meters and for traffic engineering and control. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2253) 
Sec. 150-136. - Collections, installation and maintenance. 
Collections, installation and maintenance of parking meters shall be the responsibility of the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2004-65, § 1, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 150-137. - Parking meters designated as "giving meters". 
(a)  Donation meters. 
(1)  Parking meters shall be installed throughout the City of Atlanta and designated as "giving meters." The "giving meters" shall be painted so that they are distinguished from regular parking meters. A sign shall also be permanently affixed to each of the "giving meters," identifying it as a donation meter and that all proceeds collected in the meter will be donated to the homelessness service organizations in Atlanta, which conform to the provisions of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(2)  The parking enforcement staff from the department of public works shall be authorized to collect the funds from the "giving meters" periodically in conformance with the department of public works current procedure for collecting revenue from parking meters. 
(3)  All proceeds collected from the "giving meters" shall be distributed on an annual basis by the finance department to the Regional Commission on Homelessness at the United Way as part of the City's participation in the annual giving campaign. The proceeds shall only be used to fund the provision of direct homeless services. The dispersal amount shall represent the full trust fund balance as of the most recent June 30th fiscal year closing date. The office of human services shall provide a communication to the community development/human resources committee stating the proceeds collected during the most recent fiscal year at least 30 days prior to dispersal. The office of human services shall ensure that the United Way provide it with a follow-up report on how the funds were dispersed. 
(b)  Contribution boxes. 
(1)  On one designated Homeless Persons Memorial Day per year, contribution boxes shall be distributed to various businesses, restaurants, and retail establishments throughout the City of Atlanta at their election and shall be placed inside each establishment for the purpose of collecting donations for the poor and homeless. Signs shall be affixed to the contribution boxes explaining that 100 percent of the donations will be directed to homelessness service organizations. 
(2)  All proceeds collected from the contribution boxes shall be distributed on an annual basis by city council. The regional commission on homelessness (hereinafter referred to as the RCH) shall be authorized to draft grant applications to be approved by the city council. Said applications must include inquiries regarding the financial status of the organization, its history of providing services to the homeless of Atlanta, and a requirement that how disbursed funds from the parking meters are applied must be reported to the RCH. Upon approval of said applications, the RCH shall be authorized to review completed applications from 501(c)(3) organizations that provide services to the homeless in the City of Atlanta. Based upon its review of the applications, the RCH shall recommend to city council how collected funds should be distributed among qualified applicants. After reviewing all recommendations, the city council shall vote and determine how funds shall be distributed among the qualified organizations. Said review process shall take place annually and selected organizations shall receive disbursements the January following the selection period. 
(Ord. No. 2005-91, § 1, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2008-16(08-O-0335), § 2, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 2014-52(14-O-1552), § 1, 11-25-14 ) 
Editor's note— Formerly § 42-43. 
Sec. 150-138. - Installation of new parking meters. 
Whenever the commissioner of public works determines that new parking meters should be installed in the public right-of-way, the following steps will be taken by the department of public works prior to any such installation: 
(a)  At least 30 days prior to the proposed installation of parking meters, all affected property owners will be provided with notification of such proposed installation by first class mail. Such written notice will provide the affected property owners with information as to the department official to contact with any comments such persons may wish to provide. 
(b)  Thirty days prior to the next published meeting date, the NPU where the proposed installation is to take place will be provided with notification of such proposed installation by first class mail. Such written notice will provide the affected NPU with information as to the department official to contact with any comments and recommendation the NPU may wish to provide. 
(c)  At least 30 days prior to the proposed installation of parking meters, notification will be given to the city council transportation committee of such proposed installation so that community input can be received through the "public comment" portion of a designated transportation committee meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2010-47(10-O-14117), § 1, 8-24-10) 
Secs. 150-139—150-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, adopted July 9, 2002, amended article VI, division 4 in its entirety. Formerly, said division pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 150-146. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Block face means that portion of one side of a street located between two intersecting streets or between the termination of a street and the first occurring side street. 
Corner lot means a lot that is located at the intersection of two or more streets within a residential permit parking area. 
Curb parking space means a section of street, adjacent to the curb or edge or roadway, where a motor vehicle may lawfully park. 
Residential area means a contiguous or nearly contiguous area containing public roadways which are primarily abutted by residential property and non-business property, such as parks, churches and schools. 
Residential permit parking area means that area that has been defined by the department of public works through the establishment of clearly defined boundaries within which residents shall be eligible to purchase residential parking permits. 
Street address means the lot number assigned to a lot of record as shown on the official tax maps of the city. 
Traffic generator means a property or properties which generates nonresidential traffic. This includes employment areas; college and universities; medical centers; commercial and entertainment areas and transit areas. 
(Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2010-37(10-O-0468), § 1, 7-15-10) 
Sec. 150-147. - Program established. 
There is established a residential permit parking program, whereby motor vehicles bearing a special parking permit issued pursuant to this division may be parked in excess of the time limits posted on streets within certain areas known as residential permit parking areas. Parking a motor vehicle on a street within a residential permit parking area may be restricted to a two-hour period for an established 12-hour period in the vicinity of the traffic generator unless the motor vehicle displays such valid parking permit. All presently existing residential permit parking programs and all programs established in the future may opt into this two-hour non-permitted parking element through a petition process within the residential permit parking area to be established by the commissioner of the department of public works. Street signage in each residential permit parking area must contain language that reflects the residential parking permit hours, including the two-hour non-resident exception, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2010-37(10-O-0468), § 2, 7-15-10; Ord. No. 2011-40(11-O-0773), § 1, 9-15-11) 
Sec. 150-148. - Petition required. 
(a)  Residents of a residential area who desire to have such area designated as a residential permit parking area shall submit to the office of transportation a written request seeking such designation. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such request, the office of transportation shall define the boundaries of the proposed residential permit parking area and those boundaries shall be set out in the petition. Said proposed area shall be no less than two contiguous block faces and within 1,500 feet of a traffic generator. All residences that front or are located on corner lots along the block faces, and any multiple-family dwellings that have sole vehicular access to said multiple-family dwellings from an included block face shall be included in the residential permit parking area and shall be included in the petitioning process. 
(c)  To warrant consideration. the petition must be supported by the signature of one adult resident from 70 percent or more of the residences within the area, provided only one signature shall be allowed for each street address. Apartment buildings and other multiple-family dwellings shall be considered as one residence for petitioning purposes and shall be limited to one signature, which shall be the signature of the property owner or the signature of a person who is legally authorized to sign on behalf of the property owner. 
(d)  The petition shall identify a resident petition coordinator and shall conform in form and content with requirements established by the office of transportation, 
(Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2010-37(10-O-0468), § 3, 7-15-10) 
Sec. 150-149. - Eligibility of area. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a petition referred to in this section, the office of transportation shall undertake evaluations and studies as needed to determine whether such residential area is eligible for designation as a residential permit parking area. 
(b)  In establishing the eligibility of a proposed residential permit parking area, the office of transportation shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The availability of off-street parking including but not limited to driveways, garages, and other types of parking facilities for residents. 
(2)  Studies of parking characteristics within the area considered for residential parking must show that, during the time period of the proposed restrictions. curb parking space occupancy exceeds 75 percent and non-residential vehicles represent at least 33 percent of the parked vehicles. 
(3)  For the designated residential permit parking area to meet residential parking program requirements, it must receive at least 70 points based on a combination of lack of off-street parking, percentage of non-residential vehicles and occupied parking spaces. The office of transportation shall develop the point system. 
(4)  Designation of the area as a residential permit parking area will result in one or more of the following expectations for the area: 
a.  A reduction in non-residential vehicles and the accompanying energy waste and air pollution. 
b.  A reduction in total vehicle miles traveled. 
c.  A reduction in traffic congestion and illegal parking. 
d.  An improvement in vehicular and pedestrian safety. 
(c)  Having determined that the requirements for a residential permit parking area are met, the office of transportation shall assign an appropriate and unique identification letter to the area and shall notify the petition coordinator that the area has been approved as a residential permit parking area. 
(Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2010-37(10-O-0468), § 4, 7-15-10) 
Sec. 150-150. - Application for permit. 
(a)  The application for a resident parking permit shall provide the name of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle to be permitted; the residential address; the operator's state driver's license number; the motor vehicle make, model ant license number; and other information requested on the application form. The applicant shall provide proof of residency as required by the office of transportation. 
(b)  Visitor permits shall require no written application except as provided in section 150-153(c); however, the office of transportation may require that previously issued and used permits be surrendered prior to replacement. 
(Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2010-37(10-O-0468), § 5, 7-15-10) 
Sec. 150-151. - Permit terms; fees. 
(a)  Residential parking permits shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
(b)  The permit fee shall be $20.00. 
(Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2008-46(08-O-0872), § 1, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2010-37(10-O-0468), § 6, 7-15-10) 
Sec. 150-152. - Issuance of permits. 
Following approval of a residential permit parking area, the office of transportation shall issue residential parking permits and visitor permits as follows: 
(1)  A permit shall be issued only to a motor vehicle owner or operator who resides on property that is either fronting or is located on a corner lot along a block face or has vehicular access from an included block face located within the residential permit parking area. Upon application and payment of the applicable fee, residential parking permits shall be issued in accordance with the following limitations: 
a.  For single-family dwelling units (one residential structure containing only one housing unit), two residential parking permits may be issued for each valid street address. 
b.  For multiple family dwelling units (including but not limited to, apartments, condominiums, attached dwellings, rowhouses and townhouses): 
1)  Two residential parking permits may be issued for each legally constituted and existing dwelling unit in any two-family or multiple-family dwelling facility at a valid street address within the residential permit parking area where said dwelling unit has no off-street parking availability. 
2)  One residential parking permit may be issued for each legally constituted and existing dwelling unit in any two-family or multiple-family dwelling facility at a valid street address within the residential permit parking area where said dwelling unit does have off-street parking availability, 
(2)  Upon request, two visitor permits may be issued without charge to the recipient of a residential parking permit, and such visitor permits may be renewed or replaced in accordance with procedures established by the office of transportation. 
(3)  A resident of a residential parking permit parking area who is eligible for a residential parking permit but does not apply for such permit may be issued two visitor permits by making application as provided in subsection (2) of this section and omitting information which is not applicable. No fee shall be charged for such visitor permits. 
(Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2008-46(08-O-0872), § 2, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2010-37(10-O-0468), § 7, 7-15-10; Ord. No. 2017-40(17-O-1378), § 1, 7-14-17 ) 
Sec. 150-153. - Permit form and display. 
(a)  The residential parking permit shall be a decal and shall be affixed only to the motor vehicle for which it was issued. The decal shall be permanently attached to the inside lower corner of the rear window, driver's side and must be clearly visible from outside the vehicle. Information shown on the permit decal shall include but not be limited to the residential permit parking area identification letter, the permit number and the expiration date. 
(b)  The visitor parking permit shall be a temporary permit designed for use by transient visitors and guests of residents of a residential permit parking area. Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, each visitor permit shall be valid for 15 days and shall provide all the rights and privileges of a residential parking permit. The visitor parking permit shall be of a form and shall be displayed as determined by the office of transportation. 
(c)  The office of transportation may issue a temporary parking permit, valid for not more than one year, for a vehicle operated by a person who provides health care services on a regular basis at an address within a residential permit parking area. Such temporary permit shall be a visitor parking permit bearing special validation and which is issued by the office of transportation upon satisfactory proof of need presented by the resident at such address. A temporary parking permit shall not be issued for use by a person who provides services for a commercial activity conducted at a residence. 
(Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2010-37(10-O-0468), § 8, 7-15-10) 
Sec. 150-154. - Uniformity of parking regulations. 
(a)  Within each discrete residential permit parking area there shall be uniform parking regulations applied to all locations where parking is allowed. Only when authorized by existing or future residential parking permit areas, a two-hour parking exemption for unpermitted vehicles will be allowed. Upon approval of a residential permit parking area, the office of transportation shall have parking regulation signs installed that clearly reflect the specific parking hours within the residential parking area indicating the time, location and conditions under which enforcement of the residential parking permit area shall occur. 
(b)  Parking a motor vehicle on a street within a residential permit parking area shall be restricted to a two-hour period only if permitted as provided for under section 150-147 and Section 15-154(a). Otherwise, parking a motor vehicle within a residential permit parking area shall be prohibited during the restricted 12-hour period as indicated by street signage unless the motor vehicle displays a valid residential parking permit for that area during which the residential permit parking program is in effect. No residential permit parking program shall be established that exceeds a 12-hour period per day. 
(c)  Only when authorized by existing or future residential parking permit areas, not more than 30 percent of all permit parking spaces established in a residential parking permit area shall be set aside for use by unpermitted vehicles. Whether such spaces shall be installed shall be determined through a petition process within the residential permit parking area to be established by the commissioner of the department of public works. Street signage in each residential permit parking area where such spaces are established must contain language that reflects that such spaces are available to non-permitted vehicles, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2010-37(10-O-0468), § 9, 7-15-10; Ord. No. 2011-40(11-O-0773), § 2, 9-15-11) 
Sec. 150-155. - Adding or removing block faces. 
(a)  All block faces of a discrete residential permit parking area shall have identical parking regulations where parking is allowed, and such regulations shall not be removed or modified on individual interior block faces. 
(b)  The office of transportation may add or remove block faces along the boundaries of a residential permit parking area upon receipt of a petition in which more than 50 percent of the residences request such action. The petition shall conform to the requirements of section 150-149. 
(c)  Eligibility for a block face to be added to or removed from a residential permit parking area shall be determined by the office of transportation which shall, to the extent possible, avoid approving changes which will create an isolated block face. An isolated block face: 
(1)  Is not across the street from a residential permit parking area block face for its entire length, or 
(2)  Occurs where neither end of the block face is connected to an existing residential permit parking area block face by a continuous curb or edge of roadway. 
(d)  During the initial process of approving a residential permit parking area or, as related to the addition or removal of block faces, the office of transportation may determine the appropriate status for any block face abutting a park or other property which has no street address or which has no resident qualified to sign a related petition. 
(Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2010-37(10-O-0468), § 10, 7-15-10) 
Sec. 150-156. - Termination of parking area. 
Upon receipt of an appropriate petition signed by a representative of 50 percent or more of the qualified street addresses, as identified in section 150-149(a), the city will terminate residential permit parking areas subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The parking regulations which will replace those established as provided for in section 150-147, must be determined on a block-by-block basis by consultations between the office of transportation and the affected residents prior to the termination of the residential permit parking area. The final determination shall be made by the office of transportation. 
(2)  The city shall not refund any fees which residents have paid for permits, as provided for in section 150-151, as a consequence of the termination of a residential permit parking area. 
(3)  Any street section which has been part of a residential permit parking area and which is subsequently terminated under this section shall be ineligible for inclusion in a future residential permit parking area for a period of 24 months after such termination. 
(Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2010-37(10-O-0468), § 11, 7-15-10) 
Sec. 150-157. - Limitation on permit use. 
A motor vehicle which displays a valid resident parking permit or visitor parking permit shall be allowed to stand or park in the residential permit parking area for which the permit has been issued as established in section 150-154. Such permits shall not authorize a motor vehicle to stand or park in any place where or during any time when the stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle is prohibited or the area is designated for other uses. 
(Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2010-37(10-O-0468), § 12, 7-15-10; Ord. No. 2011-40(11-O-0773), § 3, 9-15-11) 
Sec. 150-158. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for a person to furnish false information in an application for any permit authorized by this division or to represent falsely that such person is eligible for such permit. 
(b)  A person holding a valid residential parking permit issued pursuant to this, division shall not allow the use or display of such permit on a vehicle other than that for which the permit was issued. Such conduct shall be unlawful and a violation of this division both by the person holding the valid permit and the person who so uses or displays the permit improperly. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for a person to produce or display a facsimile or counterfeit residential parking permit in order to evade time limitations on parking in a residential permit parking area. 
(d)  Violation of this section shall constitute an offense and shall be punishable as provided under section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2010-37(10-O-0468), § 13, 7-15-10) 
Sec. 150-159. - Penalty for parking without permit during permitted festivals. 
(a)  During City of Atlanta permitted Class "A" outdoor festivals, as defined in section 142-59(a)(1) of the Code of Ordinances, no person shall stop, leave standing or park any passenger vehicle, automobile, light truck, sport utility vehicle, or motorcycle, whether attended or unattended, in any residential permit parking area (as defined in section 150-146, of the Code of Ordinances) within a one-mile radius of such festival without displaying a valid residential parking permit or visitor permit for that area, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or official traffic control device. 
(b)  When a violation as described in subsection (a) above occurs, a citation for parking without a residential parking permit or visitor permit shall be issued and a mandatory fine of $75.00 shall be imposed. 
(c)  If the mandatory $75.00 fine set out in subsection (b) above is not paid in full within 14 days of the issuance of the citation, the fine shall increase from $75.00 to $100.00. 
(d)  Should the violator elect to appeal the issuance of the citation described herein to the municipal court, the municipal court is authorized, pursuant to the provisions of section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances, to impose a civil monetary penalty against persons who are found to have violated this section, in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 for each such violation. Upon the proper filing of an appeal within 14 days of the issuance of the citation, the late fees described in subsection (c) above will be suspended. 
( Ord. No. 2016-03(15-O-1197), § 1(Exh. A), 2-24-16 ) 
Secs. 150-160—150-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VINE CITY PERMIT PARKING 

Sec. 150-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curb parking space means a 24-foot-long section of street, adjacent to the curb or edge or roadway, where a motor vehicle may lawfully park. 
Director means the director, bureau of traffic and transportation. 
Vine City area means that area bounded by Northside Drive, Martin Luther King, Jr., Drive, Ashby Street and Simpson Street. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2502) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 150-172. - Program established. 
There is established a permit parking program whereby motor vehicles bearing a special parking permit issued pursuant to this division may be parked in the Vine City area during events at the Georgia Dome. Parking a motor vehicle on a street within the Vine City permit parking area during an event at the Georgia Dome shall be restricted, unless the motor vehicle displays a valid Vine City area parking permit. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2501) 
Sec. 150-173. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for a person to furnish false information in an application for any permit authorized by this division or to represent falsely such person as eligible for such permit. 
(b)  A person holding a valid parking permit issued pursuant to this division shall not allow the use or display of such permit on a vehicle other than that for which the permit was issued. Such conduct shall be unlawful and a violation of this division both by the person holding the valid permit and the person who so uses or displays the permit improperly. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for a person to produce or display a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit in order to evade time limitations on parking in the Vine City permit parking area. 
(d)  Violation of this section shall constitute an offense and shall be punishable as provided under section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2508) 
Sec. 150-174. - Application for permit. 
The application for a Vine City parking permit shall provide the name of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle to be permitted; the residential address; the motor vehicle make, model and license number; and other information requested on the application form. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2505) 
Sec. 150-175. - Issuance of permits. 
The director shall issue Vine City parking permits as follows: 
(1)  Two resident permits shall be issued for each valid street address within the Vine City permit parking area upon application. 
(2)  The permit shall be issued only to a motor vehicle owner or operator who resides in the Vine City permit parking area. 
(3)  Each Vine City permit parking area shall have a unique permit expiration date, and permits shall be renewed biennially. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2503) 
Sec. 150-176. - Permit form and display. 
The Vine City parking permit shall be a decal and shall be affixed only to the motor vehicle for which it was issued. The decal shall be permanently attached to the inside lower corner of the rear window, driver's side, and must be clearly visible from outside the vehicle. Information shown on the permit decal shall include, but not be limited to, the Vine City permit parking area identification letter and the expiration date. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2504) 
Sec. 150-177. - Limitation on permit use. 
A motor vehicle which displays a valid Vine City parking permit shall be allowed to stand or park in the Vine City permit parking area without being limited by the parking restriction established in this division. Such permits shall not authorize a motor vehicle to stand or park in any place where or during any time when the stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle is prohibited or the area is designated for other uses. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2507) 
Sec. 150-178. - Uniformity of parking regulations. 
Within the Vine City permit parking area there shall be uniform parking regulations applied to all locations where parking is allowed. Upon approval of the Vine City permit parking area, the director shall have parking regulation signs installed within the area indicating the time, location and conditions under which parking shall be by permit only. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2506) 
Secs. 150-179, 150-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TURNER FIELD PERMIT PARKING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to the intent of Ord. No. 2012-09, approved March 28, 2012, the title of Division 6 has been amended to read as above. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 6 was entitled, "Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium Permit Parking." 

Sec. 150-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commissioner means the commissioner of the department of public works. 
Curb parking space means a 24-foot-long section of street, adjacent to the curb or edge or roadway, where a motor vehicle may lawfully park. 
Turner Field Permit Parking Area means: 
That area on the East Side of Interstate 75-85 bounded on the North by Interstate 20, bounded on the East by Connally Street, S.E. and bounded on the South by Little Street, S.E. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2602; Ord. No. 2012-09(12-O-0353), § 1, 3-28-12; Ord. No. 2016-17(16-O-1275) , § 1, 6-15-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 150-182. - Program established; permit required. 
There is established a permit parking program that will be in effect only during Atlanta Braves baseball games whereby motor vehicles bearing a special parking permit issued pursuant to requirements stated in this division may be parked in the Turner Field area, as defined in section 150-181, beginning two hours before and ending two hours after all Atlanta Braves baseball games played at Turner Field. Parking a motor vehicle on a street within the Turner Field permit parking area two hours before, during, and two hours after any Atlanta Braves baseball game at Turner Field shall be restricted unless the motor vehicle displays a valid Turner Field area parking permit. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2601; Ord. No. 2012-09(12-O-0353), § 2, 3-28-12) 
Sec. 150-183. - Application for permit. 
The application for a Turner Field area parking permit shall provide the name of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle to be permitted; the residential address; the motor vehicle make, model and license number; and other information requested on the application form. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2605; Ord. No. 2012-09(12-O-0353), § 3, 3-28-12) 
Sec. 150-184. - Issuance of permits; expiration; renewal. 
(a)  The commissioner shall issue Turner Field area parking permits as provided in this division. 
(b)  Two resident permits shall be issued for each valid street address within the Turner Field permit parking area upon application. The permit shall be issued only to a motor vehicle owner or operator who resides in the Turner Field permit parking area. Each Turner Field area parking permit shall have a unique permit expiration date, and permits shall be renewed biennially. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2603; Ord. No. 2012-09(12-O-0353), § 4, 3-28-12) 
Sec. 150-185. - Permit form and display. 
The Turner Field area parking permit shall be a decal and shall be affixed only to the motor vehicle for which it was issued. The decal shall be permanently attached to the inside lower corner of the rear window, driver's side, and must be clearly visible from outside the vehicle. Information shown on the permit decal shall include, but not be limited to, the Turner Field permit parking area identification letter and the expiration date. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2604; Ord. No. 2012-09(12-O-0353), § 5, 3-28-12) 
Sec. 150-186. - Uniformity of parking regulations. 
Within the Turner Field permit parking area there shall be uniform parking regulations applied to all locations where parking is allowed. Upon approval of the Turner Field permit parking area, the commissioner shall have parking regulation signs installed within the area indicating the time, location and conditions under which parking shall be by permit only. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2606; Ord. No. 2012-09(12-O-0353), § 6, 3-28-12) 
Sec. 150-187. - Limitation on permit use. 
A motor vehicle which displays a valid Turner Field area parking permit shall be allowed to stand or park in the Turner Field permit parking area without being limited by the parking restrictions established in this division. Such permits shall not authorize a motor vehicle to stand or park in any place where, or during any time when, the stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle is prohibited or the area is designated for other uses. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2607; Ord. No. 2012-09(12-O-0353), § 7, 3-28-12) 
Sec. 150-188. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for a person to furnish false information in an application for any permit authorized by this division, or for such person to represent themselves falsely as eligible for such permit. 
(b)  A person holding a valid parking permit issued pursuant to this division shall not allow the use or display of such permit on a vehicle other than that for which the permit was issued. Such conduct shall be unlawful and a violation of this division both by the person holding the valid permit and the person who so uses or displays the permit improperly. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for a person to produce or display a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit in order to evade time limitations on parking in the Turner Field permit parking area. 
(d)  Violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute an offense and shall be punishable as provided under section 1-8 of the City Code. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2608; Ord. No. 2012-09(12-O-0353), § 8, 3-28-12) 
Secs. 150-189, 150-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - INWOOD CIRCLE PERMIT PARKING 

Sec. 150-191. - Inwood Circle permit parking program. 
There is hereby established a permit parking program whereby motor vehicles bearing a special parking permit issued pursuant to requirements hereinafter stated, may be parked in the Inwood Circle permit parking area, as hereinafter defined. Parking a motor vehicle on a street within the Inwood Circle residential permit parking area is restricted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. as well as between the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. unless the motor vehicle displays a valid Inwood Circle permit parking decal. These parking controls shall not be enforced on the days on which Yom Kippur and Rosh Hashanah occur. 
(Ord. No. 1996-30, § 1, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 150-192. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, wherever used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(1)  Curb parking space: A 24-foot long section of street, adjacent to the curb or edge or roadway, where a motor vehicle may lawfully park. 
(2)  Inwood Circle permit parking: The entire length of Inwood Circle and the west side of West Peachtree Street between the northern and southern intersections of Inwood Circle and West Peachtree Street. 
(Ord. No. 1996-30, § 1, 5-28-96) 
Editor's note— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 150-193. - Issuance of permits. 
(a)  Transportation services shall issue permits as provided herein. 
(b)  Two resident permits shall be issued for each valid street address within the Inwood Circle permit parking area upon application. The permit shall be issued only to a motor vehicle owner or operator who resides in the Inwood Circle permit parking area. Each Inwood Circle parking permit shall have a unique permit expiration date and permits shall be renewed biennially. 
(Ord. No. 1996-30, § 1, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 150-194. - Permit form and display. 
The Inwood Circle parking permit shall be a decal and shall be affixed only to the motor vehicle for which it was issued. The decal shall be permanently attached to the inside lower corner of the rear window, driver's side, and must be clearly visible from outside the vehicle. Information shown on the permit decal shall include, but not be limited to, the Inwood Circle parking permit area identification letter and the expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 1996-30, § 1, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 150-195. - Application for permit. 
The application for an Inwood Circle parking permit shall provide the name of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle to be permitted; the residential address; the motor vehicle make, model and license number; and other information requested on the application form. 
(Ord. No. 1996-30, § 1, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 150-196. - Uniformity of parking regulations. 
Within the Inwood Circle permit parking area there shall be uniform parking regulations applied to all locations where parking is allowed. Upon approval of the Inwood Circle permit parking area, parking regulation signs will be installed within the area indicating the time, location and conditions under which parking shall be by permit only. 
(Ord. No. 1996-30, § 1, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 150-197. - Limitation on permit use. 
A motor vehicle which displays a valid Inwood Circle permit parking decal shall be allowed to stand or park in the Inwood Circle permit parking area without being limited by the parking restriction established herein. Such permits shall not authorize a motor vehicle to stand or park in any place where, or during any time when, the stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle is prohibited or the area is designated for other uses. 
(Ord. No. 1996-30, § 1, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 150-198. - Permit fees. 
(a)  All resident permits issued for a discrete residential permit parking area shall have a common expiration date. Full term permits shall be valid for two years. 
(b)  The permit fee shall be $12.00 for a permit issued one year or more from the expiration date. 
(c)  The permit fee shall be $6.00 for a permit issued less than one year from the expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 1996-30, § 1, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 150-199. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for a person to furnish false information in an application for any permit authorized by this article, or to represent falsely himself or herself as eligible for such permit. 
(b)  A person holding a valid permit issued pursuant to this article shall not allow the use or display of such permit on a vehicle other than that for which the permit was issued. Such conduct shall be unlawful and a violation of this article both by the person holding the valid permit and the person who so uses or displays the permit improperly. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for a person to produce or display a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit in order to evade restrictions on parking in the Inwood Circle permit parking area. 
(d)  Violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute an offense and shall be punishable as provided under section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1996-30, § 1, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 150-200. - Reserved. 
Secs. 150-200.1—150-200.20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ANSLEY PARK PERMIT PARKING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1996-18, approved April 22, 1996, did not specifically amend this Code; hence inclusion of §§ 1—5 as a new ch. 150, art. IV, div. 8, §§ 150-200.21—150-200.25 was at the discretion of the editor. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1996-75, approved Sept. 23, 1996, did not specifically amend this Code; however, provisions thereof have been included to amend portions of Ord. No. 1996-18 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 150-200.21. - [Program established.] 
There is hereby established a residential permit parking program whereby motor vehicles bearing a special parking permit issued pursuant to requirements hereinafter stated may park anytime on streets within certain areas known as residential permit parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 1996-18, § 1, 4-22-96) 
Sec. 150-200.22. - [Nonresident parking.] 
The parking of a motor vehicle by a nonresident on a street within a residential permit parking area shall be restricted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., seven days a week. 
(Ord. No. 1996-18, § 2, 4-22-96) 
Sec. 150-200.23. - [Permits.] 
Each household on the street designation outlined by the petition signed by 70 percent of the residents on Peachtree Circle between Fifteenth and Seventeenth Street as well as Seventeenth Street between Peachtree Circle and Inman Circle for which a parking permit is requested may be issued, by the City of Atlanta, upon application and payment of applicable fee and a residential permit may be issued to a motor vehicle owner or operator who resides on property fronting on a block face located within the residential permit parking area, in accordance with the following limitations: 
(1)  Two residential permits for each valid street address which consists of one residential structure containing only one dwelling unit may be issued. 
(2)  Two resident permits may be issued each legally constituted and existing dwelling unit in any two-family or multiple-family dwelling facility at a valid address within the residential permit parking area. This includes apartments, condominiums, attached dwellings, row houses, townhouses, and the like. 
(3)  Each residential permit shall be renewed every two years. 
(Ord. No. 1996-18, § 3, 4-22-96; Ord. No. 1996-75, §§ 3—6, 9-23-96) 
Sec. 150-200.24. - [Visitor permits.] 
Upon request, two visitor permits may be issued for each valid street address within the residential permit parking area. 
The visitor permit is designed for use by transient visitors and guests of residents of the residential permit parking area and shall be valid for a maximum of 15 days. 
(Ord. No. 1996-18, § 4, 4-22-96; Ord. No. 1996-75, §§ 7, 8, 9-23-96) 
Sec. 150-200.25. - [Authority to issue daily passes.] 
The Ansley Park Civic Association may designate a person who will have the authority to issue a special daily dated guest pass that will be valid only for the day on which the guest pass was issued. 
(Ord. No. 1996-18, § 5, 4-22-96) 
Secs. 150.200.26—150-200.35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - INMAN PARK PERMIT PARKING 

Sec. 150-200.36. - [Inman Park permit parking established; boundaries.] 
Residential streets within an area bounded by Austin Avenue, NE, between Elizabeth Street, NE and Sinclair Avenue, NE; Elizabeth Street, NE between Austin Avenue, NE and Waverly Way, NE and; Sinclair Avenue, NE between Austin Avenue, NE and Seminole Avenue, NE; Seminole Avenue, NE between Sinclair Avenue, NE and Cleburne Avenue, NE, Cleburne Avenue, NE shall be limited to residential parking by permit only and shall be so posted with signage. 
(Ord. No. 2002-31, 8-13-01; Ord. No. 2002-29, § 1, 5-14-02; Ord. No. 2008-24(08-O-0498), § 1, 4-28-08) 
ARTICLE V. - BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES 

Sec. 150-201. - Effect of article. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required in this article. 
(b)  Duty of parent, guardian. The parent of any child and the guardian of the person of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit that child or ward to violate any of the sections of this article. 
(c)  Applicability of article. The sections of this article applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2331) 
Sec. 150-202. - Secondhand bicycle dealer's report of transactions. 
Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling secondhand bicycles shall make a report to the police chief of every bicycle purchased or sold by that dealer, giving the name and address of the person from whom purchased or to whom sold, a description of the bicycle by name or make, the frame number thereof and the number of license plate, if any, found thereon. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2332) 
Sec. 150-203. - Traffic laws applicable to persons riding bicycles. 
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this article and except as to those ordinances which have no application. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2333) 
Sec. 150-204. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
(a)  Generally. Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Turns. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of those signs, except when the person dismounts from the bicycle to make the turn. If the person dismounts, the person shall obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2334) 
Sec. 150-205. - Speed. 
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than the maximum speed provided in this chapter for vehicles at the particular location. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2337) 
Sec. 150-206. - Emerging from alley or driveway. 
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, stop and yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area and upon entering the roadway shall stop and yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2338) 
Sec. 150-207. - Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices. 
(a)  Use of roadway. No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing the person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  Use of sidewalks. There shall be no skating or riding on the sidewalks within the central traffic district or any business district, but any person may so skate or ride upon the sidewalks outside the central traffic district or any business district. 
(c)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for persons so skating or riding to gather in crowds or to create noise or be guilty of any disorderly conduct or to take hold of or hang onto any automobile or other vehicle or in any way to interfere with the natural progress of vehicles along and in the streets of the city or for two or more persons to join hands while skating on the sidewalk. Persons so skating or riding shall give right-of-way to and in no way interfere with persons walking on the sidewalks. 
(d)  Duty of parent or guardian. The parent of any child and the guardian of the person of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit that child or ward to violate this section. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2340) 
Sec. 150-208. - Brakes. 
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2341(c)) 
Sec. 150-209. - Parking. 
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at a curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction of pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2343) 
Sec. 150-210. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)  Business district. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district or the central traffic district. 
(b)  Age restriction. No person 13 or more years of age shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in any district. 
(c)  Duties to pedestrians. Any person who is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2344) 
Sec. 150-211. - Acrobatic or fancy riding. 
No rider of any bicycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars or feet from the pedal or practice any acrobatic or fancy riding on any street nor shall any person operating a bicycle upon a street participate in any race of speed or endurance in a contest with any other bicycle or vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2345) 
Secs. 150-212—150-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD 

Sec. 150-236. - Special permits for moving materials exceeding state limits. 
(a)  For occasional movements of materials or objects of dimensions or weights which exceed the limits provided by state law, a special permit shall be obtained. 
(b)  The application for any permit required by this section shall specifically describe the motor vehicle and load to be operated or moved and the particular route for which a permit to operate is requested. 
(c)  The director, bureau of traffic and transportation may, upon application, issue a special permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles upon the public streets, when the length, width, height or weight of the vehicle and load exceeds the maximum limit. Permits authorizing the movement of vehicles which exceed the maximum weight limit will not be valid unless approved by the director, office of transportation. 
(d)  The director, bureau of traffic and transportation and the director, bureau of highways and streets may withhold permits for the movement of vehicles which exceed the maximum size and weight limits, if the movement of those vehicles would unduly interfere with the safety or the general welfare or the convenience of the general public. If the permit is issued, the director, bureau of traffic and transportation and the director, office of transportation may limit the number of trips, the time limits within which the vehicles may be operated or otherwise prescribe the conditions of operation of those vehicles on the public streets. 
(e)  Every special permit issued under this section shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of the city. 
(Code 1977, §§ 13-2373—13-2377; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 13, 9-24-07) 
Sec. 150-237. - Restricted vehicles required to use truck routes; exceptions. 
All motor vehicles having more than six wheels (excluding buses), are prohibited from using any street within the city, except those streets authorized by ordinance and designated as truck routes, except when: 
(1)  The terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters of the restricted motor vehicle is not on a designated truck route, ingress to and egress from those places shall be made by the most direct route available between the terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters and nearest designated truck route; 
(2)  A delivery or pickup is to be made at a location which is not on a designated truck route and not within the area bounded by Baker Street on the north, Courtland Street and Washington Street on the east, Memorial Drive and Garnett Street on the south and Spring Street on the west, exclusive of the boundary streets, ingress to and egress from that location shall be made by the most direct route available between that location and the nearest designated truck route; and 
(3)  A delivery or pickup is to be made by a truck tractor, road tractor, combination truck tractor semitrailer or combination road tractor-trailer at a location which is within the area of the city bounded on the north by Baker Street, on the east by Courtland Street and Washington Street, on the south by Memorial Drive and Garnett Street and on the west by Spring Street, exclusive of the boundary streets, the delivery or pickup shall not be made between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2378; Ord. No. 2018-24(18-O-1513), § 1, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 150-238. - Evidence required for restricted vehicle to be off truck route. 
Any person driving or in charge or control of any restricted vehicle defined in section 150-237, when upon streets other than those designated as truck routes, shall be prepared to present for the inspection of police officers the person's log book, weight slips, delivery slips or other written evidence of the person's destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the restricted vehicle on a street other than a designated truck route. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2379) 
Sec. 150-239. - Use of temporary truck routes by restricted vehicles. 
If any designated truck route or portion thereof shall be under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, restricted vehicles, as defined in section 150-237, shall use such other temporary truck route as may be designated by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2380) 
Sec. 150-240. - Certain trucks prohibited on certain streets. 
(a)  Any truck or truck tractor operated separately or in combination with any trailer or semitrailer which has either two axles with six tires or three or more axles shall be designated for the purpose of this section as a small truck. No such truck shall be operated on any street or portion of a street where signs are posted prohibiting the trucks, except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. Signs may be posted to prohibit the trucks from operation on a single street or a group of streets so as to form a closed area. 
(b)  A vehicle described in subsection (a) of this section may be operated on a street or in an area where prohibited by signs, if the vehicle has more than six wheels (excluding buses) and is being operated off an established truck route as provided for in section 150-237. 
(c)  A vehicle described in subsection (a) of this section which has more than six wheels (excluding buses) may be operated on a street or in an area where prohibited by signs, under the following conditions: 
(1)  When making a delivery of cargo, when proceeding to a location to pick up a load or to perform a service and the location of the delivery, loading or service is on a prohibited street or in a prohibited area. 
(2)  Ingress and egress from the location is made by traveling the most direct route between the locations and the nearest: 
a.  Street segment on which the vehicle is not prohibited; or 
b.  Designated truck route. 
(d)  The driver of any truck as defined in subsection (a) of this section shall be prepared to present to police officers for inspection the driver's log books, delivery slips and other written evidence of the driver's destination and the point of origin to justify, under subsection (c) of this section, the presence of the truck on a section of street from which the truck would otherwise be prohibited under subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2381(a)—(d); Ord. No. 2018-24(18-O-1513), § 2, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 150-241. - Hauling building materials at night. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or transport any building materials by means of any vehicle between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless the driver of the vehicle has in possession documents establishing the ownership of such building materials or unless the vehicle is owned by a governmental entity or public utility and is operated by an authorized employee of such governmental entity or utility or unless the vehicle is subject to regulations of the state public service commission or the Interstate Commerce Commission. As used in this section, the term "building materials" means and includes any new materials customarily used in building or construction work and which have a reasonable fair market value in excess of $100.00. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2381(e)) 
Sec. 150-242. - Operation of trailer in railroad facility in historic district. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Facility means a railroad-operated intermodal rail-motor piggyback facility. 
Tractor means a motor truck tractor vehicle. 
Trailer means a trailer vehicle, trailer or semitrailer vehicle. 
(b)  Marking of trailer. No container on a trailer being pulled by a tractor shall be operated into or out of any facility, any part of which is situated in an historic district, unless such trailer shall be plainly marked on the front, back and both sides with a six-digit number preceded by three or four letters always ending with the letter Z or U. Such letters and digits shall be of sufficient size and clarity as to be plainly visible from off any road the trailer traverses. 
(c)  Log of trailer identification and operator transporting trailer. The railroad operating such facility shall record the trailer letters and six digits and the operator transporting each such trailer in a log to be open to inspection by the mayor or the mayor's designee and to be maintained on a current basis for a period of 90 days following the trailer arriving at or leaving from such facility. 
(d)  Use of certain streets and highways required. No person transporting such a trailer shall operate to or from any facility over any street, road or highway located within a two-mile radius of the entrance of the facility, except over the following streets, roads or highways that are located within the two-mile radius: 
(1)  Interstate Highway 20, Interstate Highway 75 and Interstate Highway 85; 
(2)  That portion of Boulevard that is located south of the south entrance to the Boulevard railroad underpass under the Georgia Railroad right-of-way near and parallel to Decatur Street and north of the intersection of Interstate Highway 20 and Boulevard, including all off and on ramps to, from and between all points of such intersection; and 
(3)  That portion of Moreland Avenue south of Highway 20, including all off and on ramps to, from and between all points of such intersection. 
(e)  Exceptions. This section shall not prohibit, however, an operation where a consignor or consignee of a piggyback shipment ships or receives such a shipment to or from a place of business located within the two-mile radius on the one hand and the facility on the other hand. 
(f)  Responsibility of railroad. No railroad operating such facility shall permit a trailer to enter or leave its facility without the letters and six-digit number being permanently displayed on the trailer and the presentation of proper documentation authorizing a pickup or delivery of a piggy-back shipment. Any railroad operating such a facility shall designate a qualified full-time employee as enforcement officer, and the enforcement officer shall diligently monitor the routes of the trailers going to and coming from the facility and shall report any violations of this section to such officer's employer and the police. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2081) 
Sec. 150-243. - Commercial cut-through truck traffic prohibited on certain portions of Joseph E. Lowery Boulevard. 
(a)  All vehicles having more than six wheels (excluding buses) shall be prohibited from traveling on Joseph E. Lowery Boulevard north of I-20, unless a vehicle fitting that description is specifically having a point of destination within the residential neighborhood with a manifest to prove it. 
(b)  A fine of $500.00 shall be established for violators of this prohibition. 
(c)  The department of public works/transportation services shall post prominent signs at both ends of the northern segment of Joseph E. Lowery Boulevard, with the signs to read: 
"NO TRUCKS" at the top of the sign. 
The center of the sign depicting the international symbol for prohibiting truck traffic. 
(which is a picture of a truck with a circle drawn around it and a line drawn through it). 
"Having more than 6 wheels" at the bottom of the sign. 
"$500 FINE FOR VIOLATORS" being the last statement on the sign. 
(Ord. No. 1998-23, §§ 1—3, 4-29-98; Ord. No. 2017-85(17-O-1775), § 1, 12-13-17 ) 
Sec. 150-244. - Prohibition of commercial "cut-through" truck traffic on Moores Mill Road, west of I-75. 
(a)  All vehicles having more than six wheels (excluding buses) shall be prohibited front traveling on Moores Mill Road, west of I-75, unless a vehicle fitting that description is specifically having a point of destination within the residential neighborhood with a manifest to prove it. 
(b)  A fine of $500.00 shall be established for violators of this prohibition. 
(c)  The department of public works/transportation services shall post prominent signs at both ends of the western segment of Moores Mill Road, with the signs to read: 
• "NO TRUCKS" at the top of the sign. 
• The center of the sign depicting the international symbol for prohibiting truck traffic (which is a picture of a truck with a circle drawn around it and a line drawn through it). 
• Having more than six wheels at the bottom of the sign. 
• "$500 FINE FOR VIOLATORS" being the last statement on the sign. 
(Ord. No. 2012-18(12-O-0471), § 1, 5-16-12; Ord. No. 2017-85(17-O-1775), § 2, 12-13-17 ) 
Secs. 150-245—150-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PEDESTRIANS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Pedestrians generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-90 et seq. 

Sec. 150-266. - Obstructing traffic. 
No person shall stand or be in any street or roadway in such manner as to obstruct or impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2111(d)) 
Sec. 150-267. - Walking upon controlled access highway. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to walk upon a controlled access highway, except as may be necessary in order to leave the controlled access highway due to emergency arising after entry thereon in a lawful manner or except as may be necessary in order to police, repair, maintain or clean the controlled access highway and its municipally owned appurtenances. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2111(e)) 
Sec. 150-268. - Washing automobile windows. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or be in any public street or roadway for the purpose of cleaning automobile windows or for the purpose of soliciting funds to clean automobile windows. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2111(f)) 
Sec. 150-269. - Permit required for special loading, servicing and street use. 
Whenever it is necessary to provide special arrangements for the standing of trucks or other vehicles on a street for the purpose of loading or unloading or providing services to adjacent property and this standing cannot be done in compliance with this chapter or other applicable ordinances, a special temporary permit may be issued by the director, bureau of traffic and transportation. The permit may be issued to the owner or lessee of real property or to the operator of the vehicle and shall grant to that person the privilege as therein stated, and it shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate the permit. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2303) 
Secs. 150-270—150-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MISCELLANEOUS RULES 

Sec. 150-291. - Passengers entering or leaving vehicle. 
Except in emergencies, persons entering or leaving a vehicle shall do so on the side of the vehicle nearer the curb, and only when the vehicle is stopped or parked in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2283) 
Sec. 150-292. - Unlawful riding. 
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for use of passengers. This section shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2294) 
Sec. 150-293. - Construction, repairs on arterial streets during peak traffic hours. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Arterial streets means those streets or portions of streets so listed in the street use classification system adopted by the council. 
Emergency means a situation in which the public health, safety or welfare requires that the work described in this section begin or continue during the hours stated in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Prohibition. No utility construction or repair work or street repair work or other work which might cause obstructions to traffic movement will be permitted on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays during the hours of 6:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:15 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. on any streets or portions of streets which have been officially classified as arterial streets, except in case of emergency or except when a state designated legal holiday occurs on the weekdays mentioned in this subsection. 
(c)  Restoration of streets. All open ditches, excavations and other obstructions in the street which have been made in connection with such construction and repair work shall be filled in, covered with steel plates or planking or otherwise prepared or removed so as to accommodate the normal movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic during the hours of 6:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:15 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. on the weekdays mentioned in subsection (b) of this section, except for emergency or on the holidays mentioned in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Permit. If in the judgment of the director, bureau of traffic and transportation the work can be carried on without undue congestion and hazard to pedestrian and vehicular traffic, the director may issue a permit allowing the work to proceed during the hours of 6:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:15 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. or any part thereof. The permit shall be subject to the obtaining of all other permits and compliance with all other regulations as required by this Code or other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2301) 
Sec. 150-294. - Depositing materials on streets. 
(a)  Washing material onto street or highway. No person shall permit any wood, dirt, mud, sand, rock, rubbish or any other material to wash from such person's property or the property of any person upon which such person is performing repairs, improvements, excavations or grading onto any street or highway so as to cause or permit this material to deposit upon the surface of the street or highway and create an unsightly condition or a condition which may be injurious or hazardous to any person, animal or vehicle upon or using the street or highway. 
(b)  Removal required. Any person who throws, drops or washes or permits to be thrown, dropped or washed onto the street or highway any of the items named or referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall immediately remove them or cause them to be removed. 
(c)  Application to wrecked, damaged vehicles. Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or highway shall remove any glass, metal or other material dropped from the damaged vehicle upon the street or highway which may be hazardous to any person, animal or vehicle upon or using the street or highway. 
(d)  Enforcement. If any person throws, drops or washes or permits to be thrown, dropped or washed onto any street or highway any of the items named or referred to in subsection (a) of this section, and fails to immediately remove them or cause them to be removed, the bureau of sanitary services shall enforce this section. 
(e)  Penalties. In addition to the penalties provided in section 1-8, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any portion of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance, and each day the condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2300(b)—(d), (f), (g)) 
Sec. 150-295. - Discharging water or other liquids. 
(a)  No person shall throw or discharge from any lot or building any water, fluid or liquid substance so as to injuriously affect the surface of the street or sidewalk or so to make it unsafe for travel. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in section 1-8, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance, and each day the condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 13-2300(e), (g)) 
_____
Sec. 150-296. - Cruising on public streets. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Cruise or cruising means to operate a motor vehicle, or to permit the operation of a motor vehicle under one's care, custody, or control, so as to pass the same traffic points within a no cruising zone more than twice within any two-hour period. 

 
(2)  No cruising zone means the area bounded by and includes the following streets or portions of streets and any other area as designated by city council: 

 
Said "No cruising zone" shall also include all of the above-referenced segments of the thoroughfares indicated, with the exception of Northside Drive which is excluded from the zone. (A map of said area is attached to this ordinance.) 
(3)  Traffic control point means any point established by the chief of police within a no cruising zone for the purpose of monitoring cruising. 
a.  A person commits an offense if, between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day of the week, he or she cruises in an area marked in accordance with this section as a no cruising zone. A citation will be issued under this section any time after the two passages of the vehicle by the traffic control point. 
b.  The department of public works shall mark a no cruising zone by conspicuously posting appropriate signs at each entrance to the zone. 
(b)  Exclusions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  An official public safety or emergency vehicle; 
(2)  A licensed public transportation vehicle; 
(3)  A vehicle being used for business purposes; or 
(4)  Any special event as declared by city council. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall forfeit: 
(1)  The sum of $50.00 upon the first conviction under this section within a one-year period. 
(2)  The sum of $100.00 upon the second conviction under this section within a one-year period. 
(3)  The sum of $500.00 upon the third and each subsequent conviction under this section within a one-year period. 
(Ord. No. 1996-78, §§ 1—3, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 1997-20, § 1, 4-29-97; Ord. No. 1997-63, 10-27-97; Ord. No. 1997-66, 11-24-97; Ord. No. 1998-50, § 1, 7-13-98; Ord. No. 1999-58, § 1, 7-15-99; Ord. No. 2000-42, § 1, 7-13-00; Ord. No. 2000-50, § 1, 9-14-00; Ord. No. 2001-63, § 1, 9-13-01; Ord. No. 2002-50, § 1, 6-20-02; Ord. No. 2006-46, § 1, 7-25-06; Ord. No. 2007-66(07-O-2215), § 1, 11-13-07; Ord. No. 2012-20(12-O-0485), § 1, 5-30-12; Ord. No. 2014-04(14-O-1068), § 1, 2-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-47(15-O-1441), § 1, 10-14-15 ) 
Note— The map referenced in subsection (a)(2) of this section is not set out herein, but available as an attachment to Ord. No. 2007-66. 
_____
Secs. 150-297—150-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - LOADING AND UNLOADING OF INTERCITY BUSES 

Sec. 150-300. - Purpose. 
(a)  The City Council of the City of Atlanta, Georgia hereby declares its legislative intent to regulate the loading or unloading passengers by intercity buses on City right-of-way to the extent that such activity is not already regulated by prior agreements or other laws. The City Council finds that the intercity buses which load and unload passengers on the City right-of-way often impede street traffic, block sidewalks or crosswalks and make it more difficult to access businesses and their loading zones. 
(b)  The City Council finds that the regulation of the loading or unloading of passengers by intercity buses on City right-of-way will improve the flow of traffic, increase pedestrian safety, aid the efficient operation of businesses as well as maximize connectivity of transportation resources if the place of such operations is controlled or occurs at a centralized location. 
(c)  The City Council finds that the goal of having bus services connect to mass transit terminals, whether serving a single mode or as the hub for existing and proposed transportation networks serving metropolitan Atlanta and beyond, including MARTA rail and bus systems, regional express bus systems, and the Georgia railroad network, requires that use of such terminals should be made mandatory for certain types of bus operations that will lessen the congestion cause by providing such services on or adjacent to the public right-of-way by providing a viable transportation alternative for commuters. 
(d)  The City Council finds that the regulation of the loading or unloading of passengers by intercity buses on City right-of-way can be controlled by the issuance of permits in order to more effectively carry out this article and give notice to the public of the locations where such activities will take place. 
( Ord. No. 2014-55(14-O-1559), § 1(Attach. A), 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 150-301. - Prior agreements with MARTA not superseded. 
No provision of the rapid transit contract assistance agreement by and between the City of Atlanta and the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority ("MARTA") and other parties as it exists now or as it is from time to time amended shall be superseded by this article. To the extent that any term of this article is in conflict with the rapid transit contract assistance agreement, it is the intent of the City of Atlanta that the interpretation which preserves the term of such agreement shall be preferred. 
( Ord. No. 2014-55(14-O-1559), § 1(Attach. A), 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 150-302. - Operation of buses under authority of the Georgia Regional Transportation Authority or local government authorities. 
Unless the activities regulated by this article are permitted by other laws or by contracts approved by the City of Atlanta, or by memoranda approved by the commissioner, buses operated by the Georgia Regional Transportation Authority and/or other local authorities that are subject to regulation by the City of Atlanta pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 32-9-11 shall not be subject to the regulations that are applicable to intercity bus operators. 
( Ord. No. 2014-55(14-O-1559), § 1(Attach. A), 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 150-303. - General applicability to all buses and public rights-of-way. 
(a)  An intercity bus shall not occupy any portion of the public right-of-way for loading or unloading passengers on any City right-of-way except in accordance with this article. All buses that operate in the City of Atlanta, including intercity buses, shall comply with the regulations set forth in Division 2 of Article IV. 
(b)  Under the general authority set forth in this article, the commissioner may designate certain zones in the City where no bus may use of the public right-of-way for loading or unloading passengers. 
(c)  Under the general authority set forth in this article, the commissioner may add conditions to any permit to account for the circumstances attendant to a particular location in addition to the general regulations and regardless of whether the location is in a designated zone as provided for in Section 150-303(b) above. 
(d)  Charter buses shall not be subject to the same regulations as intercity buses. 
( Ord. No. 2014-55(14-O-1559), § 1(Attach. A), 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 150-304. - Use of mass transit terminals required. 
(a)  Any permission for the use of City right-of-way for loading or unloading of passengers on City right-of-way may be discontinued upon 60 days' notice where mass transit terminals are reasonably available to serve the areas where such permissions are effective, specifically including permits issued under this article. 
(b)  Agreements for the use of mass transit terminals, whether for single or consolidated modes of mass transit, shall not excuse compliance with the requirements of this article, provided however that this article shall not apply to arrangements or agreements made for the use of the facilities which are interior to such terminal. 
( Ord. No. 2014-55(14-O-1559), § 1(Attach. A), 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 150-305. - Right-of-way permits required. 
No intercity bus shall occupy any portion of the public right-of-way for loading or unloading of passengers unless the bus operator holds a permit issued by the commissioner, unless said bus operator is subject to an exception set forth in this article or by other laws or by contracts approved by the City of Atlanta, or by memoranda approved by the commissioner. 
( Ord. No. 2014-55(14-O-1559), § 1(Attach. A), 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 150-306 - Right-of-way permits for intercity bus loading and unloading. 
(a)  An intercity bus service operator shall not occupy any portion of the public right-of-way for loading or unloading passengers from an intercity bus unless the operator holds a permit issued by the commissioner. 
(b)  Minimum criteria for the location of intercity bus loading zones 
(1)  The minimum size for each intercity bus service passenger loading zone shall be 80 feet in length. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued for locations where the safety of passengers on buses, including MARTA buses, pedestrians and the travelling public is negatively affected by an intercity bus service passenger loading zone. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued to occupy the public right-of-way to load or unload passengers, or arrive or depart the public space when such operations negatively impact the adjacent business or residential properties. 
(4)  No permit shall be issued to occupy the public right-of-way to load or unload passengers, or arrive or depart the public space, during a time when standing or parking on the roadway is prohibited, such as during times of peak traffic volume. 
(5)  Liability insurance in amounts and coverages deemed sufficient by the commissioner. 
(6)  The commissioner is authorized to include such other requirements as necessary to carry out the intent of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2014-55(14-O-1559), § 1(Attach. A), 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 150-307. - Applications for right-of-way permits for intercity bus service. 
(a)  An intercity bus service operator seeking to unload or load passengers in the public right-of-way shall submit to the commissioner a permit application on a form provided by the commissioner and pay an application fee. 
(b)  An intercity bus operator already operating at the time these regulations become effective shall have 60 days from the effective date of this article to submit an application for use of the public right-of-way for intercity bus loading and unloading. Sixty days from the effective date of this article, this requirement shall be enforced against any intercity bus service operator. 
(c)  If an intercity bus service operator seeks to use more than one location for loading and unloading passengers in the public right-of-way, a separate application shall be filed for each location requested by the operator. A separate application fee shall also be required for each location. If approved, a separate permit shall be issued for each location. 
(d)  Each completed permit application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The corporate name, mailing address, e-mail address, web site address, and telephone number of the intercity bus service operator; 
(2)  The name, mailing address, e-mail address, web site address, and telephone number of the intercity bus service operator's contact person; 
(3)  The name, mailing address, e-mail address, web site address, and telephone number of the operator's agent for service of process; 
(4)  A valid U.S. Department of Transportation number and interstate operating authority; 
(5)  A copy of the intercity bus service operator's liability insurance certificate that meets the requirements set forth in this article; 
(6)  Six photographic-quality color copies each of three eight-inch by ten-inch color photographs of the public space, including the sidewalk, curb space, and the roadway, of and adjacent to the proposed passenger loading zone. The three photographs shall show the following views: 
a.  Frontal view from roadway; 
b.  Sharp angle right side view along sidewalk or curb; and 
c.  Sharp angle left side view along sidewalk or curb; 
(7)  Six photographic-quality color copies of eight-inch by ten-inch color photographs of any signs designating parking, standing, or stopping prohibitions in or within ten feet of the proposed passenger loading zone; 
(8)  Six copies of a schematic drawing of the proposed passenger loading zone, to scale and with dimensions. The schematic drawing shall show the proposed intercity bus passenger loading zone, the roadway and sidewalk between the nearest intersections on either side of the proposed intercity bus passenger loading zone, and the proposed public space required for passenger assembly, including any fixtures and signage proposed to be installed by the intercity bus service operator. In addition, the schematic drawing shall show all existing fixtures in the public space between the nearest intersections on either side of the proposed intercity bus passenger loading zone, including MARTA bus stops and bus stop zones, MARTA station entrances, vault covers and manholes, fire hydrants, trees and tree boxes, signs (including their content) and sign posts, street lights and traffic signals, sidewalk and roadway vendors, driveways, alleys, and other curb cuts, marked loading zones and building entrances, bike racks, parking meters, designated bike lanes in the roadway, and existing curb ramps, roadway, and crosswalk markings or any other similar public safety or accessibility designation; 
(9)  A proposal for the orderly queuing of waiting passengers so that pedestrian movement along the sidewalk will not be obstructed and so that pedestrian movement from the sidewalk into adjacent buildings will not be impeded; 
(10)  A proposed trash management plan for the removal of trash created by waiting or arriving passengers; 
(11)  The proposed intercity bus service schedule, including all regularly scheduled departure and arrival times; 
(12)  The hours of the day and the days of the week for which the applicant seeks to occupy intercity bus passenger loading zones (fractions of an hour are not permitted); 
(13)  If such intercity bus passenger service occurs on an intermittent basis, a proposal for informing the commissioner of when such service occurs shall be included; and 
(14)  Any other information that the commissioner reasonably requires in order to evaluate the application. 
(e)  The commissioner will provide the intercity bus service operator with the contact information of a City representative who will accept comments on the application. The contact information shall be included by the applicant in all notices to the public as required in Section 150-308. 
(f)  If the commissioner denies an application for a permit, the commissioner's reasons for the denial of the application shall be in writing and shall include the reason(s) for which the permit was denied. 
(g)  The commissioner's approval of the application shall allow for immediate operation at the location which is the subject of the permit. 
(h)  The approval or denial of a permit applied for under this article is an administrative action by the commissioner. 
( Ord. No. 2014-55(14-O-1559), § 1(Attach. A), 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 150-308. - Public notice of right-of-way permit application. 
(a)  Within five calendar days after filing a right-of-way permit application, the applicant shall give notice of the application to the affected neighborhood planning unit, the adjacent property owner(s) and to the property owners on either side of the adjacent property owner(s). Notice shall be provided by certified mail or other similar method that evidences date of mailing and delivery. The notice shall include a full copy of the submitted application, provided, that only one copy of each photograph that is part of the application need be provided, and the contact information provided by the commissioner for acceptance of comments on the application. 
(b)  Within five calendar days after filing a right-of-way permit application, the applicant shall deliver notice of the application by hand to the operator of each business in a building that is located on property that is immediately adjacent to the proposed passenger loading zone, if the business can be accessed directly from the sidewalk without entry into a common area of the building. The notice shall include a full copy of the submitted public space permit application, provided, that only one copy of each photograph that is part of the application need be provided, and the contact information provided by the department for acceptance of comments on the application. Notice need not be provided to any business that cannot be accessed directly from the sidewalk. 
(c)  Within five calendar days after filing an application, the operator shall post signs provided by the commissioner on at least one sign pole or streetlight that is immediately adjacent to the curb where the intercity bus service passenger loading zone will be located. If no sign pole or streetlight is directly adjacent to the curb where the intercity bus service passenger loading zone will be located, the intercity bus operator may post the sign on the nearest sign pole or streetlight. The operator shall laminate the signs or protect the signs in another manner from the weather. The operator shall take all reasonable steps necessary to ensure the signs are posted for ten consecutive calendar days. 
(d)  Within five calendar days after providing the required notice as specified in this section, the applicant shall file with the commissioner a notarized affidavit verifying that the applicant provided each notice required in this section. 
( Ord. No. 2014-55(14-O-1559), § 1(Attach. A), 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 150-309. - Amendments to the right-of-way permit. 
(a)  A permit holder shall inform the commissioner in writing at least 15 days before any of the following changes are made: 
(1)  A change in the ownership of the intercity bus service holding the permit; 
(2)  A modification in the intercity bus service operator's liability insurance. 
(b)  Upon receiving change of ownership information, the commissioner, without a new public notification period, may approve and issue a new permit, and cancel the prior permit. Within five days after issuance of a new permit, the bus service operator shall ensure that copies of the new permit are displayed as required by this article. 
(c)  Prior to the occurrence of any of the following changes, an intercity bus service permit holder shall submit a new application to the commissioner requesting a new permit when there is: 
(1)  A proposed change in the location of one or more approved passenger loading zones; 
(2)  A proposed increase in the size of the approved passenger loading zone(s); 
(3)  A proposed increase in the hours of operation beyond the approved schedule; or 
(d)  Upon approval by the commissioner of any changes outlined in this section, the commissioner shall issue a new permit reflecting the approved change(s), and the prior permit shall be void. Within five days after issuance of a new permit, the intercity bus service operator shall ensure that copies of the new permit are displayed as required by this article. 
( Ord. No. 2014-55(14-O-1559), § 1(Attach. A), 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 150-310. - Renewal of right-of-way permits. 
(a)  Subject to Subsection 150-310(b) below, permits issued under this article are valid only during the calendar year in which they are issued. Permits may be renewed for the next calendar year after initial issue by requesting a renewal on a form provided by the commissioner and the payment of the renewal fee no sooner than 60 days prior to the beginning of the calendar year for which the renewal is requested. 
(b)  If an initial permit is issued in the 60-day period before the end of any calendar year it shall be effective for the next calendar year without the need for a renewal application or the payment of an additional fee. 
(c)  Public notice of a renewal application shall not be required. 
(d)  The commissioner's denial of the renewal application shall be in writing and shall include the reasons for which the renewal was declined. 
(e)  The approval or denial of a permit renewal applied for under this article is an administrative action by the commissioner. 
( Ord. No. 2014-55(14-O-1559), § 1(Attach. A), 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 150-311. - Violations related to right-of-way permits and associated fines. 
(a)  Citations for violations of this article or any other part of the Code may be served on the driver of the intercity bus responsible for the violation. With respect to the permits required by this article and the use of intercity bus passenger loading zones, the following acts shall be violations for which citations may be issued by the commissioner pursuant to the authority granted in City of Atlanta Code Section 138-4 or by agencies under other general enforcement powers granted elsewhere in the Code and that are subject to the fines associated therewith: 
(1)  Loading or unloading passengers by an intercity bus service operator at a location that is not permitted as an intercity bus passenger loading zone: $500.00 for the first offense; $1,000.00 for the second offense and each subsequent offense. Each bus loading or unloading of a passenger by an intercity bus operator without a permit shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  Failure to display a permit for the use of an intercity bus passenger loading zone: $100.00 for the first offense, $200.00 for the second offense, and $300.00 for the third and each subsequent offense. Each bus failing to display a permit while loading or unloading passengers shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  Providing intercity bus passenger loading or unloading services outside of the hour(s) and day(s) of the week permitted: $100.00 for the first offense, $200.00 for the second offense, and $300.00 for the third and each subsequent offense. Each bus loading or unloading of a passenger outside of the approved hour(s) or day(s) of the week permitted shall constitute a separate offense. 
(4)  Failure to abide by a condition of the permit: $200.00 for the first offense and $300.00 for the second and each subsequent offense. 
(5)  Knowingly falsifying material information provided on the permit application: $1,000.00. 
(b)  Citations for violations of this section may be served on the driver of the intercity bus responsible for the violation and such service shall be deemed sufficient notice of the violation to the intercity bus service operator. 
(c)  Citations for violations of this section are in addition to violations of Section or any other part of the Code such that compliance with the requirements of this article shall not excuse any other violation of the Code. 
( Ord. No. 2014-55(14-O-1559), § 1(Attach. A), 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 150-312. - Suspension and revocation of permits. 
(a)  The commissioner may suspend or revoke a permit issued to an intercity bus service operator for any of the reasons listed in this section. 
(1)  Failure of the intercity bus service operator to comply with any condition of the permit, including failure to pay any required fee; 
(2)  Failure of the intercity bus service operator to cure any violation of this article or the failure of a driver to respond to a summons or pay the associated fine. Citations served on any driver shall be deemed sufficient notice to the intercity bus service operator that such violation has occurred; 
(3)  Failure of the intercity bus service operator to satisfy or cause its drivers to satisfy any outstanding traffic or parking citation for which the intercity bus service operator or the driver was deemed to have admitted or that was sustained after a hearing; 
(4)  Falsification by the intercity bus service operator of any material information provided on the permit application; 
(5)  Failure by the intercity bus service operator to respond to any written request by the commissioner; 
(6)  Negative impact on vehicular and pedestrian flow or congestion caused in whole or in part by intercity bus service operations; 
(7)  Causing a public safety hazard as evidenced by the issuance to the intercity bus service operator or its drivers of one, or more than one, citation for failure to obey traffic laws; or 
(8)  The intercity bus service operator causing a negative impact on rail or bus transit operations. 
(b)  Notice of a proposed suspension or revocation of the permit may be served on the intercity bus service operator at the place stated in its application where process can be served. 
(c)  The suspension or revocation of a permit issued under this article is an administrative action by the commissioner that may be imposed independently of any fine or other punishment imposed by a court for violation of any state law or the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2014-55(14-O-1559), § 1(Attach. A), 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 150-313. - Review of administrative decisions. 
An aggrieved permit applicant or permit holder shall have the right to appeal an adverse decision of the commissioner in the following manner. 
Appeals of application denials, or of permit suspension or revocation. An appeal of a denial of a permit application, or an appeal of a suspension or revocation of a permit shall be submitted by the applicant or permit holder to the commissioner. Such appeal shall be in the form of a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The appellant may include with the written appeal all evidentiary materials that the appellant wishes to submit in support of the appellant's position. The appeal shall be filed with the commissioner within ten business days after the notice of denial of an application or of a suspension or revocation is issued. Notices of appeal may be sent by regular mail and shall be presumed to have been received three days after mailing. 
(1)  Appeals shall be scheduled for hearing by the commissioner with notice being sent by certified mail to the appellant setting forth a time and place for the hearing. Hearings shall be informal, and shall be scheduled within ten business days after receipt of the appeal. The determination of the commissioner shall be made within ten business days thereafter, which determination shall affirm or modify the original decision of the commissioner. 
(2)  The written determination of the commissioner shall be the final decision of the City in the matter, and shall be subject to review by the Superior Court of Fulton County by a petition filed by the appellant setting forth an appeal and naming the City of Atlanta as the defending party. 
( Ord. No. 2014-55(14-O-1559), § 1(Attach. A), 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 150-314. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, all words shall have their ordinary and customary meaning and the following words and phrases shall have the meanings stated herein, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adjacent property owner means a person who owns the private property nearest the curb where the intercity bus operator plans to establish an intercity bus passenger loading zone. The adjacent property owner is on the same side of the street as the intercity bus passenger loading zone. 
Bus means a motor vehicle with a seating capacity for nine or more occupants, including the driver (except for personal passenger vehicles) or any vehicle that is designed to transport 16 or more people. 
Charter bus means a bus hired by an entity or individual for a specific purpose. 
Commissioner means the commissioner of the department of public works or a designee. 
Department means the department of public works or a component part thereof or any successor. 
Entity means a utility, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind or a person engaging in commercial activities. 
Individual means a person not acting as an entity. 
Intercity bus means a bus used for intercity bus service. 
Intercity bus service (also called a long-distance, express, long-haul, or highway bus or coach service) means a public transport service for the general public that carries passengers significant distances between different cities, towns, or other populated areas that operates with limited stops over fixed routes, and that has the capacity for transporting baggage carried by passengers. 
Intercity bus service operator means a company that provides intercity bus service. 
Intercity bus service passenger loading zone means a segment of a curb lane designated by signs prohibiting general purpose parking or standing to facilitate loading and unloading of passengers for an intercity bus service. 
Occupy means the parking, of a bus in the public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the City of Atlanta for any purpose. 
Permit means a document issued by the commissioner which is evidence of the commissioner's approval for the use of the public right-of-way by an intercity bus service operator where required by this article. 
"Public right-of-way" or "right-of-way" means generally property of any interest therein, whether or not in the form of a strip, for or devoted to (a) public transportation purposes; or (b) the placement of utility easements and other traditional uses along a transportation route, whether by dedication, prescription or otherwise, as well as the spaces above and below. 
"Street" means the surface of, as well as the spaces below, any and all paved or unpaved public roads consistent with GA. Code Ann. § 32-1-3(24) 1998. "Street" shall include the land area set aside for public uses as a travel way for vehicular traffic, pedestrian access, public utilities and other uses. 
( Ord. No. 2014-55(14-O-1559), § 1(Attach. A), 12-10-14 ) 
Secs. 150-315—150-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SHAREABLE DOCKLESS MOBILITY DEVICES 

Sec. 150-400. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless specifically stated otherwise, the following terms shall mean and include: 
Dockless mobility device system operator ("operator") is a private entity that owns and operates a city permitted shareable dockless mobility device system. 
Dockless mobility device means an electric/motorized device that permits an individual to move or be moved freely which shall include, but not be limited to, e-scooters and shall exclude bicycles, e-bicycles, and any motor vehicle required to be registered with the state in accordance with state law, or the operation of which is otherwise governed by state law. 
Shareable dockless mobility device means an electric/motorized or human-powered device that permits an individual to move or be moved freely, is available for rent to the general public for short-term one-way trips without the installation of any infrastructure in the public right-of-way and shall include, but not be limited to, a bicycle/e-bicycle, scooter/e- scooter and shall exclude any motor vehicle required to be registered with the state, in accordance with state law. 
Shareable dockless mobility device permit ("dockless permit") means a permit required to operate a shareable dockless mobility device system within the city. 
Shareable dockless mobility device system is a fleet of shareable dockless mobility devices operated by private entities that provides the general public with shareable dockless mobility devices. 
( Ord. No. 2019-01(18-O-1322), § 1, 1-16-19 ) 
Sec. 150-401. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  No shareable dockless mobility devices may be operated or deployed in the City of Atlanta without a permit. Violations of this subsection shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-8. 
(b)  Any operator applying for a dockless permit shall submit a permit application to the department of city planning office of zoning and development. The application shall be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof and must include the following: 
(1)  Completed dockless permit application form; 
(2)  City business license, (occupational tax certificate); 
(3)  Insurance documentation and acknowledgement that the city is indemnified and held harmless for all liability related to the operation of the shareable dockless mobility device system; 
(4)  Images and description of the applicant's shareable dockless mobility device, including technical specifications, any signage or instructions permanently affixed to the device, mobile application, and documentation that the devices meet safety standards as set forth in this article; 
(5)  Address and contact information of the general manager for the shareable dockless mobility device system; 
(6)  Plan for educating users on proper parking, operations, and other applicable laws; 
(7)  Plan for encouraging helmet usage; 
(8)  Plan for sustainability measures when disposing of a broken shareable dockless mobility device; 
(9)  Application fee of $100.00. 
(c)  The annual dockless permit fee shall be $12,000.00 annually for 500 devices and an additional $50.00 per shareable dockless mobility device in the operator's fleet in excess of 500 devices. Additional devices may be permitted, in compliance with any fleet maximums set forth in the administrative regulations, at a prorated rate in accordance with the administrative regulations. 
(d)  The dockless permit shall be valid for 12 months as of the date of the original issuance of the permit and shall thereafter expire. All permit holders shall be required to renew their permits annually on forms prescribed by the department of city planning office of zoning and development. 
(e)  Any expansion of a shareable dockless mobility device fleet not permitted in the most current dockless permit on file may be authorized through the filing of an application to amend the permit to add devices along with the applicable fees. 
(f)  Upon administrative declaration by the commissioner of city planning, a permit holder may apply for a temporary expansion of their fleet in accordance with a temporary fleet maximum. 
( Ord. No. 2019-01(18-O-1322), § 1, 1-16-19 ) 
Sec. 150-402. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The primary authority and responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter in the city's right of way shall be vested in the commissioner of the department of public works. 
Upon a determination that an operator is in violation of this chapter or any administrative regulations promulgated by the department of city planning the City of Atlanta shall issue notice or issue a citation. Notices of violation or citations may result in: 
(1)  The revocation or suspension of a dockless permit after written notice and reasonable opportunity to cure; and/or 
(2)  An administrative fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per day for each violation of a provision of this chapter or any administrative regulations promulgated by the department of city planning by the department of city planning office of zoning and development. 
(b)  Appeals. The appeal of a notice or citation issued under this section shall be filed in the City of Atlanta Municipal Court within 14 days of the issuance of the notice or citation. 
(c)  If an operator's permit is revoked, the operator may not reapply for a new permit for 12 months after all of the operator's shareable dockless mobility devices are removed from the city. Operator must continue to provide access to real time data regarding device locations until all of operator's shareable dockless mobility devices are removed. 
( Ord. No. 2019-01(18-O-1322), § 1, 1-16-19 ) 
Sec. 150-403. - Safety. 
(a)  The motor of the shareable dockless mobility devices must not alone be capable of propelling the device in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(b)  All shareable dockless mobility devices must adhere to minimum safety standards as established by law. 
(c)  All operators shall maintain liability insurance with the city as the certificate holder in the amounts determined by the office of risk management. 
(d)  All operators will educate users regarding laws applicable to riding and operating in the city. 
(e)  Operators will encourage users to wear a helmet while operating a shareable dockless mobility device. 
(f)  Shareable dockless mobility devices shall not be operated by more than one person at a time. 
(g)  While operating a shareable dockless mobility device or dockless mobility device, no individual shall physically hold a wireless telecommunications device, including cell phones. 
( Ord. No. 2019-01(18-O-1322), § 1, 1-16-19 ) 
Sec. 150-404. - Parking. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to identify parking areas and no-parking areas through administrative regulations issued by the department of city planning office of zoning and development. All parking areas and no-parking areas will be communicated directly to operators and posted online. 
(b)  Operators must communicate proper shareable dockless mobility devices parking requirements to all users. 
(c)  Shareable dockless mobility devices shall be parked upright at all times. 
(d)  No person shall park a shareable dockless mobility device or a dockless mobility device other than upon the sidewalk in a bike rack or against a building or at a curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction of pedestrian traffic and provides a minimum of five feet clear for pedestrians. 
(e)  Shareable dockless mobility devices and dockless mobility devices shall not be parked: 
(1)  On vegetation; 
(2)  On any grate, manhole cover, or access lid; 
(3)  In any loading zone, driveway, vehicle travel lane, bike lane, or shared-use path; 
(4)  Where they obstruct vehicle parking; 
(5)  Where they obstruct pedestrian or wheelchair access to: 
i.  Private or public buildings and establishments; 
ii.  Street features that require pedestrian access including, but not limited to, benches, parklets, parking pay stations, and crosswalk buttons; 
iii.  Accessibility and safety features including curb ramps, wheelchair ramps, ramp landings, handrails, areas of refuge, and detectable warning strips. 
(6)  In bus stop clear zones defined as: 
i.  The on street clear zone defined under the "Identification of bus stops" in chapter 150, article IV; 
ii.  A bus stop clear zone of 40 feet long by eight feet wide for transit stops served by only one route. When signage indicates the presence of two or more bus routes at a transit stop, an additional 40 feet of curb length per route should remain clear. 
(7)  At or within five feet of a bikeshare station; 
(8)  Where it obscures any fixed, regulatory, or informational signs or traffic control devices; 
(9)  Where it obstructs emergency service infrastructure including, but not limited to, fire hydrants, stand pipes, or automated external defibrillators. 
(f)  All shareable dockless mobility devices shall have permanently affixed contact information and unique company specific device identifiers on all devices for relocation requests. Operators must monitor and document relocation requests and responses 24/7. 
(g)  Operators will remove improperly parked shareable dockless mobility devices in accordance with local laws and without prior notice from the city. 
(h)  Upon evidence that an operator's shareable mobility devices are found to be consistently parked improperly, the city reserves the right to reduce the number of shared devices allowed under their permit or revoke it all together. 
(i)  The city reserves the right to cite, impound, store, and dispose of improperly parked devices at the operators' expense. 
( Ord. No. 2019-01(18-O-1322), § 1, 1-16-19 ) 
Sec. 150-405. - Operations. 
(a)  Shareable dockless mobility devices and dockless mobility devices may be operated within city parks, including along the Atlanta BeltLine and shall not be considered motorized vehicles as set forth in chapter 110, article III, (park rules). 
(b)  Shareable dockless mobility devices and dockless mobility devices shall not be operated on sidewalks or any space exclusively for pedestrian use. 
(c)  Shareable dockless mobility devices and dockless mobility devices may operate in vehicle travel lanes, in bike lanes, and along shared use paths throughout the city. 
(d)  Operators shall adhere to the fleet size minimums and maximums as determined by the commissioner of city planning through administrative regulations, communicated directly to operators, and published on the city's website. Fleet maximums may be set based on the discretion of the department of city planning. 
(e)  Shareable dockless mobility devices and dockless mobility devices shall be operated in a manner consistent with all applicable state and local laws. 
(f)  Operators must educate users on proper shareable dockless mobility devices operations. 
(g)  Shareable dockless mobility device and dockless mobility device riders must yield to pedestrians in all cases including along shared use paths. 
(h)  Operators shall provide sufficient local operations and maintenance staff to address issues and remove improperly parked bikes or scooters. 
(i)  Third party advertising or sponsorship shall not be affixed or placed in any other manner on shareable dockless mobility devices. 
(j)  Operators shall work with the Department of city planning, the department of public works, and the Atlanta Police Department to enforce this ordinance with the most advanced and appropriate available technology. 
(k)  Operators shall work with the department of city planning and the department of public works to enforce temporary or semi-permanent no-ride zones authorized by the department of city planning with the most appropriate available technology. 
(l)  In addition to the penalties operators are subject to in accordance with section 150-402, users convicted of violating this section shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-8. <https://library.municode.com/ga/atlanta/codes/code_of_ordinances?nodeld=ptiicoorenor_chigepr_s1-8gepecovi> 
( Ord. No. 2019-01(18-O-1322), § 1, 1-16-19 ) 
Sec. 150-406. - Data sharing. 
(a)  Operators shall provide a documented application programming interface ("API") that furnishes real-time anonymized data for the entire fleet. The format and field requirements of the API will be defined through administrative regulations, communicated directly to operators, and published on the city website. Operator may not change the API URL without notifying the city with at least 30 days' notice. Operators are required to make the API endpoint available for public consumption. 
(b)  Operators must provide a monthly data report. Reporting requirements will be defined through administrative regulations, communicated directly to operators, and published on the city's website. 
( Ord. No. 2019-01(18-O-1322), § 1, 1-16-19 ) 
Sec. 150-407. - Equity. 
(a)  Operators shall have payment options which do not require the rider to have access to credit cards to use of a shareable dockless mobility device. 
(b)  Operators shall adhere to equitable distribution requirements as determined by the commissioner of city planning through the administrative regulations, published on the city's website, and provided directly to all operators. 
(c)  Operators shall provide an equity plan to the department of city planning as part of the permit application. The equity plan may include such elements as discounted price options, cash-based payment systems, and non-smartphone reservation systems. 
( Ord. No. 2019-01(18-O-1322), § 1, 1-16-19 ) 
Chapter 154 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 2007-(07-O-0956), § 16, approved June 26, 2007, provides that this ordinance shall "sunset" on June 26, 2010. 
Cross reference— Department of public works, § 2-461 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 130. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; specific grant of constitutional authority relative to municipal utilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2), (a)(7), (a)(8); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; authority to acquire water and sewer systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 154-1. - Additional qualifications of the commissioner of watershed management; additional duties of the commissioner of watershed management. 
(a)  In addition to the general qualifications set forth in section 2-221, the commissioner of watershed management shall possess a bachelor's degree in engineering or public administration and five years of senior level, supervisory experience in at least one of the following fields: water purification and distribution; wastewater services; sewer operations; and storm water engineering. Such experience may be in either private employment or previous government employment; or any equivalent combination of education, training, and experience. 
(b)  In addition to the duties related to the administration of the department of watershed management, the duties of the commissioner of watershed management shall include: 
(1)  Planning and oversight of the strategic direction for the operations of water purification and distribution, wastewater service, sewer operations, and storm water management; 
(2)  Ensuring that the city complies with all federal and state regulations regarding water management; 
(3)  Identifying potential environmental issues and developing strategies to effectively respond; 
(4)  Ensuring the city is aware of proposed environmental standards, trends and technologies; and 
(5)  Providing engineering reviews and design and construction management services on capital improvement projects. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 53, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 154-2. - Functions and duties of the office of water treatment and reclamation. 
(a)  The functions and duties of the office of water treatment and reclamation shall include: 
(1)  Manage the city's water treatment systems, including the operation, maintenance and repair of the water treatment plants, pumping stations, water storage facilities, and appurtenant facilities; 
(2)  Manage the city's wastewater treatment systems, including the operation, maintenance and repair of wastewater treatment plants, pumping stations, and appurtenant facilities; and 
(3)  Manage the city's combined sewer overflow facilities, including the operation, maintenance and repair of the combined sewer overflow treatment facilities and appurtenant facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 54, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2003-83, § 2, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2012-46(12-O-1316), § 1, 10-24-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2016-40(16-O-1568) , § 1, 11-16-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-40(16-O-1568) , § 1, adopted Nov. 16, 2016, amended only the title of § 154-2 to read as herein set out. Former § 154-2, pertained to functions and duties of the bureau of wastewater treatment and collection. 
Sec. 154-3. - Functions and duties of the office of watershed protection. 
The functions and duties of the office of watershed protection shall include: 
(1)  Development and management of a stormwater utility for the city of Atlanta; 
(2)  Planning, design, construction, management, maintenance and operation of facilities and systems for the management of the city's natural and water resources and non-point pollution sources; 
(3)  Development and implementation of an environmental compliance and inspection program for the city of Atlanta to address: 
a.  Natural resource management; 
b.  Water resources protection; 
c.  Water quality monitoring and analysis and industrial pretreatment; 
d.  Stormwater compliance; 
e.  Permit and regulatory compliance and management; and 
f.  Regional water resource planning; 
(4)  Monitoring, coordination and implementation of programs for watershed protection, including establishment of standards and development of solutions to the problems of air pollution where appropriate, noise abatement and control, water protection and other matters affecting natural environmental conditions in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 55, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2003-83, § 3, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2005-89, § 2, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2012-46(12-O-1316), § 2, 10-24-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2016-40(16-O-1568) , § 2, 11-16-16) 
Sec. 154-4. - Functions and duties of the office of engineering services. 
The functions and duties of the office of engineering services shall include: 
(1)  Planning and managing operational and capital improvement projects related to the city's water, sewer or other related assets and environmental programs, performing and overseeing the performance of engineering reviews, design inspection and construction management service on capital improvement projects; 
(2)  Performing engineering services, including but not limited to, the furnishing of lines and grades, the preparation of maps, plans, surveys, land records, or other services needed for capital projects, repairs and maintenance of the water, sewer and environmental programs; 
(3)  Maintaining engineering maps and plans, property records and other information related to water, sewers and other assets and rights-of-way; 
(4)  Providing engineering reviews and design, inspection and construction management services for other departments of the city as required; and 
(5)  Performing and providing database structure and management of department's inventory and geographical information systems analytical support. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 56, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2012-46(12-O-1316), § 3, 10-24-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2016-40(16-O-1568) , § 3, 11-16-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-40(16-O-1568) , § 3, adopted Nov. 16, 2016, amended only the title of § 154-4 to read as herein set out. Former § 154-4, pertained to functions and duties of the bureau of engineering services. 
Sec. 154-5. - Functions and duties of the office of linear infrastructure operations. 
The functions and duties of the office of linear infrastructure operations shall include: 
(1)  Maintaining, operating and repairing the city's wastewater collection systems and appurtenances; 
(2)  Maintaining, operating and repairing the city's water distribution systems and appurtenances; and 
(3)  Providing customer response for repair services for wastewater collection and water distribution systems. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 57[1], 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2003-83, § 8, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 2, 8-29-06; Ord. No. 2012-46(12-O-1316), § 4, 10-24-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2016-40(16-O-1568) , § 4, 11-16-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-40(16-O-1568) , § 4, adopted Nov. 16, 2016, amended only the title of § 154-5 to read as herein set out. Former § 154-5, pertained to additional qualifications of head of the bureau of drinking water; functions and duties of bureau of drinking water. 
Sec. 154-6. - Functions and duties of the office of customer care and billing services. 
The functions and duties of the office of customer care and billing services shall include: 
(1)  Customer relations; 
(2)  Billing; and 
(3)  Maintaining, operating and repairing small meters. 
(Ord. No. 1998-87, § 1, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 52, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2003-83, § 8, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 3, 8-29-06; Ord. No. 2012-46(12-O-1316), § 5, 10-24-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2016-40(16-O-1568) , § 5, 11-16-16) 
Note— Formerly § 154-1. 
Sec. 154-7. - Functions and duties of the office of the commissioner of watershed management. 
The functions and duties of the office of the commissioner of watershed management shall include: 
(1)  Safety, security and emergency management; 
(2)  Human resources support services; 
(3)  Communications and Community Relations; 
(4)  Strategic planning; 
(5)  Performance and accountability; 
(6)  Information technology support services; 
(7)  Management of central warehouse and fleet; 
(8)  Management and maintenance of buildings and grounds; 
(9)  Policy and intergovernmental affairs; 
(10)  Central document control; and 
(11)  Consent decree and consent order compliance and management. 
(Ord. No. 2003-83, § 4, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2005-89, § 3, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2012-46(12-O-1316), § 6, 10-24-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2016-40(16-O-1568) , § 6, 11-16-16) 
Sec. 154-8. - Functions and duties of the office of financial administration. 
The functions and duties of the office of financial administration shall include: 
(1)  Financial planning, analysis, budgeting and reporting; 
(2)  Revenue operations and management; 
(3)  Customer collections; 
(4)  Accounting services; 
(5)  Payroll; 
(6)  Capital financial management and auditing; 
(7)  Financial administration and accounts payable; 
(8)  Fixed asset and inventory management; and 
(9)  Procurement planning services. 
(Ord. No. 2003-83, § 5, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2005-89, § 4, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2012-46(12-O-1316), § 7, 10-24-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2016-40(16-O-1568) , § 7, 11-16-16) 
Sec. 154-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-46(12-O-1316), § 8, adopted October 24, 2012, effective July 1, 2012, repealed § 154-9, which pertained to functions and duties of the bureau of financial administration. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 154-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-46(12-O-1316), § 9, adopted October 24, 2012, effective July 1, 2012, repealed § 154-10, which pertained to functions and duties of the bureau of program performance. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 154-11—154-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER BILLING AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES 

Sec. 154-26. - Water and sewer appeals board. 
(a)  There is created a water and sewer appeals board which shall consist of seven persons who shall be residents of the area served by the department of water. 
(b)  Members of the board shall be selected as follows: 
(1)  Six members will be nominated by the paired district councilmembers with the concurrence of the at-large councilmember and one member will be nominated by the president of council. 
(2)  The nominations shall be voted on by the entire council, which shall either approve or disapprove each nomination. 
(3)  The membership shall consist of at least three lay persons, one of whom must be retired and over 60 years of age, and four other persons, preferably consisting of at least one from each of the following three categories: residential property management, plumber or property maintenance person with at least five years of plumbing experience, civil or mechanical engineering. 
(c)  Each member of the board shall be paid $100.00 for each board meeting attended; provided, however, the total amount paid any member shall not exceed the sum of $10,500.00 in any one calendar year. 
(d)  Members shall be appointed for three-year terms. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. No person shall serve more than eight consecutive years as a member of the board. 
(e)  A member shall be elected annually by the board to preside at all meetings of the board, for whatever purpose called, and shall perform and exercise all of the functions, powers and duties granted or assigned by applicable law to a person who presides at or chairs meetings of the board; provided, however, the member shall not be permitted to vote on any matters brought before the board except to break tie votes. The board may elect another member to preside in the absence of the presiding officer, and such person shall also not be permitted to vote while presiding except to break tie votes. Three members of the board will constitute a quorum. 
(f)  The board shall establish its own rules of procedure for the accomplishment of its duties and functions, provided that such rules shall not be in conflict with this Code, state and federal law and the water and sewer revenue bond ordinances. 
(g)  The board shall address administrative-related matters exclusively; it shall not have the authority to make policy decisions. 
(h)  The duties and authority of the board shall be to: 
(1)  Consider and rule on determinations made pursuant to this ordinance, provided that such appeals are timely and accompanied, unless waived by the commissioner of the department of watershed management, by the amount in dispute. Consider and rule on appeals from administrative penalties imposed pursuant to the City of Atlanta Water Use Restriction's Ordinance (Atlanta City Code section 154-73 et seq.) and the City of Atlanta Waste of Water Ordinance (Atlanta City Code section 154-59 et seq.). 
(2)  Set forth findings of fact and conclusions as to each dispute, to be mailed to the consumer, and file the findings with the municipal clerk. 
(3)  When appropriate, order the department of water to refund, credit or adjust the amount or portion of the amount in dispute. 
(4)  Furnish the following to all appellants: 
a.  An opportunity to be heard in person, and to present witnesses and documentary evidence. 
b.  The right to be represented by counsel, although counsel shall not be furnished by the city. 
c.  The right to confront and cross examine employees or agents of the city as to the basis for determining the amount billed. 
(i)  The executive branch shall provide such staff services as may be required for the efficient operation of the board, through the department of watershed management. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4086; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 4, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2007-39(07-O-0956), §§ 11, 14, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 2010-70(10-O-1914), §§ 11, 14, 12-15-10; Ord. No. 2011-01(10-O-2116), §§ 1, 2, 1-27-11; Ord. No. 2011-02(10-O-2117), § 1, 1-27-11; Ord. No. 2011-25(11-O-0850), § 1, 6-29-11; Ord. No. 2017-26(17-O-1213), §§ 1, 2, 5-15-17 ) 
Cross reference— Boards, councils, commissions and authorities, § 2-1851 et seq. 
Sec. 154-27. - Credits and adjustments. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Deaf means a person who is legally or medically totally deaf. Proof satisfactory to the commissioner of water must be furnished by the customer for the customer to be considered for an adjustment for toilet leaks. 
Excess bill means that portion of a bill for water and sewer services which is greater than the average consumption for the account during a normal six-month period. 
Leak or leakage means the uncontrolled loss of water from artificial structures as a result of hydrostatic pressure or the uncontrolled loss of water from one aquifer to another. The leakage may be natural, as through semi-impervious confining layer, or humanmade, as through an uncased well, and includes loss of water through faucets, meters, toilets or underground pipes on the property. 
Meter leaks means leaks determined by the department of water to be located within the meter or between the meter and the property line or both and which affect consumption; inlet meter leaks, meter repairs and change-outs will also be considered meter leaks if, after the repair or change-out is completed, consumption drops to the average consumption for a normal six-month period. 
Vandalism means acts by a person, not under control of the customer or property owner, which cause damage to the plumbing system which cause waste of water. Proof satisfactory to the commissioner of water must be furnished by the customer or owner which verifies that vandalism was by a third party. 
_____
(b)  Authority. The commissioner of watershed management is authorized, where appropriate, to make adjustments and give credits in water and sewer bills, according to the following: 
(1)  Specific adjustment allowance. 

 
_____ 
(2)  Maximum time period to which adjustments will be applied. 
a.  Meter leaks, unlimited time period. 
b.  Underground leaks, two billing periods. 
c.  Identified leaks as in subsection (b)(1)d of this section, one billing period. 
d.  Toilet leak, if customer deaf, two billing periods. 
e.  Vandalism, two billing periods. 
(3)  Proof. Satisfactory written proof must be furnished to the commissioner of the department of watershed management by the customer that the leak actually existed and that it has been repaired. The commissioner or his/her designee may, at his/her discretion, verify that the repairs have indeed been made if the billing has not returned to the average consumption. 
(c)  The authority of the commissioner of the department of watershed management to make adjustments in water and sewer bills is limited as follows: 
(1)  The commissioner is authorized and directed to make adjustments to water bills for circumstances listed in subsection (b) of this section not attributable to meter-reading errors or computer entry billing errors not exceeding $5,000.00 for each adjustment. Adjustments by the commissioner exceeding $5,000.00 for circumstances listed in subsection (b) of this section not attributable to meter reading errors or computer entry billing errors must be approved by resolution of the council. 
(2)  Adjustments in water bills may be made by the commissioner of the department of watershed management for meter reading errors or computer entry billing errors regardless of amount. 
(3)  No adjustment shall be made to accounts for charges due and payable more than one year previously. 
(4)  Adjustments to bills shall be considered for water service customers where the request was made within one year of the date the charges were due and payable but such request was not processed by the city within one year. 
(d)  Records. The commissioner of watershed management shall keep and maintain for a period of four years records of each adjustment. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4070; Ord. No. 1996-62, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 2001-97, § 1, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2006-53, §§ 4, 5, 8-29-06; Ord. No. 2007-39(07-O-0956), § 13, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 2010-70(10-O-1914), § 13, 12-15-10) 
Sec. 154-28. - Disputed bills. 
The commissioner of the department of watershed management shall have the duty and responsibility to provide notice and an opportunity to be heard to users of water and sewer services to resolve disputed water/sewer bill amounts prior to termination or other legal action to collect the full amount of the bill, which will include the following: 
(1)  Written notice to consumers that they have the right to dispute such bill amounts by providing to the commissioner of the department of watershed management on or before the due date of the bill to be disputed written notice setting forth the dispute in accordance with the instructions contained on the disputed bill, provided, however, that failure to either pay the bill or provide written notice of the dispute of the bill will be grounds for the commissioner of the department of watershed management to provide notice that the water service may be immediately terminated without additional notice. 
(2)  The designation of employees empowered to correct mistakes in the determination of the amounts billed to customers that have properly submitted written notice of the dispute of a bill to the commissioner of the department of watershed management, whose duties will include meeting with the disputing customer, investigating the basis of the dispute, sending a written response to the customer of the result of the investigation prior to any termination of services or other legal action to collect the full amount of the bill. The written responses will be in the form of a certified letter and will include notice of the availability of a hearing before the water and sewer appeals board after payment of the amount in dispute. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4084; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 5, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2001-97, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2006-53, §§ 6—8, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-29. - Right of appeal. 
A customer may appeal a determination as to the amount of the water/sewer bill owed, as set forth in section 154-28, by filing a written appeal to the water and sewer appeals board with the commissioner of the department of watershed management, describing the basis of the appeal and the specific dates of the bill(s) in dispute. The customer may authorize the water and sewer appeals board to administratively review the basis of the dispute and decide upon the customer's appeal without requiring the customer to appear before the board for the hearing. A customer must send the request for an appeals board hearing to the water and sewer appeals board within seven business days of the date that the written response provided for in section 154-28 was mailed by the city. The customer shall pay the average amount, as determined by the department, for the period in dispute. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4085; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 9, 8-29-06; Ord. No. 2007-39(07-O-0956), § 15, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 2010-70(10-O-1914), § 15, 12-15-10; Ord. No. 2011-03(10-O-2118), § 1, 1-27-11) 
Sec. 154-30. - Placement of fi. fa. for delinquent bills. 
The chief financial officer or other duly authorized collector of water and sewer charges shall, after the failure of any person to pay delinquent water and sewer bills and the commissioner of the department of watershed management has certified that other methods of collection are ineffective, place a fi. fa. on the property where service was received and shall maintain a docket on delinquent water and sewer bills which shall be available for examination; in addition to any delinquent water and sewer bills, the chief financial officer is authorized to charge the property owner any costs for the execution of the fi. fa. and maintenance of this docket. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4072.1; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 10, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-31. - Judicial review. 
The city or any customer who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final decision of the water and sewer appeals board regarding violations of water use restrictions, after exhausting his, her or its administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal to the superior court of the county wherein the alleged violation occurred, for review of such written decision by filing a petition with the said superior court within 30 days after the service of the final decision of the water and sewer appeals board. The water and sewer appeals board shall transmit to the reviewing court the original or a certified copy of the entire record of the proceeding under review. The review shall be conducted by the court without a jury and shall be confined to the record. The court shall not substitute its judgment for that of the water and sewer appeals board as to the weight of the evidence on questions of fact. The court may affirm the decision of the water and sewer appeals board or remand the case for further proceedings. The court may reverse or modify the decision if substantial rights of the appellant have been prejudiced because the administrative findings, inferences, conclusions, or decisions are: (1) In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions; (2) in excess of the authority of the department of watershed management or the water and sewer appeals board; (3) made upon unlawful procedure; (4) affected by other error of law; (5) clearly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the whole record; or (6) arbitrary or capricious or characterized by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39(07-O-0956), § 12, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 2010-70(10-O-1914), § 12, 12-15-10) 
Secs. 154-32—154-48. - Reserved. 
Sec. 154-49. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-53, § 11, approved Aug. 29, 2006, repealed § 154-49 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to duties of the company and derived from Ord. No. 1998-87, § 2, approved Dec. 10, 1998, as subsequently amended. 
Sec. 154-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-53, § 12, approved Aug. 29, 2006, repealed § 154-50 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to operations and maintenance agreement and derived from Ord. No. 1998-87, § 3, approved Dec. 12, 1998, as subsequently amended. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Department of water, app. IV, § 54. 
Cross reference— Water pollution, § 74-167. 
Land development code reference— Plumbing code, § 8-2141 et seq.; water service impact fees, § 19-2001 et seq. 
State Law reference— Specific grant of constitutional authority relative to water systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); acquisition of water systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 154-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department means the City of Atlanta Department of Watershed Management which has responsibility for the administration, monitoring, and management of the city water system and capital improvements thereof. 
Company means the private firm(s) authorized to operate, maintain and manage the city water system by the operations and maintenance agreement of water system. 
Excess bill when meter leak existed means the amount of water consumption based on six months' normal usage. 
Owner means a person who owns real property or the person's employee or agent. 
Premises includes land and all types of structures thereon. 
System includes all real and personal property of the City of Atlanta used by the department of water for the purification and distribution of water. 
Tenant means any person other than the owner who has possession or the right of possession of real property. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4001; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 6, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 13, 8-29-06) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 154-52. - Right of entry; penalties for interference. 
(a)  The commissioner of the department of watershed management and designated inspectors or representatives are authorized and empowered to enter at all reasonable hours any premises where water is consumed to: 
(1)  Check where unnecessary waste is known or suspected and examine and determine the cause thereof; 
(2)  Inspect the pipes, fixtures and settings therein; 
(3)  Read and repair water meters; 
(4)  Turn water off and on; and 
(5)  Examine for contemplated expansion, enlargement or improvements of the city water system. 
(b)  The inspectors shall have full power to examine the complete water supply system for the purpose of ascertaining whether it meets all legal requirements. If any person refuses to permit the examination or obstructs the officer in the performance of this duty, the supply of water may be shut off until the required examination is made and these alterations and repairs are completed as may be necessary to comply with all legal requirements. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4003; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 7, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 14, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-53. - Administration of department of water; establishment of rules and regulations. 
To assist in the successful performance of the functions and services enumerated in this article, there shall also be established a set of rules and regulations. The commissioner of the department of watershed management shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor, be responsible for administering and directing the affairs and operations of the department of watershed management and shall be responsible for the establishment of such rules and regulations as the commissioner of the department of watershed management deems necessary to successfully perform the operations and responsibilities of the department of watershed management. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4014; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 8, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 15, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-55. - Supplying water for swimming and other pools. 
(a)  Authority of department. The department of watershed management may fill swimming and other pools upon request from owners, builders or tenants and shall use sufficient labor and equipment to perform this work. 
(b)  Charges. The department of watershed management shall be authorized to make charges established by the city for filling swimming and other pools. 
(c)  Deposit. The department of watershed management shall be authorized to require a deposit for this service when and if it is determined that it would be to the best interest of the department of watershed management. 
(d)  Refusal of service. The department of watershed management may refuse to fill swimming and other pools when it is thought to be hazardous or unwise to render this service. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4007; Ord. No. 1995-16, § 1, 4-24-95; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 9, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 16, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-56. - Preparation and implementation of capital improvement program. 
The head of the bureau of drinking water shall, prepare as called for by the Charter, a proposed capital improvement program for the department of watershed management and shall implement any such program upon the approval of financing by the council. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4009; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 57[2], 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2003-83, § 8, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 17, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-57. - Acquiring and maintaining watershed. 
The commissioner of the department of watershed management shall recommend to the council the acquisition by the city of those lands which comprise the watershed from which water to be supplied is gathered. Any lands so acquired shall be administered by the commissioner of the department of watershed management to prevent the pollution thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4005; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 18, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-58. - Reserved. 
Sec. 154-59. - Authority to prohibit waste of water. 
The commissioner of the department of watershed management or the commissioner's designated representatives shall have the power to take whatever reasonable and lawful steps are necessary to prevent the unlawful use or waste of water. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4012; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 11, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 19, 8-29-06) 
Secs. 154-60—154-62. - Reserved. 
Sec. 154-63. - Turning off water for violation. 
Upon the discovery of the violation of any section of this Code or other ordinance regulating the use of water or any rule regulating that use, the commissioner of the department of watershed management shall discontinue water service to the person who committed such violation and to the property owned, occupied or controlled by such person. The commissioner of the department of watershed management in all such instances, except those described in section 154-170 and other instances that may pose an imminent threat to the public health and safety, shall give such person three days prior notice of the intention to discontinue the water service during which period of time the person shall be entitled to appeal to the designated agent regarding the propriety of the proposed action. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4040; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 15, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 20, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-64. - Turning off water for emergency or necessity. 
The commissioner of the department of watershed management or the officers or employees thereof may turn off the supply of water from any pipe or water main in an emergency or for repairs or extensions as necessity may require. Reasonable notice shall be given when practicable; however, neither the city, nor their officers and employees shall be held liable for any damage for turning off the water as provided in this section or for insufficient supply of water. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4013; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 16, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 21, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-65. - Extension of water system beyond city limits. 
The water system may be extended beyond the territorial boundaries of the city pursuant to such terms as the mayor, with the approval of the council, may establish. The commissioner of the department of watershed management shall be responsible for the administration and direction of that part of the city water system lying outside the territorial boundaries of the city and shall prepare rules and regulations necessary for the efficient and successful operation. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4016; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 22, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-66. - Cross-connection control/backflow prevention program; enforcement. 
(a)  [ Implementation: ] It shall be the responsibility of the department of watershed management to implement a cross-connection control/backflow prevention program by: 
(1)  Protecting the public potable water system at the service connection by containment, within the consumer's premises, the actual or potential pollution or contamination which may result from backflow through cross-connections; and 
(2)  Providing means whereby the department of watershed management, as supplier/purveyor may segregate the domestic, irrigation and industrial water uses into separate systems to prevent possible pollution or contamination of the public water system which may result from backflow through cross-connections. 
(b)  Definitions: As used in this section, unless different meaning is apparent from the content: 
Acceptable entry conditions means the conditions which must exist in a permitted space to allow entry and to ensure that employees involved with a permit-required confined space entry can safely enter into and work with the space. 
Approved is used in reference to a water supply that has been approved by the commissioner or his/her designee. As herein used in reference to air-gap separation, double check valve assembly or other backflow prevention assemblies or methods, the term "approved" shall mean as allowed or sanctioned by the Southern Plumbing Code. 
Backflow means the undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of the potable supply of water. 
Backflow prevention assembly (approved) means an assembly that has been investigated and approved by a state or federal regulatory agency, used to prevent backflow into a potable water system, based on the degree of hazard either existing or potential. 
Backpressure means an elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system above the supply pressure at the point of consideration which would cause or tend to cause a reversal of the normal direction of flow through the backflow prevention assembly. 
Backsiphonage means a form of backflow due to a reduction in system pressure which causes a negative or sub-atmospheric pressure to exist at a site in the water system. 
Confined space means a space that: 
(1)  Is large enough and so configured that an employee can bodily enter and perform assigned work, and 
(2)  Has limited or restricted means for entry or exit (for example, tanks, vessels, silos, storage bins, hoppers, vaults, and pits are spaces that may have limited means of entry); and 
(3)  Is not designed for continuous employee occupancy. 
Consumer means the owner of private industries or operator of a private water system or residence, receiving service from the Atlanta Water System. 
Containment means the total isolation of a facility with a potential hazard from the public water supply system commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the water which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids or waste. 
Cross-connection means any unprotected actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between a public, or a consumer's potable water system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas, or substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. 
Degree of hazard shall be derived from the evaluation of conditions within the Atlanta Water System which can be classified as either a pollutant (nonhealth) or a contaminant (health) hazard. 
Health hazard means an actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system that would be a danger to health. 
Owner means any person who or entity which has legal title to, or license to operate or habitate in, a property upon which a cross-connection inspection is to be made or upon which a cross-connection is present. 
Permit means a document issued by the department of watershed management which allows the use of a backflow preventer. 
Pollution means an impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonable affect the aesthetic qualities of such waters for domestic use. 
Purveyor means water supplier. 
Service connection means the point of delivery of water to a premises, the normal location of the meter. It is the end of the water purveyor's jurisdiction and the beginning of the consumer's responsibility. 
(c)  Thermal expansion: It shall be the responsibility of the owners of the commercial, industrial and residential premises to provide necessary protection against thermal expansion as needed and specified by relevant standards enforced by the plumbing division of the bureau of buildings. 
(d)  Confined space: Consumers shall comply with OSHA regulations codified at part 29 of the code of federal regulations, section 1910.46, regarding permit-confined spaces. 
(e)  Department requirements: 
(1)  The department of watershed management shall provide an on-site evaluation and/or inspection of plans in order to determine if, and which type of backflow preventer will be required. The department will issue applicable permits and perform inspections and testing as necessary. 
(2)  Plans for new installations must be approved prior to installation. 
(3)  For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the department will perform evaluations and inspections of plans and/or premises and inform the owner by letter of any corrective action deemed necessary, the method of implementing the correction, and the time allowed for the correction to be made, depending upon the degree of hazard. 
(4)  The department will not allow any service connection to remain unless it is protected by an approved backflow preventer for which a permit has been issued and which will be tested regularly to insure satisfactory operation. 
(5)  The department shall provide written notice of violations at the time of the first reinspection. The department will allow an additional 15 days for the required corrective action. In the event the owner fails to complete corrective action at the time of the second reinspection, the water service to the premises shall be terminated. In the event that the owner demonstrates to the department that extenuating circumstances existed which prevented completion of corrective action, a time extension may be granted by the department. However, in no case shall the extension exceed an additional 24 hours. 
(6)  If the department determines at any time that a serious threat to the public health exists, the water service will be terminated immediately. 
(f)  Owner requirements: 
(1)  The owner's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the department of watershed management to determine the existence of cross-connection, other structural or sanitary hazards, or violations of this section. 
(2)  The owner shall be responsible for elimination or protection of all cross-connections on his premises. 
(3)  The owner shall correct any malfunction of the backflow preventer which is revealed by periodic testing. 
(4)  The owner, after having been informed in writing by the department, shall at his expense, install, maintain, and test, or have tested, any backflow preventers on the premises. 
(5)  The owner shall inform the department of any proposed or modified cross-connections and also any existing cross-connections of which the owner is aware but has not been found by the department. 
(6)  The owner shall install backflow preventers approved by the department. 
(7)  The owner shall install only backflow preventers approved by the department. 
(8)  The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for permits, annual or semiannual device testing, re-testing in the case that the device fails to operate correctly, and second reinspections for noncompliance with the department. 
(g)  Enforcement/penalties: 
(1)  A written notice of noncompliance will be given including a recommendation that will bring the consumer into compliance within a specified time period. The time period will be determined based on the degree of hazard. 
(2)  Failure of compliance at the expiration of the specified time period may be subject to: 
a.  Assessment of a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or termination of the water service; and/or 
b.  Issuance of a citation and summons to appear in court for each violation; and/or 
c.  Termination of water service at the main until compliance has been reached and all fees have been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 1996-02, § 1, 1-8-96; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 23, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-67. - Authority to design, install, extend and inspect water pipes and mains and to charge the cost thereof to property owners, developers or contractors; authority to approve the design and installation of water pipes and mains by private developers and authority to charge inspection and other fees. 
(a)  Generally. The commissioner is authorized to design, install, extend and inspect water pipes and water mains to promote the efficient operation of the city water system. The commissioner is authorized to allow private developers the opportunity to design and install water mains and pipes to supply water service to private development according to the regulations and criteria of the department of watershed management. 
(b)  Charges. The commissioner is authorized to assess fees and charge for the costs of such work. 
(1)  Application for installation by the department of watershed management. 
a.  Any person desiring the construction of a water main or the construction or relocation of a fire hydrant by the department of watershed management shall contact the application coordinator for the department of watershed management and make such request according to the prescribed guidelines. 
b.  A fee of $2,000.00, due at the time of application, shall be charged to all developers, contractors or property owners who apply for the city to install, extend, relocate or abandon water mains. This fee is non-refundable except as set forth in subsection (d) and is applied to cover the city's engineering costs in the event that the project set forth in the application is not completed. For applications to abandon water meters, the fee shall be $1,000.00. 
c.  A fee of $1,000.00, due at the time of application, shall be charged to all developers, contractors or property owners who apply for the city to install, relocate or abandon fire hydrants. This fee is non-refundable except as set forth in subsection (d) and is applied to cover the city's engineering costs in the event that the project set forth in the application is not completed. For applications to abandon water meters, the fee shall be $1,000.00. 
d.  If after the prepayment has been made the applicant wishes to cancel the application, the applicant must notify the application coordinator in writing and request a partial refund. The following refund schedule shall apply: 
1.  Seventy-five percent of the prepayment shall be refunded if notification of cancellation is received within one week of the application date. 
2.  Fifty percent of the prepayment shall be refunded if notification of cancellation is received within two weeks of the application date. 
3.  Twenty-five percent of the prepayment shall be refunded if notification of cancellation is received within three weeks of the application date. 
4.  No refund shall be made if notification is received three weeks after the application date. 
(2)  Design and installation. A fee of ten percent of the total calculated construction cost of water mains and fire hydrants will be charged to all developers, contractors or property owners to cover the expenses incurred by the city for engineering design, chlorination and construction inspection. Any prepayment shall be credited toward such fee. If the calculated construction cost is less than the prepayment, the difference shall be refunded. 
(3)  Authorization of construction. Upon completion of the engineering design by the city, the application coordinator shall notify the applicant as to the calculated construction cost. Upon receipt of payment the application coordinator shall pursue all actions that may be necessary and proper to legally authorize construction of the facilities. 
(4)  Expiration of application. 
a.  If within three months of notification by the application coordinator the applicant has not made payment as stipulated in subsection (b)(1)b of this section, the application shall be considered inactive. The file will be closed and removed from current records. 
b.  If an applicant wishes to reactivate an inactive application, the applicant must first consult with the department of watershed management to determine if the previous design is still valid. If the existing design is still valid, the applicant may make payment and the authorization process shall proceed as outlined in subsection (a) of this subsection (b)(2) of this section. If the previous design is no longer valid, the applicant may reapply and begin the process again or the applicant may request a revision and the process will proceed as outlined in subsection (b)(5) of this section. 
c.  An inactive and closed application cannot be reactivated. If an applicant desires further action after an application has been closed, the applicant must reapply. 
(5)  Revisions. 
a.  If, after notification by the application coordinator as to the calculated construction cost, the applicant wishes to revise or otherwise change the details or the scope of the application, the applicant must request a revision. 
b.  When a request for revision has been received, the design shall be revised to reflect the new information. The construction cost shall be recalculated but shall include an additional fee of three percent of the revised construction cost to cover the expenses incurred in the revision process. 
c.  When the revision process is complete, the application coordinator shall notify the applicant of the revised cost. When payment is made the process shall continue as outlined in subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
d.  No application may be revised more than once. If the applicant wishes a second revision, a new application must be made and the process shall begin anew. 
(6)  Private developer installation. The commissioner or his/her designee is authorized to charge a private developer, who designs and installs a water main, a fee for reviewing, inspection and chlorination of water mains according to the established fee schedule. 
a.  Any developer desiring to design, install and construct a water main shall contact the department of watershed management and make such request according to the prescribed guidelines. 
b.  A nonrefundable fee, as set forth in section 154-67.1, is payable at the time of application to cover the initial review, prior to the determination of the total cost for design review, inspection, testing, chlorination, and engineering and documentation, which is determined according to the rate schedule in said code section. 
c.  After determination of the total cost for design review, inspection, testing, chlorination, and engineering & documentation, as set forth in section 154-67.1, the department shall notify the applicant of the amount and set forth the scope of any revisions necessary for a completed engineering design to be presented at the pre-construction conference. At a pre-construction conference, the applicant shall present a completed engineering design signed by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Georgia and pay the balance of the fee. If after payment of the balance of the fee, the applicant requests a refund in writing, such refund will be provided less any cost incurred by the city. The final approval of the design and authorization of construction are governed by subsection (7). 
(7)  Authorization of construction. Upon completion of the engineering design by licensed professional engineers, the developers, contractors or property owners shall forward a copy of the completed design to the department of watershed management. 
a.  The completed design must be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia and contain complete drawing(s), or plat(s), showing street elevations and proposed meter locations. 
b.  The department of watershed management shall review and approve the design. 
c.  Upon approval of the design, the department of watershed management shall notify the applicant and authorize construction. If the design is not approved the developer shall have 30 days from the date the city mails the nonapproval notice to submit a revised design. 
(8)  Expiration of application. 
a.  If within three months of payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the department of watershed management has not received the design, the application shall be considered inactive. 
b.  If an applicant wishes to reactivate an inactive application, the applicant must first send a written request to the department of watershed management. The department of watershed management shall determine if the previous design is still valid. If the existing design is still valid, the applicant may make payment and the authorization process shall proceed as outlined in subsection (b)(3) of this section. If the previous design is no longer valid, the applicant may reapply and begin the process again or the applicant may request a revision and the process will proceed as outlined in this section. 
c.  If within 90 days the applicant has neither submitted a design nor requested a revision, the written request and/or application shall be considered inactive and closed and shall be removed from the current records. An inactive and closed request cannot be reactivated. If an applicant desires further action after a request has been closed, the applicant must reapply as stipulated under this subsection. 
(9)  Revisions. 
a.  If the applicant wishes to revise or otherwise change the details or the scope of the application, the applicant must write the department of watershed management and inform it of need for a revision. 
b.  When a request for revision has been received, the design shall be revised to reflect the new information. The cost shall be recalculated but shall include an additional fee of three percent to cover the expenses incurred in the revision process. The revised design must be submitted within 30 days of the request for revision. 
c.  The department of watershed management shall notify the applicant of the revised fees or costs. The applicant shall have ten days to pay any revised fees or costs. When payment is made the process shall continue as outlined in this section. 
(c)  All permit fees for easements, boring and casing, and tapping fees must be obtained and/or paid by the developer prior to installation of water main. 
(d)  The developer will maintain and be responsible for all construction and repairs to the water main and all damages, injuries, costs, loss claims and actions caused by the water main for a period of 12 months after release of the water main by the department personnel for water service. During the 12-month period, any water service received through said water main will be subject to all laws, rules and regulations and water rates set by the city council. After the 12-month period of time, the water main and all appurtenances will belong exclusively to the City of Atlanta Department of Watershed Management. 
(e)  The developer will sign any necessary documents to create or effectuate any easements, rights of entry or rights-of-way. 
(f)  Neither the city nor the contractor will be responsible for any failure due to delay in laying the water main caused by labor shortage, delay in securing materials, act of God or war or any other known or unknown, anticipated or unanticipated, foreseen or unforeseen causes or reasons. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4008; Ord. No. 1996-22, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 17, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2005-01, §§ 7—10, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 24, 8-29-06) 
_____
Sec. 154-67.1. - Rates associated with private water main and fire hydrant installation. 
(a)  The nonrefundable fee of $1,000.00 is due at the time of application to cover the initial review of all private water main and fire hydrant installation design proposals. The total cost for design review, inspection, testing, chlorination, and engineering and documentation shall be determined according to the schedule set forth in subsection (b) and shall be paid at the time of the pre-construction conference. 
(b)  The charges for chlorination, inspection, and testing the associated documentation shall be according to the established table for a minimum of 500 feet of ductile iron pipe to be installed according to the design criteria of the department of watershed management. 
RATES ASSOCIATED WITH PRIVATE WATER MAIN AND FIRE HYDRANT INSTALLATION  TABLE OF COSTS PER 500 FEET (MINIMUM) LENGTH OF PIPE TO BE INSTALLED  FROM MAIN COCK TO MAIN COCK: 

 
TABLE OF COSTS PER 500 FEET (MINIMUM) LENGTH OF PIPE TO BE INSTALLED FROM MAIN COCK TO FIRE HYDRANT: 

 
(c)  All fees are due and payable not less than 15 working days prior to commencement of actual construction. 
(Ord. No. 1996-61, §§ 1—3, 8-26-96; Ord. No. 2005-01, §§ 11, 12(Att. D), 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 25, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-68. - Water meter charges; location and sizes of water meters in new construction. 
(a)  Schedule of water meter prices. The schedule of water meter installation fees as set by the city council from time to time includes the cost of the meter, the tapping of the main, the installation of the meter and the cost of labor and equipment to bring the service line from the right-of-way to the property line. The cost for the re-establishment of functional water meters already installed but not currently in operation shall be as set by city council. The cost for the relocation of operational water meters already installed shall be as set by city council. Any additional costs resulting from unusual circumstances in the installation, re-establishment or relocation shall be based on the actual cost to the city and passed on to the property owner or lessee. 
(b)  Authority of commissioner. The commissioner of the department of watershed management shall be authorized to use discretion in requiring the installation of water meters of adequate size for existing buildings. 
(c)  Discontinuing service for noncompliance. The commissioner of the department of watershed management may turn off water service to buildings whose owners refuse to comply with this section upon notification and hearing as required by this article. 
(d)  Water meter size and location required for commercial, industrial and high-rise properties. All blueprints used in applying for a building permit on commercial, industrial and high-rise properties shall show the proposed size and location of water meters to serve the facilities in order to determine the availability of an adequate water supply to meet domestic, industrial and fire service requirements of each building. 
(e)  Charges to restore service. If restoration of service occurs on a weekday, Monday through Friday, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. there shall be no additional charge to restore service. If restoration of service occurs between the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. on a weekday, or any time on a weekend or on a holiday the additional charge to restore service shall be $75.00. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4068; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 18, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2005-01, §§ 1, 2, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 26, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-69. - Charges and penalty for turning off water, plugging service or removing meter. 
(a)  Charges. Whenever it is necessary for the department to terminate water service, plug the meter, remove the meter, or remove a jumper in order to enforce the requirements of this article, accounts shall be charged as follows: 
(1)  Termination of service, including locking device, $45.00. 
(2)  Plugging meter and reset, $75.00. 
(3)  Removing meter and reset, $100.00. 
(4)  Removing jumper, $200.00. 
(b)  Removal of meter. Should the water be turned off from any premises for nonpayment of any bill or any other cause and afterwards the water is found to be on, the water meter may be removed or the water service plugged or locked and a charge in accordance with this section, in addition to a charge for the water consumed, shall be made. 
(c)  Penalty. If the termination or removal is the result of an illegal connection, any violation shall subject the offender to punishment pursuant to the penalty set forth in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances, as may be amended from time to time. Each day such illegal activity continues shall constitute a separate violation. This penalty shall be in addition to the costs and charges listed above. 
(d)  Restoration of service. Service shall not be restored until all charges and penalties set forth herein are paid in full. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4069; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 19, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2005-01, §§ 21, 22, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 154-70. - Using water through unauthorized connection. 
(a)  Written authorization required for plumbing installations. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any plumbing, pipe, valve fixture or apparatus in any premises to any pipe or main containing water from the city system or make any alterations or additions to any pipe, valve, fixture or apparatus already installed, unless that person first obtains authorization from the department of watershed management. Each day in such illegal activity continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(b)  Connection of private water system to city system. It shall be unlawful to connect any private water pipe, which takes water from any point, well, reservoir or other source, to pipes which are connected with the system of the city, except with written authorization of the department of watershed management. Any violation of this section shall cause the water to be turned off until each such connection or cross connection to the private well, pond, reservoir or other system is disconnected and removed. Each day in such illegal activity continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Written authorization required for extending pipes or adding fixtures. It shall be unlawful for any person to make changes in water pipes or fixtures, either by extending those pipes to other premises or within the premises to which water is supplied, which will in any way effect a change in the rate classification for the premises without first obtaining authorization from the department of watershed management. Each day in such illegal activity continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)  Interfering with the city water system; tapping, using water without permission. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any part of the city water system, to insert any plug or to make any connection thereto by tapping any of the mains or pipes, adding straight line connection or other apparatus to the water system without the permission of the department, permitting any such connections or tapping to be made on premises under such person's control as owner or tenant, using water from unauthorized connections, or supplying water through unauthorized connections without written authorization for that use of water. Each day in such illegal activity continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(e)  Responsibility of owner. It shall be unlawful, whenever water service has been turned off for any reason, for a property owner to knowingly or unknowingly allow occupants to use water through another meter or service. 
(f)  Imposition of charges. If any person uses water through any unauthorized pipe or connection or without the permission of the department of watershed management, a bill shall be made against the premises for the time the water has been used or for the quantity shown to have been used. If the bill is not paid, the water shall be turned off and not turned on again until the bill is paid and permission given for continuance of the supply. 
(g)  Amount of charges. If unmetered water is used from an unauthorized connection or fire hydrant, there may be a charge fixed by the council. 
(h)  Removal of unauthorized apparatus. The commissioner or designee, upon discovery of any unauthorized connection, including a straight line connection, shall immediately terminate the water service and remove the apparatus. 
(i)  Costs of labor and materials. Costs of all labor, materials and equipment needed to terminate the unauthorized connection shall be assessed against the person who receives the benefit of the service, including the retail cost of water at the current rate. 
(j)  Restoration of service. All charges must be paid in full, and application for water service must be on file before water service can be restored. 
(k)  Penalty. In addition to the costs and charges listed above, any violation shall subject the offender to punishment pursuant to the penalty set forth in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances, as may be amended from time to time, for each day the violation continues. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4076; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 20, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 27, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-71. - Effect of fraudulent representation or unauthorized use of water. 
If the supply of water shall have been turned on to any premises and afterwards it shall be found that false representation has been made by the applicant or that water is being used in or upon the premises for purposes not set forth in the application made for the water supply to the premises, the water shall be turned off and shall remain turned off until all unauthorized use of water has been stopped and any sum of money determined due for that use has been paid to the city. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4073; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 21, 12-10-98) 
Sec. 154-72. - Obstructing or damaging meters or devices. 
It shall be unlawful to obstruct, damage or hide any water meter, proportional register or any water indicating or recording device so that the inspector or meter reader or other employee of the department of watershed management cannot find or reach the meter or device. The property owner and/or occupants where such activity has been identified shall be subject to the penalty set forth in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4032; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 22, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 28, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-73. - Water use restrictions. 
(a)  This section and all sections beginning with 154-73 shall collectively be known as the "City of Atlanta Water Use Restrictions Ordinance" and may be referred to throughout sections beginning with 154-73 as "this ordinance." 
(b)  City of Atlanta has the authority to adopt this ordinance pursuant to Article 9, Section 2, Paragraphs II and III of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, Chapter 35 of Title 36, Section 31 of Chapter 5 of Title 12 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Section 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 12 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Rules for Outdoor Water Use, Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. Ch. 391-3-30, and Section 1-102(c)(9) of the Atlanta City Charter (1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469). 
(Ord. No. 2000-40, §§ 1—7, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 57[2], 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2003-83, § 8, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2007-39(07-O-0956), §§ 1, 2, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 2010-70(10-O-1914), § 2, 12-15-10) 
Sec. 154-73.1. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by adopting and enforcing water use measures that encourage water conservation and ensure adequate supplies of water for the residents and water customers of the city. 
(b)  It is the policy of the city to promote water conservation by regulating outdoor water use, by complying with the laws and regulations imposed by the State of Georgia on outdoor water use; and by restricting water usage during non-drought periods or state-declared periods of drought to avoid or relieve a local water shortage, or during emergency conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39(07-O-0956), § 3, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 2010-70(10-O-1914), § 3, 12-15-10) 
Sec. 154-73.2. - Definitions. 
When used in this ordinance: 
(1)  Address means the "house number" (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. 
a.  Even numbered address means a house number ending with the number 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number. 
b.  Odd numbered address means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
(2)  Commissioner means the commissioner of the department of watershed management or his/her designee who is vested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective outdoor water use program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(3)  Declared drought response level means one of three levels of drought that can be declared by the environmental protection division based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and three being the most severe. 
(4)  Director means the director of the environmental protection division as defined in this ordinance. 
(5)  Drip irrigation means the use of an irrigation system manufactured and sold specifically for delivering water through small flexible pipes and emitters slowly and directly to the soil around the base of individual plants in a manner that minimizes evaporative losses, pooling, runoff and wetting of plant foliage. This type of system may be part of a larger automated irrigation system or may operate as a stand-alone system connected to a typical outdoor faucet. 
(6)  Environmental Protection Division ("EPD" or "Division") means an organizational unit of the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources ("DNR"), which has responsibility for administration of the State of Georgia's Rules for Outdoor Water Use (Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. Chapter 391-3-30) promulgated by the State of Georgia Board of Natural Resources. 
(7)  Soaker hose means a hose that is connected to a typical outdoor faucet and that is manufactured and sold specifically for delivering water slowly and directly to the soil around the base of individual plants by allowing water to seep from it in a manner that minimizes evaporative losses, pooling, runoff and wetting of plant foliage. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39(07-O-0956), § 4, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 2010-70(10-O-1914), § 4, 12-15-10: Ord. No. 2017-13(17-O-1131) , § 1, 4-26-17) 
Sec. 154-73.3. - Predrought mitigation strategies and drought response strategies. 
(a)  Predrought mitigating strategies. 
(1)  During non-drought periods, persons may irrigate outdoors daily for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(2)  The restriction in paragraph (1) shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
a.  Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
b.  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances and state guidelines; 
c.  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
d.  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Division to provide reclaimed waste water; 
e.  Irrigation of personal food gardens; 
f.  Irrigation of new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
g.  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
h.  Handwatering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
i.  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
j.  Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
k.  Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
l.  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
m.  Hydroseeding. 
(3)  The restriction in paragraph (1) shall not create any limitation upon outdoor water uses for purposes other than planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants. 
(b)  Drought response strategies. Within five days of receipt of notice from the Division of a declared drought response level the city will implement the applicable drought response strategies listed below. 
(1)  Drought response level 1. The city will implement a public information campaign that will include, at a minimum, public notice regarding drought conditions and drought specific public-service messages in one or more of the following ways: newspaper advertisements, bill inserts, website homepage, social media, and notices in public libraries. 
(2)  Drought response level 2. During drought response level 2, the city will implement the drought response level 1 measures plus the following additional drought response level 2 measures: 
a.  General outdoor watering. Outdoor irrigation for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants, as described in paragraph (a)(1), shall be limited to two days a week on an odd-even schedule. Even numbered addresses may irrigate on Wednesday and Saturday between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. Odd numbered addresses may irrigate on Thursday and Sunday between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
b.  Specific categories of outdoor water use. The outdoor water uses listed in paragraph (a)(2) shall be allowed. 
c.  The following outdoor water uses shall not be allowed: 
1.  Washing hard surfaces such as streets, gutters, sidewalks and driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety; 
2.  Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls; 
3.  Use of fire hydrants, except for the purposes of firefighting, public health, safety, or flushing; 
4.  Washing vehicles, such as cars, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, or golf carts; 
5.  Non-commercial washing, or pressure washing, of buildings or structures, except for immediate fire protection; and 
6.  Charity, or non-commercial fund-raiser, car washes. 
(3)  Drought response level 3. During drought response level 3, the city will implement all drought response level 1 and 2 measures plus the following additional drought response level 3 measures: 
a.  General outdoor watering. Outdoor irrigation for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants, as described in paragraph (a)(1) is not permitted. 
b.  Specific categories of outdoor water use. The outdoor water uses listed in paragraph (a)(2) shall be allowed, subject to the following additional requirements: 
1.  Irrigation of personal food gardens shall be conducted between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., unless done using drip irrigation or soaker hoses. Irrigation of personal food gardens using drip irrigation or soaker hoses may be done at any time; 
2.  Handwatering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container may be conducted between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; 
3.  Irrigation of athletic fields or public turf grass recreational areas may be conducted between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., subject to the two days a week odd-even schedule described in drought response level 2; 
4.  Irrigation of golf courses shall be conducted in accordance with the "Golf Irrigation Prediction and Estimation Worksheet" and only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., provided, however, irrigation of golf course greens may occur at any time of day; 
5.  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Division to provide reclaimed waste water shall not be allowed for general outdoor watering as described in paragraph (a)(1). It shall be allowed for any use described in paragraph (a)(2), subject to the limitations in this subparagraph; 
6.  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems is allowed, provided that it is done by professional landscapers or golf course superintendents. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39(07-O-0956), § 5, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 2010-70(10-O-1914), § 5, 12-15-10: Ord. No. 2017-13(17-O-1131) , § 2, 4-26-17) 
Sec. 154-73.4. - Exemptions. 
The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use restrictions contained herein: 
(1)  Pressure washing; 
(2)  Permanent car wash facility, provided that it is connected to a sanitary sewer system of a political subdivision or local government authority or recycles used wash water; 
(3)  Construction sites; 
(4)  Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf; and 
(5)  Other activities essential to daily business. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39(07-O-0956), § 6, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 2010-70(10-O-1914), § 6, 12-15-10: Ord. No. 2017-13(17-O-1131) , § 3, 4-26-17) 
Sec. 154-73.5. - Authority to restrict water usage to avoid or relieve a local water shortage, or during emergency conditions. 
(a)  Authority. In accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-7(a)(1) and 12-5-7(a)(2), the commissioner may implement special water conservation measures during emergency conditions that threaten the public health, safety or welfare, or for repairs, water shortages or potential water shortages in addition to any outdoor water use restrictions in place during non-drought conditions or declared drought response levels. The type, nature, degree, commencement and duration of any restrictions or prohibitions are to be determined by order of the commissioner and in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 12-57(a)(1) and 12-5-7(a)(2). 
(b)  Restrictions. The water conservation measures imposed by the commissioner under section 154-73.5(a), above, may include restrictions or prohibitions on nonessential uses such as swimming pool filling, watering of lawns and gardens, washing of recreational or other vehicles, equipment, sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, and other paved areas, recreational uses, and any other uses which the commissioner may deem to be nonessential. 
(c)  Notice. Prior to the imposition of any restrictions under this ordinance, written notice of the restrictions or prohibitions imposed under this section due to water shortage, potential water shortage, emergency, or prolonged routine maintenance interruptions shall be provided to the city council and through the news media simultaneously. The notice shall set forth the specific nature of the restrictions or prohibitions, the reasons for the imposition of the restrictions or prohibitions, the date upon which the restrictions or prohibitions become effective, and their duration. Notice is not required for emergency diversions of water or emergency repairs; except to the city council. 
(d)  Modifications and additional restrictions. The commissioner of the department of watershed management, in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-7(a)(1) and 12-5-7(a)(2), may modify or cancel water restrictions and schedules or add additional restrictions for any and all water users from time to time as conditions affecting the water system such as drought, emergency, repairs, water shortages, or potential water shortages, may worsen or abate. Modifications to water restriction schedules may include but are not limited to restricting public parks and recreational facilities to the scheduled days of Monday and Friday during the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m., during declared drought response level three. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39(07-O-0956), § 7, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 2010-70(10-O-1914), § 7, 12-15-10) 
Sec. 154-73.6. - Enforcement, penalties for violation and termination of service. 
(a)  Liability and conditional provision of water services. No resident or customer shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions contained in this ordinance or restrictions issued by the commissioner pursuant to this ordinance. All customers of water services are required to comply with this ordinance and restrictions issued pursuant to this ordinance as a condition of continued water services. 
(b)  Enforcement authority. The department of watershed management shall be the enforcement authority for this ordinance. The mayor may also authorize other departments in the city as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Administrative penalties and termination of water service. No customer shall use or allow the use of water in violation of any provision of this ordinance or restrictions issued by the commissioner pursuant to this ordinance. 
(1)  Violators of this ordinance or restrictions issued by the commissioner pursuant to this ordinance shall be subject to the following schedule of administrative penalties: 
a.  First violation. Written notice mailed to the property or posted at the property where the violation occurred. 
b.  Second violation. An administrative penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) placed upon the water bill of the customer's property where the violation occurred. 
c.  Third violation. An administrative penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) placed upon the water bill of the customer's property where the violation occurred. 
d.  Fourth and subsequent violations. An administrative penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) placed upon the water bill of the customer's property where the violation occurred, or service termination including charges for reconnection of service, or both. 
(2)  Notice. Notices of violation for the first and all subsequent violations of the prohibitions in this ordinance shall be posted at the property or sent by first class mail to the customer of record. The notice shall be in writing, include the address of where the violation occurred, the restriction which has been violated, and the consequences of subsequent violations. In the case of multi-family residential dwellings where two or more units are served by a single meter, written notice shall be mailed to the person in whose name the water bill is issued and administrative penalties shall be assessed accordingly. 
(3)  Any administrative penalties imposed pursuant to this section shall be payable to the City of Atlanta, remitted to the Water and Wastewater Operation and Maintenance Fund (5051), and shall commence on the date of issuance of any notice of violation. Any such administrative penalties shall become a part of the customer's regular bill for service. Failure to remit payment shall be subject to the rules, procedures and penalties under Chapter 154, Article III, Section 120, Nonpayment of Bills. 
(4)  Any customer aggrieved or adversely affected by an administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this ordinance shall have an opportunity to request and be given a hearing before the water and sewer appeals board, established under Chapter 154, Article II, wherein the aggrieved or adversely affected customer shall have an opportunity to show cause as to why an administrative penalty or other enforcement action under this ordinance should not be taken, 
a.  An aggrieved or adversely affected customer may request a show cause hearing by filing a written appeal to the water and sewer appeals board with the commissioner of the department of watershed management, setting forth the basis of the appeal, provided that such appeals shall be forwarded to the water and sewer appeals board only if filed within seven business days of the date that the written notice to customers regarding their right to request a show cause hearing on or before the due date of the administrative penalty or other enforcement action is to be disputed. 
b.  Upon receipt by the commissioner of the department of watershed management of a request for a show cause hearing, customers shall not be required to pay the administrative penalty or be subject to service termination for nonpayment of such administrative penalty, until final determination by the water and sewer appeals board, provided however, that a request for a show cause hearing shall not affect authority of the city to require full payment of other amounts under Chapter 154, Article II, Water Sewer Appeals Board, or to collect other amounts in dispute under Chapter 154, Article III, Water. 
c.  Any administrative penalties imposed pursuant to this ordinance may at the discretion of the commissioner under extraordinary circumstances, be waived or reduced. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39(07-O-0956), § 8, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 2010-70(10-O-1914), § 8, 12-15-10) 
Sec. 154-73.7. - Rulemaking authority. 
The commissioner is authorized to make all necessary and reasonable rules and policies with respect to the enforcement of this division. All such rules and policies shall be consistent with the provisions of this ordinance and O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-7(a)(1) and 12-5-7(a)(2) and shall also be provided to the Atlanta City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39(07-O-0956), § 9, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 2010-70(10-O-1914), § 9, 12-15-10) 
Sec. 154-73.8. - Severability. 
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this ordinance, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of the provisions of this ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application and, to this end, the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2007-39(07-O-0956), § 10, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 2010-70(10-O-1914), § 10, 12-15-10) 
Sec. 154-74. - Outdoor water requirements for large landscapes. 
Sec. 154-74.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to reduce discretionary outdoor water use and avoid wasting water by adopting more efficient irrigation system design requirements. 
( Ord. No. 2018-66(18-O-1712), § 2, 12-12-18 ) 
Sec. 154-74.2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Flow sensor means an inline device installed at or near the supply point of the landscape irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. 
Landscape irrigation system means an assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution of water to irrigate landscapes. 
Landscape means ground cover, trees, shrubs, and other plants. 
Large landscape means the landscape areas associated with a development (excluding single-family homes) served by one or more landscape irrigation systems where all irrigated areas added together total more than one acre (or 43,560 square feet). 
Master shut-off valve is an automatic valve such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) capable of being automatically closed by the WaterSense controller. When this valve is closed water will not be supplied to the landscape irrigation system. 
Rain sensor shut-off means an electric device that detects and measures rainfall amounts and overrides the cycle of a landscape irrigation system so as to turn off such system when a predetermined amount of rain has fallen. 
WaterSense controller means weather-based irrigation controllers labeled under the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense program, which includes standalone controllers, add-on devices, and plug-in devices that use current weather data as a basis for scheduling irrigation." 
( Ord. No. 2018-66(18-O-1712), § 3, 12-12-18 ) 
Sec. 154-74.3. - Avoiding water waste through design. 
All landscape irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, and operated to prevent runoff from leaving the target landscape due to low-head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures. This requirement helps ensure compliance with, and is in addition to, the department of watershed management's more general prohibitions against water waste. 
( Ord. No. 2018-66(18-O-1712), § 4, 12-12-18 ) 
Sec. 154-74.4. - Large landscape irrigation system requirements. 
(a)  Applicable backflow prevention, a WaterSense controller, and the rain sensor shut-off as required of all new landscape irrigation systems; 
(b)  A master shut-off valve for each controller installed as close as possible to the point of connection of the water but downstream of the backflow prevention assembly; 
(c)  Pressure-regulating devices such as valve pressure regulators, sprinkler head pressure regulators, inline pressure regulators, or other devices shall be installed as needed to achieve the manufacturer's recommended pressure range at the emission devices for optimal performance; and 
(d)  At least one flow sensor connected to the WaterSense controller that will detect and report high flow conditions to such controller and automatically shut master valves. 
( Ord. No. 2018-66(18-O-1712), § 5, 12-12-18 ) 
Sec. 154-74.5. - Compliance self-certifications for 1" and larger service connections. 
As a condition of selling a new water meter or irrigation meter for any new service connection of one inch or larger, the purchaser of such meter shall submit a certification of compliance along with any other required paperwork and project information as may be required by the department of watershed management. 
(1)  Such certification of compliance shall include a certification that one of the following is true and correct: 
a.  the development will not include any landscape irrigation systems; 
b.  the development will include a landscape irrigation system that does not serve a large landscape, and as a result the system will only include applicable backflow prevention, a WaterSense controller, and the rain sensor shut-off; or 
c.  the development will include a landscape irrigation system that does serve a large landscape, and as a result all requirements in this section will be met. 
(2)  For all new service connections of one inch or larger, the department of watershed management shall receive the signed certification of compliance and determine whether all required information has been provided. If the certification of compliance has not been completed with all required information, the department of watershed management shall return the certificate of compliance to the purchaser specifying what information is missing and asking that a complete certificate be resubmitted. 
( Ord. No. 2018-66(18-O-1712), § 6, 12-12-18 ) 
Secs. 154-75—154-78. - Reserved. 
Sec. 154-79. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-53, § 29, approved Aug. 29, 2006, repealed § 154-79 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to supplying water for swimming and other pools and derived from Code 1977, § 9-4064. 
Secs. 154-80—154-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE HYDRANTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 78; obstructing fireplugs, § 78-61. 

Sec. 154-91. - Installation of detector meter or fire line meter on private unmetered fire service systems having fire hydrants. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to require the installation of a detector meter or factory mutual fire line water meter on all new unmetered fire service systems. 
(b)  Work is to be performed by the city. 
(1)  Installation of detector meters or factory mutual fire line meters as required by this section will be handled by city personnel at the expense of the building owner or lessee. 
(2)  The charges for the installation shall be set by city council. 
(c)  Authority of commissioner. Water service to buildings whose owners refuse to comply with this section upon notification and hearing as required by this article may be terminated. 
[d]  Standby charge. The regular monthly fire service standby charge shall be continued for fire service installations having a detector meter. The commissioner of the department of watershed management may bill factory mutual fire line meters at metered rates. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4079; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 29, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 3, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 30, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-92. - Connections for fire service and water meters. 
(a)  Separate properties under one ownership. Whenever one or more connections from the city water main to the property line are used for the purpose of supplying more than one property under one ownership, a separate charge, according to the schedule of charges for fire service connections, shall be made and assessed against the owner and tenant; that is to say, if the connection from the city main to the property line is separated or divided or extended for the protection of more than one building or property, a separate charge according to the schedule of charges for connections or size of connection shall be made for each building or property so connected. 
(b)  Separate meters or connections. The commissioner of the department of watershed management may require separate water meters and fire service connections for each owner. 
(c)  Subdivision. Whenever property formerly held by one owner is subdivided and sold to multiple owners, it shall be unlawful for the new owners of the various parcels to be served collectively on one or more meters. Instead, the water supply for both domestic use and fire protection shall be metered on a separate meter for each parcel under separate ownership. Application for such additional services or connections shall be made to the department of watershed management. The applicant will be charged for the cost of making the tap, setting the meters and other expenses in connection therewith. In addition, the department may, after notice to at least one offending property owner and to all other property owners known to the department and reasonable opportunity to cure the violations, discontinue water service to properties in violation of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4081; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 30, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 31, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-93. - Possession of key to fire hydrant. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in possession any key to any fire hydrant owned by the city, except such key as may be furnished by permit from the commissioner of the department of watershed management or the commissioner's designee. Only persons named on the permit or a duly authorized agent of a permittee may possess a key issued by the commissioner of the department of watershed management or the commissioner's designee. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any instrument, other than a key issued by the commissioner of the department of watershed management or the commissioner's designee, to open a fire hydrant. 
(b)  The commissioner of the department of watershed management or the commissioner's designee shall impose, as a condition to the issuance of a permit, the agreement of the permit holder to be subject to any of the following penalties if there is a finding by the commissioner of the department of watershed management or the commissioner's designee of a violation of subsection (a) of this section or section 154-94: 
(1)  Immediate confiscation of the key or instrument used to open the fire hydrant. 
(2)  Costs of all labor and materials needed to repair or replace any damage to the fire hydrant or meter. 
(3)  Revocation of the permit and forfeiture of the deposit. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4036; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 32, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-94. - Use and misuse of fire hydrants. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to use water from any fire hydrant from which city water is drawn without permission from the department. 
(b)  In case of a violation of subsection (a) of this section, the department shall impose a charge for the unauthorized use of water of: 
(1)  $300.00 plus retail cost for water used for first-time offenders. 
(2)  $500.00 plus retail cost for water used for second-time offenders. 
(3)  $750.00 plus retail cost for water used for third-time offenders. 
(4)  $1,000.00 plus retail cost for water used for fourth-time offenders. 
The retail cost for water used will be the rate in effect. 
(c)  Tampering. It shall be unlawful to tamper, plug or interfere with any fire hydrant from which city water is drawn without written authorization. 
(d)  Apparatus without backflow prevention. It shall be unlawful to connect any vehicle, container or equipment which is subject to the danger of backflow or back siphonage to a fire hydrant. 
(e)  Penalty. In addition to the costs and charges listed above, any violation shall subject the offender to punishment pursuant to the penalty set forth in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4037; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 31, 12-10-98) 
Secs. 154-95, 154-96. - Reserved. 
Sec. 154-97. - Charges for use. 
(a)  Deposit. A person desiring to use water from a fire hydrant shall be required to deposit $2,900.00 for the use of a temporary meter and any accessories and, upon approval by the commissioner of the department of watershed management or the commissioner's designee, shall be allowed to use water from fire hydrants. Upon return of the temporary meter and accessories and provided that satisfactory evidence is presented that all bills and charges are paid, the commissioner of the department of watershed management or the commissioner's designee is authorized to refund the deposit made without interest, charging such voucher to the refund of meter deposit account. A monthly reading of the meter associated with the fire hydrant for which the temporary meter was obtained shall be used for the calculation of the actual consumption charges to be assessed in connection with the use of water from the fire hydrant. 
(b)  Schedule of charges. After a permit is issued, charges for the use of water from hydrants shall be based on a flat daily rate or a retail rate for water used as measured through a temporary meter installed by the permit holder for this purpose. The method of determining charges shall be decided by the commissioner of the department of watershed management or the commissioner's designee based on the following: 
(1)  The flat daily rate will be as established by the city including the use of the key. 
(2)  If a temporary meter is installed, the charges will be either the retail charge for water used or the minimum bill based on meter size. 
(c)  Monthly meter readings. The person to whom a meter is issued is required to make monthly readings of the water used and to submit such readings to the commissioner of the department of watershed management or the commissioner's designee. Upon request by the commissioner of the department of watershed management or the commissioner's designee, the meter must be brought in for verification or testing. A bill based on the monthly meter reading shall be issued to the permit holder. 
(d)  Minimum charge. The minimum rate for the use of a fire hydrant shall be as established by the city. 
(e)  Failure to pay bill. If the water bill is not paid within 90 days from the date of the bill, the key will be confiscated and the deposit will be forfeited. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4062; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 34, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 6, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 33, 8-29-06) 
Secs. 154-98—154-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES, CHARGES AND RELATED MATTERS 

Sec. 154-111. - Authority to fix water rates. 
(a)  The mayor or the commissioner of the department of watershed management, subject to the approval of the council, shall fix rates for which water shall be furnished for all purposes within the area served by the city water system. Water rates shall be sufficient to pay for the operation, maintenance, reserves, debt service, additions, extensions and betterments of the water system, including those reasonably required for the anticipated growth of the area served, and should also be sufficient to provide for the accumulation of reserves for improvements that cannot be acquired from a single year's receipts. 
(b)  The authority granted in subsection (a) of this section shall apply to all charges made by the department of watershed management including, without limitation: 
(1)  Deposits for water service; 
(2)  Use of fire hydrants and deposits for fire hydrant keys; 
(3)  Filling swimming and other pools; 
(4)  Turning off water, locking the meter, cutting at main, plugging the service or removing the meter; 
(5)  Moving water meters; 
(6)  Installation of meters on fire service systems; 
(7)  Filling fire service system tanks; 
(8)  Fire service connections; and 
(9)  Purchase, installation and service of meters. 
Water rates are hereby waived by 30 percent for domestic customers, aged 65 and older, with a maximum household income of $25,000.00 or less. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4002; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 35, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2001-99, § 1, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2004-01, §§ 1, 3, 1-9-04; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1, 1-5-04; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 34, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-112. - Established. 
The rates and charges for city water service shall be as established by the city. 
Water rates are hereby waived by 30 percent for domestic customers, aged 65 and older, with a maximum household income of $25,000.00 or less. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4061; Ord. No. 2001-99, § 1, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2004-01, §§ 1, 3, 1-9-04; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1, 1-5-04) 
Sec. 154-113. - Charges for water connections and setting meters. 
The charges for making water connections and setting meters inside and outside the city shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4065) 
Sec. 154-114. - Deposits for water service. 
(a)  The commissioner is authorized and directed to require deposits from customers as follows: 
(1)  Prior to, and as a condition of, the establishment of water service at any address within the service area of the water department. 
(2)  Prior to, and as a condition of, the restoration of water service terminated for nonpayment of charges due at any address within the service area of the water department, after any credit from a deposit previously made by the customer is applied to charges due. 
(3)  New applicants for water service that qualify for assistance under the established guidelines of the care and conserve program may elect to split the required deposit into four equal payments over a four-month period. 
(4)  As adequate assurance of payment from customers of the water department who have commenced a case under the United States Bankruptcy Code or from the bankruptcy trustees. 
(b)  The amount of the deposit required for single-family residential, commercial and industrial meters will be as follows: 

 
(c)  The amount of the deposit required as adequate assurance of payment from bankruptcy debtors or their trustees in bankruptcy shall be based on the rate of two periods of average billings. 
(d)  No deposit shall be required from customers who request the transfer of water service to a different address within the service area, provided that no action to terminate service has been taken at the customer's present service address within the previous 24 billing periods, and further provided that no payments are overdue at the customer's present service address. 
(e)  Deposits made on accounts shall be refunded, provided no action to terminate service has been taken, after five years of uninterrupted water service. 
(f)  When accounts are closed, the deposit collected for such accounts shall be applied to any unpaid balance. Any funds remaining for the account after unpaid balances are satisfied shall be refunded within 60 days without interest, or upon customer request, shall be transferred without interest to another account to serve as a deposit or a portion of the required deposit for such new account. 
(g)  Any deposit returned to the department with no forwarding address, or otherwise unclaimed within 12 months after the account to which it is credited is closed, shall be transferred from the water and sewer revenue fund to the water and sewage renewal and extension fund. 
(h)  There will be a nonrefundable charge of $15.00 applied to every account at the time it is established to cover administrative costs. Changing the name on the account at the customer's request shall be considered establishing an account. This charge will appear on the customer's first bill. 
(i)  For multiple-dwelling unit account, the deposit shall be $25.00 per living unit. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4004; Ord. No. 1995-12, 4-24-95; Ord. No. 2008-04(07-O-2586), §§ 1—3, 1-30-08) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that all unclaimed deposits will be handled in accordance with applicable local and state law. 
Sec. 154-114.1. - Establishment of water service. 
The commissioner may require proof of identity of each applicant and occupancy information sufficient to establish the identity of the consumer of water and sewer services. In addition, the commissioner may require tenant and/or property ownership information on each property served at the time of application regardless of whether the property owner is the occupant or consumer. No new account shall be established for customers with delinquent charges on any account in the name of such customers or for customers on any partial payment plan agreement until such charges are paid. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4004.1) 
Sec. 154-115. - Residential customers served through single meter. 
Use of sub-meters in multifamily or mixed use structures containing residential units and residential customers served through a single meter during construction. 
(1)  No water shall be supplied nor any building permit issued to any newly constructed multi-family residential building or structure or mixed use building or structure containing residential units unless the building or structure is built with either individual meters that measure water provided to each residential unit or private sub-unit meters owned and managed by the property owner that measure water provided to each residential unit with a utility owned master meter that measures the quantity of water to the master meter. This requirement shall not apply to those applications received by the bureau of buildings prior to July 1, 2009. 
(2)  Nothing in this Code section shall render the department of watershed management responsible for providing, owning, operating, or maintaining any sub-meter required under this Code section. For buildings with master meters required to install sub-meters under this Code section, the property owner shall be responsible for providing, owning, operating, and maintaining the sub-meters. 
(3)  Monthly water and sewer rates and charges applicable to a single account will be charged while under construction for structures that have more than one house, apartment or condominium living unit on one meter. As soon as any part of the building is occupied, water and sewer base charges will be applicable for each house, apartment or condominium living unit that may be occupied and monthly rates and charges for water consumption and sewer service will be computed based on each unit having used water within each consumption range of the adopted rate schedule. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9-4082, 9-7006; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 36, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2005-88, § 1, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2009-14 (09-O-0285), § 1, 3-24-09) 
Sec. 154-115.1. - Charge for notification of termination of service to residents of multiple dwelling units. 
Whenever it is necessary for the commissioner or designee to notify the residents of multiple dwelling units of pending termination of services due to nonpayment of water and sewer bills, a charge of $1.00 per dwelling unit will be assessed against the account in order to recover the associated costs incurred by the department. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4082.1) 
Sec. 154-116. - Installation of separate water meters for individual units of groups of single-family dwellings. 
(a)  Individual water meters for each living unit of groups of single-family dwellings served by a single water meter will be installed by the city, on request, after the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The owner of all individual living units served by a single meter must give written consent to the installation of individual water meters. 
(2)  The owner of each individual living unit must pay the cost of the meter and all installation costs in accordance with the city's fee schedule in force at the time of installation. 
(3)  Existing and proposed distribution piping and appurtenances must conform to the department of water design criteria and construction manual in force at the time of installation. 
(4)  Except as provided in this section, the meters and appropriate housing for the meters must be designed for installation in an existing city-owned street right-of-way. 
(5)  If existing city-owned rights-of-way are not suitable for the installation of individual meters, in addition to subsections (a)(1) through (a)(4) of this section, the following conditions must be met for the installation of individual meters on private property: 
a.  The owners of all individual living units shall grant easements to the city for meter installation within ten feet of the curbline of existing rights-of-way for water mains. 
b.  The easements shall comply with the specifications then in force of the department of water. 
c.  The owner of all individual living units shall sign an agreement indemnifying the city from any and all damage claims resulting from the installation, maintenance of and access to meters on private property. 
d.  The owner of each individual living premises shall sign a written acknowledgement that water lines between the meter and living unit and the living unit interior plumbing will be maintained by the owner and that cutoff valves must be installed by the owner on the discharge side of the meter box at or near the property line. 
e.  If required in lieu of dedicated streets, a 20-foot right-of-way centered on the water main shall be conveyed to the city, except that the commissioner of water may accept a narrower right-of-way where obstructions are involved. 
(b)  Water and sewer rates for individual units of groups of single-family dwellings for which individual meters are installed shall be in accordance with the rates set forth for single-family residences. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4083) 
Sec. 154-117. - Charges made to trailer parks. 
All water service charges made to trailer parks shall be uniform and shall be charged at the regular city water system rate on a one-unit basis for the amount of water used. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4066) 
Sec. 154-118. - Water and wastewater systems security surcharge. 
(a)  That the imposition of a surcharge shall be placed on all domestic, commercial, industrial and other users of the City of Atlanta Water and Wastewater System to pay for the cost to implement the security and infrastructure requirements as described in the Safe Drinking Water Act and Public Health Security and Bioterrorism Preparedness and Response Act. 
(b)  That for purpose of this section, the surcharge will be described as the "water and wastewater systems security surcharge." 
(c)  That the water and wastewater systems security surcharge shall be $0.15 per hundred cubic feet for all billing cycles beginning on and after January 1, 2004. Funds collected from the surcharge shall be deposited in a fund separate and distinct from other funds of the water and wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 2004-01, § 7, 1-9-04) 
Sec. 154-119. - Temporary use of water by contractors and others. 
(a)  Charges. Contractors and other persons may be supplied with water for temporary use according to the regular monthly rate of charges provided for water supply. They shall be required to deposit an amount equal to that charged for making water connections of various sizes as scheduled for these connections, the deposit to be held as a guaranty of the safety of the meter and other equipment owned by the city furnished such persons and for the payment of charges for water used through the meter. The applicant shall be charged for cost of making the tap, setting the meter and other expenses in connection therewith and for the removal of the meter and connections. 
(b)  Refund of deposit. Upon payment of all charges and the removal and discontinuance of service through the meter, the commissioner of the department of watershed management is authorized to refund the amount of the deposit without interest. 
(Code 1977, § 9-4063; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 35, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 154-120. - Nonpayment of bills. 
The department of watershed management and the treasury division of the department of finance will develop written policies and procedures for the billing, collection and cut-off procedures for the provision for water and sewer services. The policies and procedures developed must contain at least the following provisions: 
(1)  Upon the failure of any person to: (i) Pay any water bill assessment, advance payment or charge against any premises for which the person is responsible by the due date set forth in the bill; or (ii) To send a written notice of dispute in accordance with the instructions contained on the applicable bill, the person will be sent a notice that their service will be terminated without further notice and the commissioner of the department of watershed management are authorized to turn off and discontinue water service to the person and premises until the bill or charge is paid, and a charge fixed by the council will be made for each turnoff. Subject to O.C.G.A. § 36-60-17, the delinquent bill or charge shall be a lien on the property where the bill or charge was incurred. In no event will the termination of service be later than 30 days from the due date of the bill for monthly bills and 60 days for bi-monthly bills. 
(2)  A late fee of $5.00 or five percent of the total bill, whichever is greater, will be assessed on all water and sewer bills rendered that are not paid by the established due date on the bill. The bill rendered for the following billing cycle will contain the past due amount plus the $5.00 or five percent of the total bill, whichever is greater, late fee. 
(3)  The past due charges, late fee and any other appropriate charges must be paid in full before service is restored. Said late fees shall be deposited into fund, account, and center number 2J01 462601 B00001. 
(4)  The department of finance shall cause books recording all liens for unpaid water and sewer bills and charges to be prominently displayed for public inspection in the office where the chief financial officer keeps other lien information books and in the office where the general execution docket of the county wherein the delinquent property is located. 
(5)  Subject to O.C.G.A. § 36-60-17, the charge must be paid before water is turned on again unless the commissioner of the department of watershed management, in the commissioner's discretion, waives such charges. 
(6)  The commissioner of the department of watershed management or the commissioner's designee may authorize agreements, with the person responsible for the payment of water services, for an installment payment schedule not to exceed 12 months in order to alleviate the customer's financial burden caused by periods of high usage. 
(7)  The commissioner of the department of watershed management are authorized to turn off and discontinue water service to any property where the responsible party does not meet the agreed-upon payment schedule and make timely payments for current usage charges. 
(8)  Water and sewer revenues collected will be prorated between the water, sewer and industrial surcharge accounts on a percentage to total bill basis when received and recorded on the books. Any partial payments received shall be applied in the appropriate percentages to the water, sewer and industrial surcharge accounts based on each accounts pro rata share of the total water/sewer bill. All past due amounts from the previous billing periods must be paid in order to continue water service. All cutoff dates must be strictly adhered to and enforced. When calculating the application of the appropriate percentages to the water, sewer and industrial surcharge accounts on a partial payment, the methodology in the following hypothetical must used: 
a.  Total water/sewer/industrial surcharge bill = $1,000.00 comprised of $300.00 water, $600.00 sewer and $100.00 industrial surcharge; 
b.  Pro-rata allocation = water—30 percent + sewer—60 percent + industrial surcharge—Ten percent; 
c.  Total water/sewer/industrial surcharge bill collected = $500.00; 
d.  Allocate as follows: 
1.  Water (0.3 x $500.00 = $150.00); 
2.  Sewer (0.6 x $500.00 = $300.00); and 
3.  Industrial surcharge (0.1 x $500.00 = $50.00). 
(Code 1977, § 9-4072; Ord. No. 1998-87, § 38, 12-10-98; Ord. No. 2001-97, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 36, 8-29-06) 
Editor's note— The last sentence of subsection (a) has been editorially revised so as to be consistent with O.C.G.A. § 30-60-17, which reads as follows: 
(a) No public or private water supplier shall refuse to supply water to any single or multifamily residential property to which water has been furnished through the use of a separate water meter for each residential unit on application of the owner or new resident tenant of the premises because of the indebtedness of a prior owner, prior occupant, or prior lessee to the water supplier for water previously furnished to such premises. 
(b) For each new or current account to supply water to any premises or property, the public or private water supplier shall maintain a record of identifying information on the user of the water service and shall seek reimbursement of unpaid charges for water service furnished initially from the person who incurred the charges. 
(c) A public or private water supplier shall not impose a lien against real property to secure unpaid charges for water furnished unless the owner of such real property is the person who incurred the charges. 
(d) A public or private supplier of a gas, sewerage service or electricity shall not impose a lien against real property to secure unpaid charges for gas, sewerage service, or electricity unless the owner of such real property is the person who incurred the charges. 
Secs. 154-121—154-129. - Reserved. 
Sec. 154-130. - Care and conserve program. 
(a)  Findings. 
(1)  Authority. The City of Atlanta pursuant to the Article IX, § II, Paras. II and III, and Art. IX, §IV, Para. II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5, and the Atlanta City Charter § 1-102(C)(9) has the authority to provide and the responsibility of providing drinking water and wastewater service to its water and sewer customers both inside and outside the corporate, boundaries of the City of Atlanta and to fix rates, charges and fees for same. The provision of clean drinking water and continuous wastewater service promotes the safety, health and general welfare of the City of Atlanta and its inhabitants pursuant to the Atlanta City Charter § 1-102(b). 
(2)  Water conservation. The City of Atlanta finds that water is a vital resource that requires conservation to sustain adequate supplies for emergencies and future system needs as well as to protect water quality and the environment. Conservation of water supplies by various means is now required and encouraged by the United States of America through statutes such as 42 U.S.C. § 10302 and 42 U. S.C. § 6295; and the State of Georgia through Title 12, Chapter 5, Article 1; the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, et seq.; the. Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. 12-5-170, et seq.; the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District Act, O.C.G.A.§ 12-5-470, et seq.; and O.C.G.A.§ 8-2-1 et seq.; among others. To conserve its vital water resources, the government of the City of Atlanta shall establish programs that expand customer access to water conserving measures, fixtures and devices. 
(3)  Lifeline access to water and wastewater service. The City of Atlanta finds that it is standard practice throughout the United States for water and wastewater utilities to implement well-tailored programs that provide assurance of the availability of service to all customers, especially economically disadvantaged households. To assure lifeline access to water for economically disadvantaged customers, the government of the City of Atlanta shall establish programs that improve customer accessibility to the minimum quantity of water necessary to sustain life, safety, and health. 
(4)  Sustainable infrastructure. The City of Atlanta finds that operation of the City's drinking water and wastewater system in an efficient and economical manner and on a revenue-producing basis is necessary to sustain strong public water and wastewater infrastructure. The City of Atlanta further finds that programs that assist customers with conserving water through installation of water conserving devices and repair of leaks in service lines, as well as programs that otherwise facilitate lifeline access to water and wastewater service by providing limited bill payment assistance to qualified customers provide a direct and substantial benefit to the drinking water and wastewater system and are therefore reasonable and customary costs of operating and maintaining the City of Atlanta's drinking water and wastewater system because they: 
(i)  Retain customers; 
(ii)  Avoid costs of disconnection and collections; 
(iii)  Reduce bad debt expenses; 
(iv)  Further federal, state and City policy to conserve water resources upon which the City relies; 
(v)  Avoid or defer costly water supply enhancement projects and allow the City better leverage existing water resources; 
(vi)  Reduce the likelihood of sewage spills; and 
(vii)  Enhance the City's good will. 
Further, the City of Atlanta finds that all of the foregoing enhance the City of Atlanta's ability to operate the drinking water and wastewater system in an economical manner and on a revenue-producing basis and are reasonably incurred in connection with the operation and maintenance of such system and will result in the combined benefits of providing assurance of the availability of service to all customers, enabling ratepayers to remain connected throughout particularly challenging periods, and enhancing water use efficiency among low-income households. 
Further, the City of Atlanta finds that it is a national standard practice to fund conservation and affordability programs by combining system revenues (or receivable reductions) and local charitable contributions to fund program expenditures. Therefore, implementation of such programs will further the efficient and economical operation of the drinking water and wastewater system and are necessary expenses of operation and maintenance. Any benefit which may inure to private citizens in connection with or as a byproduct of the provision of these services is merely incidental to fulfilling the paramount public purposes served by such programs. When sufficient funds exist, system revenues may be utilized in part to fund conservation and affordability programs. 
(5)  Care and Conserve Program. The achievement of the policies and purposes described in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(4) require that the Mayor or his designee, the Commissioner of the Department of Watershed Management, be charged to create a Care and Conserve Program that may provide certain services for qualified low-income customers of City's drinking water and wastewater system that further the policies declared in this Code Section. These services may include installation of water conserving devices, leak repairs for water and sewer service lines, residential plumbing repairs; and bill payment assistance to qualified customers. 
(b)  Care and Conserve Program established. The City of Atlanta Care and Conserve Program is established for the purposes described in subsection (a), which shall include the provision of the following defined services for qualified low-income water and/or sewer customers of the City of Atlanta: installation of water conserving devices, leak repairs for water and server service lines, residential plumbing repairs, and bill payment assistance to qualified customers. 
(c)  Funding sources. The Care and Conserve Program may be funded through corporate donations, customer contributions, revenues generated from cell tower lease agreements governing the use of properties used as part of the water or sewer system under the purview of the Department of Watershed Management or revenues generated from any service line warranty program or other revenue sources where funds are so designated for the Care and Conserve Program and/or the Care and Conserve Trust Fund through appropriate legislative authorization; and further such water and sewer revenues of the City's drinking water and wastewater system, as such funds may be properly authorized in an approved budget or other legislative authorization. 
(d)  Annual Contribution to the Care and Conserve Program. The City may authorize and appropriate for the Care and Conserve Program such funds as may be designated in appropriate legislation at least annually from the authorized funding sources described in subsection (c). Approved funds shall constitute the City's annual contribution to the Care and Conserve Program, as a matching grant payable to the non-profit entity properly selected and awarded the HUD CDBG Grant. Should the HUD CDBG Grant not be awarded to a non-profit entity in any given calendar or fiscal year or if funds are not made available for the HUD CDBG Grant, the City may select and award funds from authorized City of Atlanta funding sources through a competitive grant selection process substantially similar to the selection process followed for the HUD CDBG Grant, which process shall be overseen by the Chief Financial Officer in connection with the Commissioner of the Department of Watershed Management, or their authorized designees. For purposes of this Section, "HUD CDBG Grant" means the annual selection, award and funding process for the Housing and Urban Development Community Development Block Grant for the Care and Conserve Program, which results in an agreement between the U.S. Housing and Urban Development, the grant recipient and the City of Atlanta, for the grant of certain federal grant funds to a non-profit entity to administer and provide services to City's qualified low-income water and/or sewer customers under the Care and Conserve Program ("HUD Contract"). 
(e)  Administration of the Care and Conserve Program. The Care and Conserve Program shall be administered by the non-profit entity selected and properly awarded the HUD CDBG grant or as may be otherwise selected by the City of Atlanta pursuant to subsection (d), which selection and award shall occur annually. The Care and Conserve Program administrator shall be required to comply with such program requirements provided in the grant selection process and all other procedures and program requirements as may be developed by the City of Atlanta in connection with its oversight and participation in the Care and Conserve Program. The HUD Contract shall govern the terms and conditions of the services to be provided by the grant recipient under the Care and Conserve Program, unless another agreement is executed with a grant recipient in the case that there is no HUD CDBG Grant. 
(f)  Care and Conserve Program requirements. The Commissioner of the Department of Watershed Management is authorized to oversee and manage on behalf of the City all aspects of the Care and Conserve Program, including the development of grant recipient criteria, program requirements, program processes and oversight and management of the grant recipient and its administration of the Care and Conserve Program service delivery as may be needed to ensure the Successful implementation of the Care and Conserve Program consistent with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-14(13-O-0119), § 1, 5-15-13) 
Secs. 154-131—154-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER CONSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Special assessments, ch. 134. 
Land development code reference— Wastewater service impact fees, § 9-3001 et seq. 
State Law reference— Specific grant of constitutional authority relative to stormwater and sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); acquisition and construction of sewer systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 154-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appurtenances means structures, devices and appliances, other than pipe or conduit, which are integral parts of sewer systems, such as manholes, catchbasins, drop inlets, headwalls, etc. 
Combined sewer means a sewer which carries both surface runoff and sewage. 
Commissioner means the commissioner of public works or the designated representative of the commissioner of public works. 
Contractor means the party performing work under this article. 
Cover means the vertical distance in feet and inches from the finished surface to the top of pipe. 
Culverts means that system of pipe and appurtenances necessary to convey water across roadways or other obstacles, as distinguished from a full system of storm sewers. 
Discharge means the quantitative outflow of water in million gallons per day, cubic feet per second or other volumetric flow rate from a pipe, channel, structure or drainage area. 
Domestic sewage means the water-carried waste products discharged from residences or commercial or business establishments, as distinguished from industrial waste. 
Dry sewers means sewer works provided but not yet in use due to no fault of the city. 
Effluent means the outflow of drainage water from a pipe, channel, structure or drainage area. 
Engineer means the owner's or developer's professional engineer registered in the state. 
Fill means any material that was placed by humans and not naturally deposited or any earth or other material, compacted or not compacted, that does not exhibit the characteristics of natural soils about it with regard to weight, density or erosion resistance. 
Floodplain high water means that elevation accepted by the commissioner as the anticipated flood level of a 100-year flood in the drainage area concerned. 
High water means that water elevation established by the commissioner as the estimated flood level of a reoccurrence interval established for particular types of development. 
House building sewer means the portion of the sewer line connecting the building or house to the city sewer. 
House connection means the extension of the house building sewer from the property line to the city sewer lateral in a city street. 
Improved channel means provisions made to stabilize stormwater ditches by the installation of city standard riprap or reinforced concrete or as directed by the commissioner. 
Industrial waste means the water-carried waste products resulting from a process of industry, manufacture or business or from the development of any natural resource. 
Inspector means the authorized representative of the commissioner and who is responsible for enforcement of this article. 
Live sewers means those pipes and appurtenances conveying sewage or industrial wastes. 
Private sewer means a sewer located on private property not serving the community at large and for which the city does not have an executed and recorded easement for the purpose of providing city maintenance. 
Public sewer means a sewer serving a city facility or located on city property or located within a legally executed and recorded easement for providing maintenance of the sewer. 
Pumping facilities means those facilities designed and constructed to pump sewage or industrial waste from one elevation to another. 
Runoff means that quantity of water generated by rainfall within a given area which moves across the land surface as flowing water. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and from which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are excluded. 
Sewage means the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and commercial and industrial establishments. 
Sewage treatment means the necessary processing of sewage prior to its discharge. 
Sewer specifications means sewer specifications for work by contractors and developers as furnished by the commissioner. 
Sewer system means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Standard sections means those typical drawings issued by the commissioner from time to time as a supplement to this article. 
Storm sewer means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and contained polluted industrial wastes. 
Stormwater means that water caused by rainfall. 
Streets means those streets identified in section 15-06.001 of this Code. 
Structures means those appurtenances associated with sewer works that may be required in this article and as indicated on applicable standard sections. 
Surface drainage means that water that results from rainfall and that flows away from an area on the ground or pavement, including groundwater. 
Swale means any defined depression or restricted alteration of the land to control and direct surface drainage. 
Tributary population means the number of persons indicated as residing within a given area. The indication of population may have many sources. 
Vehicular traffic means traffic other than pedestrian which might cross over the sewer easement. 
Velocity dissipator means those devices constructed at the discharge end of sewers to reduce the velocity of flowing water. 
Wetlands means those areas defined by federal and/or state law as wetlands. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3129) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 154-142. - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
An ordinance of the city providing rules and regulations governing private development of sanitary or storm sewers, effective February 1, 1967, is incorporated in this article as if set out at length in this article, and a copy of the ordinance shall be kept on file in the office of the municipal clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 9-5061) 
Sec. 154-143. - Administration. 
(a)  All work of laying down or constructing sewers or drains shall be done under the direction of the commissioner. The commissioner shall furnish to the council, when requested, information and advice as to the necessities of any particular locality for sewers, the kind of sewers that may be desirable, with estimates of cost and plans and profiles, and such other like information that may be necessary and proper. 
(b)  Construction of sewers and provision of sewer service in areas where no sewers exist may be considered on petition of affected property owners or where in the judgment and discretion of the council the public health and good of the city so require. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9-3141, 9-3144) 
Sec. 154-144. - Ordinance for construction. 
The construction of all sewers and the assessment for the construction shall be provided for by ordinance. After the first reading of an ordinance providing for a sewer, a notice of the introduction shall be published in one or more of the daily papers of the city; the notice shall contain a statement of the line along which the proposed sewer is to be laid and a statement of the general character, material and size of the sewer. The notice shall be published at least ten days before the adoption of the ordinance, and the ordinance may be adopted at the next meeting after the notice has been published. Substantial compliance with this section as to notice shall be sufficient. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3142) 
Sec. 154-145. - Plans and specifications generally. 
(a)  Submission; permits. 
(1)  Applicability. This article is applicable to sanitary and storm sewers eight inches in diameter and larger, together with associated house connections. Extensions of the existing combined sewer system shall not be permitted. This article is supplemented for smaller size pipe by the city's plumbing code and falls under its jurisdiction. 
(2)  City approval prior to permit issuance. It shall be mandatory that all appropriate departments and bureaus of the city government ensure that this article is met prior to permit issuance. 
(3)  Approval of plans. Upon approval by the commissioner of plans and specifications submitted by the developer, the city will issue a permit for the work so approved. Permit approval may be withheld where downstream problems exist until the problems are addressed to the satisfaction of the commissioner. No work is to be started prior to permit authorization. Necessary changes made to plans subsequent to approval and permit issuance will be indicated on revised plans submitted and the permit corrected. 
(4)  Preparation of engineering material. Engineering material for public sewers submitted under this article shall be prepared by a professional engineer competent in the design of sewer systems. 
(5)  Copies submitted for approval. Four copies of all plans, profiles and specifications relating to storm or sanitary sewers and other drainage facilities shall be submitted for approval. 
(6)  Preconstruction conference. A conference with contractors and developers and various governmental departments may be called when deemed necessary by any party concerned. 
(7)  Permit and related requirements. 
a.  Permits, see section 154-147. 
b.  Assessments, connection fees and recovery of fines, see section 154-147. 
c.  Inspection fees, see section 154-147. 
d.  Inspection notification and procedures, see section 154-147. 
e.  Subdivisions, see part 15 of this Code. 
(8)  Additional requirements. All sewer work covered by this article shall include but not be limited to: 
a.  Current city business license for an appropriate type of work. 
b.  Submittal of a three-year maintenance bond set for that portion of the sewer contract for which the sewers will be maintained by the city. The bond shall represent 33 percent of the value of the installed sewer where a television inspection which is satisfactory to the commissioner has been submitted. In lieu thereof, the commissioner may accept a bond representing 100 percent of the value of the installed sewer. 
c.  Submittal of permanent storm and sanitary sewer maintenance easements for sewers which are to be maintained by the city. The easements are to provide a width as determined by the commissioner. Easements for off-site sewer construction shall be recorded before sewer construction commences on any project. On-site easements shall be recorded in the county property records prior to final approval. 
d.  No building construction will be allowed within the easement of any existing or proposed sewer or so close to the easement that soil bearing loads of the proposed structure are imposed, unless special permission is obtained from the commissioner. 
(b)  Recovery of fines from spillage. Pursuant to state law, fines due to spillage from sewers may be recovered from the property owner responsible for the spillage. Further, any repair costs for such sewer shall be charged against the owner by the commissioner and collected by the chief financial officer. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3130) 
Sec. 154-146. - Contents of plans and specifications. 
(a)  General layout. The general plans for sewers shall include a suitable title and name of the project, subdivision or institution; its location; district, land lot and unit and intended use; the scale in feet; a graphical scale; the north point; the date; the name and signature of the party designing the system and the imprint of the party's professional seal, certificate number or registration number. 
(1)  Scale and size. General layout and profile scales and structural and/or architectural drawing scales shall be distinguished. The scale for general plans should not be less than 20 feet and/or greater than 100 feet to the inch. 
(2)  Notations. The lettering and figures on the plans should be of appropriate size of distinct outline. Surface elevations should be placed preferably just outside street lines opposite their respective position. The benchmark used should be indicated. For large sets of drawings, an index to the sheets and sections shall be provided on or near the cover sheet. 
(b)  Geological features. Existing or proposed streets and all stream or water surfaces shall be clearly shown. The elevation of all proposed sewer inverts shall be clearly and distinctly written close to the manhole, parallel with the sewer line, and expressed to the nearest 0.01 foot. All elevations used will be based on USC&GS benchmark datum. 
(c)  Existing facilities. The following existing facilities shall be indicated: 
(1)  Sewers. The location, type, size, length, slope and direction of flow of all existing sewers shall be indicated sufficiently so that adaptability to the proposed system and future expansion may be readily elevated. 
(2)  Water supplies and facilities. The location of water supplies, water treatment plants, reservoirs or other structures, existing and proposed, will be indicated. 
(d)  Proposed facilities. The following proposed facilities shall be indicated: 
(1)  Sewers. The location of all proposed sewers, with the size, pipe, type, class, grade, length and direction of flow, shall be indicated. Some numbering and/or lettering system shall be used to distinguish the manholes on the layout and the profile for adequate identification. 
(2)  Detailed plans. 
a.  Generally. White prints with black or blue lines are acceptable. Drawings must be legible, with scales as indicated in subsection (a) of this section. For modifications or extensions to an existing system or pumping station, the drawings should distinguish clearly the new facilities from the existing facilities and clearly indicate the connection and relation thereto. 
b.  Sewers. Detail plans for sewers should show the following: 
1.  Plan and profile. Show plan and profile drawing along the route of all sewers to be constructed. The plan and profile should indicate all special features such as inverted siphons, extra-strength pipe, concrete encasements and sewer bridges. All stream crossings and sewer outlets should be shown on the profiles, including the elevations of the streambed and the normal and 100-year highwater levels. Horizontal scale of profiles should be limited to not more than 50 feet to the inch and vertical scales be limited to not more than ten feet to the inch. Indicate both scales clearly on the profile. All known structures both above and below ground which might interfere with the proposed system should be shown, particularly such items as gas mains, water mains, storm drains and nature of street surfacing. Where work proposed is of a minor nature, profiles may be omitted at the option of the commissioner. 
2.  Details. Distinguishing numbers and/or letters for manhole identification, size of sewer, surface and sewer invert elevations at structures and distance and grade of all sewers between the adjacent structures will be shown on the profiles. Both invert and structure top elevation will be shown. Plans must show location and surface elevations of developed abutting buildings except where otherwise noted on plans. 
3.  Appurtenances. Include details of all appurtenances such as standard manholes, drop manholes and inverted siphons, as well as of all special appurtenances and structures such as regulators, floodgates and sewer bridges. These detailed plans should be drawn to such a scale as will indicate clearly the nature of the design of each of the structures and its equipment. Dimensions, elevations, capacities and explanatory notes should be appropriately marked so as to make details of the appurtenances readily intelligible. 
4.  Cross sections. Detailed plans shall be included for all sewer or grading cross sections. Details of cradling and encasement shall be included. 
5.  Flooding. The elevation of the 100-year flood high water will be indicated on the general plan and on the profile of sewers located within floodprone areas. Sewers will not be permitted in floodplain areas without special provisions. 
6.  Test borings. Location and logs of test borings or seismic studies for determination of soil conditions, when required, will be shown on the plans. 
(3)  Final (as-built) plan. 
a.  Contents. The final sewer plat required under this section shall consist of a revised and corrected plan and profile in a Mylar-reproducible format containing the information outlined in this section with the further provision that the final plat shall reflect as-built locations of facilities determined by review or resurvey after construction and shall be tied to the state plans coordinate system. The size of the plans will be 23 inches by 36 inches. All drawing sheets in a set for a proposed project shall be of the same size. 
b.  Certificate. The final sewer plat will also contain a certificate signed by the licensed professional engineer responsible for the design containing essentially the following statement: 
"I certify that the data reflected on this drawing has been verified in the field and to the best of my knowledge is accurate and correct and in general compliance with existing rules and regulations governing development of sanitary or storm sewers in the City of Atlanta. 
_____ Signature (Seal)" 
(Code 1977, § 9-3131) 
Sec. 154-147. - Design criteria. 
(a)  Generally. The requirements in this section have been prepared with an attempt to give full consideration to general conditions in the city. The requirements are established to represent the criteria upon which approval of designs will be considered and given. Any design that includes materials other than those recommended, grades less than the listed minimum and like variances from accepted practice must be supported by appropriate engineering study and approved by the commissioner. 
(b)  Design period. In general, sewer systems should be designed for the estimated future tributary population to 50 years. 
(c)  Materials. Materials shall be selected by reference to the city's rules and regulations. The material selected should be adapted to local conditions, special consideration being given to the character of industrial wastes, possibilities of septicity, exceptionally heavy loads, abrasion, the necessity of reducing the number of joints, soft foundations and similar problems. 
(d)  Location. Sewers shall be constructed so as to be remote from public water supply wells, other water supply sources and structures. Water pipe and sanitary sewer lines shall not be laid in the same trench. A lateral separation of at least ten feet and for crossings a vertical separation of not less than 18 inches should be maintained. If this is impractical, special provisions should be made. 
(e)  Interconnections. No physical connection between a potable water supply system and a sewer, sewage treatment plant or appurtenances thereto which might permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable water supply shall be permitted. 
(f)  Sizes, slopes, depths and velocity of flow. 
(1)  Size. The minimum allowable size for any sanitary sewer governed by this article other than house sewer connections shall be eight inches in diameter. 
(2)  Slopes. All sewers should be designed and constructed with hydraulic slopes sufficient to give mean velocities, when flowing half full, of not less than 2.5 feet per second, based on Manning's formula. Sewer velocities should be determined using coefficients of friction ("n") appropriate for the pipe material specified. 
(3)  Increasing size. At manholes where the sewer is increased in size or at points where a smaller sewer connects into a larger sewer, the crown elevations of the pipes shall be notched at a minimum to maintain the same energy gradient. 
(4)  Alignment. Sewers up to and including 30-inch diameter must be laid with uniform slope and alignment between manholes. On larger sizes, horizontal curves may be permitted. 
(g)  Basis of design. 
(1)  Generally. The design analysis to determine the required capacities of sanitary sewers will consider the following factors: maximum hourly quantity of domestic sewage and industrial wastes and groundwater infiltration or the 50-year design period. 
(2)  New systems. New sewer systems will be designed on the basis of an average per capita daily flow of not less than 100 gallons of sewage. On this basis the lateral sewers will be designed with capacities when running full of not less than four times the average flow. Trunk and outfall sewers must have an appropriate peak factor under the same conditions of not less than 2.5 times the average flow. Special allowance should be made in each case for sewage or water from industrial plants. 
(h)  Manholes. 
(1)  Location. Manholes shall be installed at the end of each eight-inch or larger sanitary sewer, at every change in grade, except as indicated in subsection (f)(4) of this section, change in size or alignment, at all intersections and at distances not greater than 400 feet for sewers of 15 inches in diameter or less and 500 feet for sewers 18 inches to 30 inches. Greater spacing may be permitted in larger sewers and those carrying treated effluents with approval of the commissioner. 
(2)  Drop manholes. Inside drop manholes are permitted for drops of up to four vertical feet for eight-inch through 12-inch diameter pipe where special filleted inverts with reinforced concrete bottom are provided. For drops greater than four feet, city standard outside drop manholes shall be used. All manholes will have a shaped rowlock, brick invert or an alternative invert if approved by the commissioner. Standard manhole sections will be used if the elevation difference between the manhole invert and the incoming sewer invert is less than 36 inches, in which case the invert will be filleted to create a channel which will prevent solids depositing in the manhole. 
(3)  Diameter. See applicable standards. 
(4)  Materials and watertightness. Manholes will be constructed to city standards and will be waterproofed where groundwater conditions are unfavorable. Special manhole covers are required to prevent flooding, when ordered by the commissioner. Manholes will have city standard castings and steps throughout. 
(5)  Flow channel. The manhole floor shall have a flow channel made to conform in shape and carrying capacity to that of the sewers, as indicated on the applicable standard section. 
(6)  Top elevation. Top elevation will conform to street grade and slope. Manholes outside the paved roadway shall be three feet higher than the ground elevation unless otherwise permitted by the commissioner. The developer is responsible for any final adjustment. 
(i)  Inverted siphons. Inverted siphons will have at least two barrels with minimum pipe size of six inches. Necessary flushing and maintenance appurtenances will be provided. The manholes will have adequate clearances for rodding, and the inlet and outlet details must be arranged so that normal flow is diverted to one barrel and so that either barrel may be taken out of service for cleaning. In general, sufficient head should be provided and pipe sizes selected to secure velocities of at least three feet per second at average flows. Siphons will be used only when approved by the commissioner. 
(j)  Force mains. Force mains will be allowed only with the permission of the commissioner. Installation, design and material specifications shall be approved by the commissioner. 
(k)  Depth. 
(1)  Sanitary sewers shall be located with a minimum of three feet of cover in areas not subject to vehicular traffic and a minimum of six feet of cover under areas designated for vehicular traffic. Specific exceptions to this subsection may be made where special material or bedding is provided. 
(2)  Documentation of soil compaction tests meeting city standards shall be submitted to the commissioner for approval. 
(l)  House connections. 
(1)  House connections in new developments will be extended one joint (three feet) beyond the property side of the sidewalks at a location selected to best serve each property. A city standard cleanout shall be provided at the property line. All house connection extensions will be properly sealed prior to backfilling. 
(2)  The house connections where provided shall be accurately located in the field by the owner's engineer, who shall submit an acceptable plat in two copies indicating the location, along with an affidavit by the owner's engineer confirming such locations. 
(3)  Prior to the use of any house connection provided in the metropolitan sewer system, all provisions of the city's plumbing code shall be met. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3132(a)—(e), (g)—(m)) 
Sec. 154-148. - Stormwater. 
(a)  Standards for calculations. Acceptable standards for calculating stormwater runoff are found in the city's rules and regulations for developers. 
(b)  Assessments. Assessments for installations of storm sewers are found in the city's rules and regulations for developers. 
(c)  Design period. Consideration of 50-year development trends shall be applied to drainage area studies for design purposes. 
(d)  Materials. Storm sewers in the city shall be constructed with materials meeting city specifications. 
(e)  Location. 
(1)  The locations of all stormwater structures will be accurately shown on plans submitted for approval. Permanent maintenance easements will be indicated to provide a width as determined by the commissioner. Easements must be properly drawn and conveyed to the city prior to final approval of any development. 
(2)  Building or grading over any sewer shall first be approved by the commissioner. The commissioner shall examine the application, and, if satisfied that the proposed work will not place an excessive load on the sewer, injure the sewer or not prevent reasonable access for repair and maintenance or harmfully affect the drainage system of the city nor any of its streets and sidewalks, the commissioner may issue a permit to do so. 
(3)  All storm sewers shall terminate at a point of discharge acceptable to the commissioner. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3133) 
Sec. 154-149. - Construction and connection of sewer outside city. 
(a)  Generally. All sewers constructed outside the city, to be connected with the city's sewer system, shall be laid under the direction and control of the commissioner, and the material and work shall be approved by the commissioner. 
(b)  Permit required. No property outside the city shall be connected with the city's sewer system without a permit. 
(c)  Application for permit; filing of plat. When the owner of any property outside of the city desires to make connection to the city's sewer system, the owner shall make a written application to the commissioner and shall file with the application a detailed plat showing the location and dimensions of the property and the location and size of the sewer to be connected. 
(d)  Consent of county required. No permit shall be granted unless and until the owner making the application has procured the consent of the county in which the property to be connected to the sewer lies, under the terms and conditions of contracts which have been entered into with such county by the city. 
(e)  Fee for connection. The commissioner shall charge a fee established by the council for each connection to a sewer outside the city to cover the cost of the work making the connection. 
(f)  Excavation and refilling. All excavation and refilling shall be done by the person making application for the connection. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9-3152, 9-3153) 
Sec. 154-150. - Maintenance of sewers outside city. 
(a)  Duty of property owner. Sewers outside the city, constructed by private owners for the use of their property, which are connected to a city sewer shall be maintained by the private owners. The owner shall make all necessary repairs or do work necessary for the maintenance of the sewer within 48 hours after notice of the necessity therefor is given by the commissioner. 
(b)  Authority of city. If the work is not done within the time allowed, the commissioner shall make such repairs as may be necessary to protect the city's sewer system from any damage and shall charge the cost thereof to the property owner. Further, the city may recover fines resulting from spillages pursuant to state law. 
(c)  Effect of nonpayment by owner. When the owner fails or refuses to pay the cost of those repairs, as required by subsection (b) of this section, the commissioner shall give the owner notice of a hearing in regard to cutting off the owner's water connection to the city water system, if it is connected with the city's water system. After hearing, if no justification is shown for not paying such cost, the water shall be cut off until the cost and the charges for cutting off and again turning on the water shall have been fully paid. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3154) 
Sec. 154-151. - Building over or filling over city sewers. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to build over, cover or fill over a city sewer without first obtaining written permission from the commissioner. 
(b)  Application for permit. Application for a building permit shall be in writing. A current plat of the applicant's property, showing the location and the extent of the proposed building or proposed structure, fill, depth, size and type of sewer over which the fill, building or structure is to be placed; any openings or drains which may be affected by the fill; and the topography of the property to be affected before and after the filling may be included in the commissioner's review. If application is made to construct over a sewer in addition to the information required in this subsection, the applicant must submit plans showing the proposed method for providing adequate protection to the sewer to ensure that the proposed building or structure will not cause harm to the sewer. The commissioner shall examine the application, and, if satisfied that the proposed work will not place an excessive load on the sewer, injure the sewer in any way or not prevent reasonable access for repair and maintenance, or harmfully affect the drainage system of the city or any of its streets or sidewalks, the commissioner may approve the proposal upon the execution of an indemnification and hold-harmless agreement between the applicant and the city. 
(c)  Inspection of work. The work shall be subject to the inspection of the commissioner. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3155) 
Sec. 154-152. - Connection of surface water drains to sanitary sewers. 
No drain for surface water shall be connected with any sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3156) 
Sec. 154-153. - Placing obstruction in stream or drain. 
(a)  Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction in any stream, natural drain or waters of the city in such a manner as to divert, decrease or obstruct the natural flow of water therein. 
(b)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, to lay or extend any pipe or any type of structure in any stream or natural drain in the city in such a manner as to divert, decrease or obstruct the natural flow of the water therein without first obtaining the written permission of the commissioner. 
(c)  Application for permit. Application for the permit shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a plat showing the property of the applicant, location and topography of the property to be affected. The commissioner shall examine the application, and, if satisfied as to the location, size and material of the proposed obstruction and convinced that it will not harmfully affect adjacent upstream and downstream properties, the drainage system of the city or any of its streets or sidewalks, the commissioner may approve the proposal. 
(d)  Inspection of work. The work shall be subject to the inspection of the commissioner. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3157) 
Sec. 154-154. - Obstructing catchbasins, drop inlets and other entrances to sewers and drains. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or otherwise place grass, leaves, trash, rubbish, shrubberies, trees, tree limbs or any other type of debris or refuge in, on, in front of or beside the entrances to catchbasins, curb inlets, drop inlets or any other entrances and exits to the city's sewers and drains. It shall also be unlawful to deposit or otherwise place or cause to be placed such debris and refuse in curbs, gutters, flumes, swales and any other type of drain so as to stop, restrict, impede or otherwise affect the flow of water therein. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to blow, rake or deposit refuge of any type into a public street as a means of disposal. 
(c)  Penalties for any person violating this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  First offense. A fine of $250.00. 
(2)  Second offense. A fine of $500.00 and confinement in the city jail for a period not to exceed ten days. 
(3)  Third offense. A fine of $1,000.00 and confinement in the city jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3158; Ord. No. 2013-08(98-O-0817), § 1, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 154-155. - Private decentralized wastewater systems prohibited. 
(a)  A "private decentralized wastewater system" means any privately owned wastewater collection, treatment, or disposal system: 
(1)  Serving more than one residential lot or business; or 
(2)  That has a daily flow in excess of 2,000 gallons per day; or 
(3)  That transfers flows between more than one parcel or tract of land. 
(b)  The construction, permitting or maintenance of a private decentralized wastewater system is prohibited within the boundaries of the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2011-13(11-O-0494), § 1, 5-11-11) 
Secs. 154-156—154-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ASSESSMENTS 

Sec. 154-166. - Lien against property. 
The amount of assessments for sewers shall be a lien on abutting property as provided by the Charter and related state laws of the city. Assessments shall be paid in full prior to connection. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3159) 
Sec. 154-167. - Amount where sewer laid in street; right of abutting property owners to connect. 
(a)  If a sewer is constructed by or under the authority of the city in any street, except those sewers designated as outfall sewers, the cost thereof shall be assessed upon the property and estates respectively abutting on the street, on each side of the street in which the sewer is laid or constructed. The cost shall be calculated based on the time and materials required for the installation and inspection. 
(b)  Each lot or parcel of property abutting on the sewer shall be assessed according to its frontage on the street. In consideration of the payment of the assessment, the owners of the property and estates shall have the right to connect their drains from the abutting property and estates for the discharge of sewage into the sewer upon payment of the rates for connection then in effect and subject to availability of sewer capacity and the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  When a property owner or lessee requests that the city construct a connection to an existing sewer, the charge for such connection shall be assessed at the rate established by ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3160; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 14, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 154-168. - Payment for privilege of connecting to sewer when assessment not made. 
Where a lot or parcel of property which has a city sewer in front of or abutting the lot or parcel to which the lot or parcel has never been connected and for which no assessment by the city for the cost of the sewer or the use of the city sewer system and the owner desires to connect to the city sewer system, the property owner shall be required to pay to the city an amount equal to the sewer assessment rate per front foot then in effect for each front foot of the lot or parcel of property so connected for the privilege of connecting the lot or parcel to the city sewer system. This amount is to be paid in advance of connection but after work is authorized, and shall be collected by the municipal revenue collector. 
In addition to the payment of the assessment, the property owner shall also be required to pay all other sewer fees then in effect, including but not limited to installation, connection and inspection fee, which are then in effect. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3162; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 16, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 154-169. - Payment when pumping required for service. 
If residential, apartment, commercial or industrial buildings are constructed at an elevation which is too low to be served by gravity flow into the sewer for which assessment will be made, the owners of the residential, apartment, commercial or industrial buildings shall pay the assessment, and when required to connect onto the sewer the owners shall install sewage pumping facilities to make use of the sewer. The amount of assessment shall be the same as that provided for in section 154-167. Minimum pumping system specifications may be found in the city's rules and regulations for sewers. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3164) 
Sec. 154-170. - Report and record of completion of work. 
When any sewer construction is completed, for which an assessment lien attached in favor of the city, the completion of the sewer shall be reported immediately to the chief financial officer by the commissioner of public works, and the chief financial officer shall cause an entry of that completion to be promptly entered in a book provided for this recorded information, which book shall be made available to the public. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3168) 
Sec. 154-171. - Charges for additional connections. 
Whenever it is necessary to install an additional sewer connection in front of any property, the cost thereof and any additional assessments shall be paid by the property owner before it is installed by the commissioner. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3171) 
Sec. 154-172. - Conditions for construction of private sewers. 
Any permit for the construction of a private sewer or for connection therewith shall be granted and accepted upon condition that thereafter, when the city constructs a public sewer, the abutting property shall be subject to assessment in the manner provided by the Charter and related state laws, this Code and other ordinances of the city, without regard to the existence of or connection with the private sewer. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3174) 
Sec. 154-173. - Charges for sewers laid by developer for use of development. 
(a)  Established. Where sewers are laid by a developer for the use of the developer's development, fees shall be collected in accordance with the schedule of fees and charges established by the council from time to time, copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the municipal clerk and the commissioner. 
(b)  Inspection fees. All sewer work, both storm and sanitary, grading and drainage improvements performed by private contract for a private development approved on a permit by the commissioner shall be subject to inspection fees established by the council. 
(Code 1977, § 9-3175) 
Secs. 154-174—154-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Bureau of pollution control, app. IV, § 52. 
Cross reference— Clean city commission, § 2-1876 et seq.; environment, ch. 74; health and sanitation, ch. 86. 
Land development code reference— Plumbing code, § 8-2141 et seq. 
State Law reference— Specific grant of constitutional authority relative to stormwater and sewage collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); acquisition and construction of sewer systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 154-196. - Definitions 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  Act or the Act : The federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et. seq., as it may be amended. 
(2)  Ammonia (NH 3 ): A colorless gaseous alkaline compound of nitrogen and hydrogen that is very soluble in water. 
(3)  Authorized representative of industrial user : 
a.  If the industrial user is a corporation, authorized representative shall mean the president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation. 
b.  If the industrial user is a partnership or a sole proprietorship, the authorized representative shall mean a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
c.  If the industrial user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility, the authorized representative shall mean the director or highest designated official overseeing the activities of the facility. 
d.  The commissioner may allow the individuals described in subparagraphs (a) and (b) above to designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, and if the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company. 
(4)  Biochemical oxygen demand: The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20° Celsius expressed in terms of weight or concentration (milligrams per liter, mg/1). 
(5)  Building sewer: A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the water pollution control facilities. 
(6)  Bypass: The diversion (both intentional and accidental) of wastestreams from any portion of any pretreatment system. 
(7)  Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
(8)  Chemical oxygen demand: A measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water and wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen in milligram per liter by weight consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test. 
(9)  City: The City of Atlanta, Georgia. 
(9.1)  Collection system: Sewers, force mains, pump stations, ejector stations and other equipment for the conveyance of wastewater to a publicly-owned treatment works. 
(10)  Combined sewer: A sewer receiving both storm water and wastewater. 
(11)  Commissioner: The commissioner of the department of watershed management or his/her duly authorized assistant, agent, or representative, or such person as the mayor may designate to carry out the functions set forth herein. 
(12)  Compliance: The level of conformity with all applicable regulations. There are three levels of compliance: 
a.  Consistent compliance. 
b.  Infrequent noncompliance. 
c.  Significant noncompliance. 
(13)  Composite sample: The accumulation of a number of individual samples over a period of time, so taken as to represent the nature of the wastewater. 
(14)  Constituents: The combination of particles, chemicals, or conditions which exist in the wastewater. 
(15)  Customer: Every person who is responsible for contracting (expressly or implicitly) with the city in obtaining, having or using water or wastewater connections with, or sewer taps to the city wastewater system and in obtaining, having or using water or other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater through said system. The term "customer" shall also include illicit users of the water or wastewater systems. 
(15.1)  Dilute: To make any pollutant, pollution, waste or wastewater thinner or weaker by adding water or any other substance. 
(16)  Direct discharge: The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Georgia. 
(17)  Domestic wastewater: That wastewater discharged into the wastewater system from domestic sources such as toilets, washing machines, dishwashers, sinks, showers, and bathtubs from normal household usage. 
(18)  Effluent: The treated flow discharged from a water pollution control facility. 
(19)  Environmental Protection Agency or EPA: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used to designate the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
(20)  Existing source: Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed Categorical Pretreatment Standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act. 
(21)  Flammable: As defined by existing City of Atlanta Fire Department regulations. 
(22)  Floatable oil and grease: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate from wastewater by treatment in an American Petroleum Institute (API) type oil/water gravity separator. 
(23)  Food processing industry: Any user whose primary business is the preparation of food products. Users are identified as having SIC Codes in the range 2011-2099, including but not limited to baking products, canned products, dairy products, grain mill products, sugar and confectionery products and meat products. 
(24)  Food service establishment: Any restaurant, eatery, food caterer, cafeteria, or other institution processing and serving food. 
(25)  Grab sample: A sample which is taken from a wastewater stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the wastewater stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
(26)  Grease and oil: The group of substances with similar physical characteristics, which includes fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils and any other material that can be solvent extracted and is not volatilized during evaporation of the solvent. 
(27)  Grit: Matter consisting of sand, gravel, cinders, or other heavy solid materials that has settling velocities or specific gravity's greater than those of organic putrescible solids normally encountered in domestic wastewater. 
(28)  Health department: The Fulton County Board of Health, or any successor agency. 
(29)  Holding tank waste: Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks. 
(30)  Industrial user: A source of discharge of industrial wastewater into water pollution control facilities. 
(30.1)  Indirect discharge: The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater to the publicly owned treatment works (POTWs) of the city. 
(31)  Industrial wastewater: Wastewater in which the solid, liquid and gaseous wastes from process of industry, manufacture, trade or business, or from the development or recovery of any natural resource (as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes) is found. 
(32)  Industrial waste surcharge: The additional service charge assessed against industrial users in the city whose wastewater characteristics exceed established limits for COD, TKN, and TSS. 
(33)  Infiltration: Groundwater and surface water which leaks into the wastewater system through cracked pipes, joints, manholes or other openings. 
(34)  Inflow: Water that flows into the wastewater system from the surface, streams, roof drains, down spouts, or other such sources. 
(35)  Influent: The wastewaters arriving at the water pollution control treatment facility. 
(36)  Interference: An inhibition or disruption of operation or maintenance of the water pollution control facilities, city wastewater treatment processes or operations, or sludge processes, use or disposal: 
a.  Which is a cause of or significantly contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation); or 
b.  Which causes or significantly contributes to an increase in the discharge of pollutants above normal conditions or an increase in the cost of operation of the POTW above normal conditions; or 
c.  Which causes or significantly contributes to the prevention of sludge use or disposal by the city in accordance with the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, and any permits or regulations issued thereunder. Section 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1345), the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the federal Clean Air Act, and the federal Toxic Substances Control Act. An industrial user significantly contributes to such interference or prevention of sludge use or disposal in accordance with above-cited authorities whenever such user: 
1.  Discharges a daily pollutant loading in excess of that permitted by the provisions of this article or by federal or state law; 
2.  Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature or constituents from a user's average discharge; or 
3.  Knows or has reason to know that the user's discharge, along or in conjunction with discharge from other sources, would result in a NPDES permit violation by the city or would prevent sludge use or disposal in accordance with the above-cited authorities as they apply to the city's selected method of sludge management. 
(36.1)  Maintenance, operations and management ("MOM") program: A program for the efficient and proper operation and maintenance of the sewer collection system and includes, but is not limited to, a collection system contingency and emergency plan, an operations plan, a grease management plan, a maintenance management plan and a training program for appropriate personnel of the department of public works. 
(37)  Medical waste: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, cultures and dialysis wastes. 
(38)  Metered water: The amount of water used by the customer as measured by a city water meter, or other approved metering device. 
(39)  Milligrams per liter (mg/1): The units for expressing weight per unit volume and when multiplied by the factor 8.34, mg/l is equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. For a water solution, mg/l is equivalent to parts per million (ppm) on a weight basis. 
(40)  National pollutant discharge elimination system permit: A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342). 
(41)  New source: Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
1.  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (41)(b), or (c) of this section but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
2.  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
d.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
e.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
(42)  Noncontact cooling water: Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product or to which the only pollutant added is heat. Examples are water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration. 
(43)  Nondomestic user: Any user of the Atlanta water pollution control facilities who discharges wastewater from a structure other than a residential unit. 
(44)  Nondomestic wastewater: The wastewater generated from nondomestic users as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
(45)  Pass-through: Any discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
(46)  Person: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or its legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities. 
(47)  pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. A measurement of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance expressed on a scale of 0—14 standard units, with 0 being highly acidic and 14 being highly alkaline. 
(48)  Pollutant: Any dredged material, spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, or agricultural waste discharge into water. 
(49)  Pollution: The man-made or man-induced detrimental alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water or soil. 
(50)  Pretreatment or treatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties to a less harmful state, prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the wastewater treatment system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or by process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR § 403.6(d). 
(51)  Publicly-owned treatment works (POTW): A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1292), including any devices or systems designed, intended, or used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of wastewater. 
(52)  Pumpage: The wastes removed from a container by pumping. 
(53)  Receiving waters: Those waters into which wastewaters are discharged. 
(54)  Sanitary sewer: A sewer which carries wastewater from which storm, surface, and ground waters are excluded. 
(55)  Self-monitoring: Monitoring by an industrial user of the regulated discharge of that industrial user at the expense of the user. 
(56)  Septage: Any wastes removed from a portable toilet, chemical toilet, holding tank, or septic tank. 
(57)  Septic tank: A subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
a.  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
b.  A subsurface system of trenches, piping and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
(58)  Severe property damage: The substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(59)  Sewer: A pipe or conduit in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by a public entity. 
(60)  Sewer assessment rate: The average cost per foot of all lateral sewers constructed in the city during the previous year, exclusive of house connection, and adjusted for unusual or extraordinary costs. 
(61)  Sewer meter: Those devices approved by the commissioner for the purpose of establishing the quantity of wastewater discharged by a premise or person. 
(62)  Sewer service charge: The charge assessed against the persons in the city that are connected to, or have access to, the city water pollution control facilities. 
(63)  Significant industrial user or SIU . 
a.  Except as provided in paragraph (63)(b) of this section, the term significant industrial user means: 
1.  All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR § 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and 
2.  Any other industrial user that: discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5 percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the Control Authority as defined in 40 CFR § 403.12(a) on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR § 403.8(f)(6)). 
b.  Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subparagraph (a)(1)(2) of this section has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority (as defined in 40 CFR § 403.12(a)) may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user or POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR § 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
(64)  Slug loading: Any pollutant released in a discharge of such volume or strength as to cause interference in the water pollution control facility. 
(65)  Standard industrial classification (SIC): A classification pursuant to the most current Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget. 
(66)  Standard methods: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation. 
(67)  Storm sewer: A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes domestic and industrial wastewaters. 
(68)  Suspended solids: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
(69)  TKN: Total nitrogen as measured by the Kjeldahl technique, expressed in milligrams per liter by weight. 
(70)  Toxic: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the EPA under the provision of the Clean Water Act, section 307(a) or other acts. 
(70.1)  Trucked or hauled pollutants: Any dredged material, spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, or agricultural waste discharge transported by truck, rail or dedicated pipeline. 
(71)  User: Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's water pollution control facilities. 
(72)  Waste: Includes sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal. 
(73)  Wastewater: A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and commercial establishments, together with those ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present. 
(74)  Water meter: Those devices approved by the commissioner for the purpose of establishing the quantity of water used by a premise or person. 
(75)  Water pollution control facilities: All facilities for collecting, pumping, or treating wastewater or storm water. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 1999-30, §§ 2, 3, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2006-53, § 37, 8-29-06; Ord. No. 2013-67(12-O-0563), § 1, 12-11-13 ) 
Sec. 154-197. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD, biochemical oxygen demand. 
CFR, Code of Federal Regulations. 
COD, Chemical oxygen demand 
EPA, Environmental Protection Agency. 
GPD, gallons per day. 
mg/l, milligrams per liter. 
MOM, maintenance, operations and management. 
NPDES, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
O&M, operation and maintenance. 
POTW, publicly owned treatment works. 
RCRA, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
SIC, standard industrial classification. 
TKN, total Kjeldahl nitrogen. 
TSS, total suspended solids. 
USC, United States Code. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 1999-30, § 4, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 154-198. - Findings and purposes. 
The city finds that, in order to provide for the public health and welfare, and to comply with the laws and regulations of the State of Georgia and the United States Government, it is necessary to set uniform requirements for all users of the water pollution control facilities of the city; to establish effluent limits; to require minimum frequencies of inspections depending upon size of the city sewer system, to require pretreatment, where necessary, by system users; to regulate the use of municipal pollution control facilities through the issuance of permits to certain industrial users; to establish charges and fees for the equitable distribution of costs; and to authorize monitoring and enforcement activities. 
The purpose of article V is to prevent the introduction into the municipal pollution control facilities of pollutants which will interfere with the proper operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; to prevent the introduction into the municipal pollution control facilities of pollutants which will cause the city to be in violation of any permits; to prevent the introduction into municipal pollution control facilities of toxic pollutants which would pass through the facilities in toxic amounts, into receiving water or the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the facilities; to prevent unauthorized discharges of pollutants into the environment; to improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the facilities; and to provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal pollution control facilities. 
The city finds that criteria are needed to better control the discharge of grease and oils to the city's sewer system and that due to the diameters of the existing sewer piping system that certain portions of the city require additional inspections to accommodate compliance with this section. The accumulation of grease and oils discharged into the sewer system can lead to grease blockages, which in turn can cause overflows from the sewer system. The city must protect its sewer system against accumulations of grease and oils. Sources of grease and oil discharges include industrial users of the sewer system and food service establishments. Industrial users are subject to industrial user permitting and pretreatment requirements. The best method for reducing discharges of grease and oil from food service establishments is the installation of grease traps at the food service establishment and proper maintenance of the grease traps by the owner or operator of the food service establishment. The sewer use ordinance establishes requirements that control the discharge of grease and oil from industrial sources and food service establishments. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 1999-30, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-5, § I, 1-23-01) 
Sec. 154-199. - Public nuisance. 
It shall constitute a nuisance and shall be unlawful for any user to discharge a wastewater in any manner in violation of this article, or of any condition of an industrial wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Secs. 154-200—154-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 154-211. - Confidential information. 
All information and data concerning a user or obtained from a user shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies in accordance with the requirements of the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70, et seq., and subject to exemption from disclosure only as authorized by Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-212. - Notification of pretreatment standards promulgation. 
The commissioner shall notify industrial users of applicable national pretreatment standards within 30 days of promulgation of final pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-213. - Right to object. 
The industrial user has the right to object within 30 days of notification of action taken on behalf of the city which changes the industrial user's obligations or subjects it to penalties, restrictions or further obligations. The objection and all evidence supporting such objection must be made in writing to the commissioner. In his/her discretion, the commissioner shall make written response to the objection, stating his/her decision and reasons thereof. All decisions by the commissioner shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-214. - Reporting requirements for the permittee. 
(a)  Reporting requirements for all industrial users subject to pretreatment standards; the baseline monitoring report. Within 180 days after the effective date of a national categorical pretreatment standard promulgated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act, all existing industrial users subject to such standards shall submit to the commissioner the information listed in subparagraphs (a)(1)—(10) of this section. 
At least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable standard, shall be required to submit to the commissioner a report which contains the information requested in subparagraphs (a)(1—3) and (a)(5—-7) of this section. 
(1)  The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owners. 
(2)  A list of any environmental control permit(s) applied for or held by the facility. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classification of the operation(s) carried out by the industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram, site plans, floor plans, and plumbing plans which indicates points of discharge to the water pollution control facility from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Number of employees and hours of operation of the facility. 
(5)  Information showing the time, duration, and volume, including average daily and maximum daily flow in gallons per day, to the water pollution control facilities from each of the following: 
a.  Regulated process streams; and 
b.  Other streams as necessary to allow use of a combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR § 403.6(e), if applicable. 
(6)  The pretreatment standard applicable to each regulated process. 
(7)  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, where feasible. The commissioner may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any industrial user that demonstrates that flow-proportional composite sampling is not feasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples where the industrial user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged; 
b.  The industrial user must take a minimum of three representative samples, in a time frame to be determined by the commissioner, to compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph; 
c.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR § 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards; 
d.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR, Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using procedures approved by EPA; 
e.  A baseline monitoring report may be submitted which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; and 
f.  The baseline monitoring report shall indicate the time, date, and place of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the water pollution control facility. 
(8)  A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional O&M and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(9)  If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
(10)  Any other information deemed necessary by the commissioner to ensure compliance with this article or other applicable ordinances, laws, or regulations. 
(b)  Pretreatment compliance schedule: Where pretreatment is required to meet pretreatment standards or the provisions of this article, a compliance schedule must be submitted to the commissioner for which the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the applicable standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing the contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
(2)  No increment referred to in subparagraph (b)(1) of this section shall exceed nine months. 
(3)  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the commissioner including, as a minimum, whether it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the commissioner. 
(4)  Compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline: Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the wastewater treatment facility, any industrial user subject to pretreatment standards or permit requirements shall submit to the commissioner a report containing the information described in subparagraphs (a)(5) through (a)(8) of this section. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. 
(c)  Reporting of monitoring results: Demonstrating continued compliance with applicable standards. Any industrial user required to self-monitor by the industrial wastewater discharge permit required by subdivision II herein shall submit to the commissioner during the months of January and July, unless required more frequently, a report indicating the nature and concentration or mass, if required, of pollutants in the effluent which are limited in the industrial wastewater discharge permit. In addition, this report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharge. At the discretion of the commissioner and in consideration of such factors as high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the commissioner may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. Falsification of self-monitoring reports shall be considered a violation of this article. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the commissioner, the report required by this paragraph shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), the report required by this paragraph shall include the user's actual average production rate for the reporting period. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(d)  Self-monitoring and analysis of industrial discharges: 
(1)  The monitoring reports required in subparagraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where required, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the industrial wastewater discharge permit. The commissioner may allow the use of monitoring results obtained by the city, in lieu of self-monitoring by the industrial user. This will only be granted by permit condition or written authorization from the commissioner. 
(2)  If a sampling performed by the industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user shall notify the commissioner within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and shall submit the results of the repeat analysis to the commissioner within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except that the industrial user is not required to resample if (i) the control authority performs the sampling at the industrial user's site at a frequency of at least once per month, or (ii) the control authority performs sampling at the industrial user's site between the time when the industrial user performs its initial sampling and the time when the industrial user receives the results of the sampling. 
(3)  The reports required in subparagraph (c) of this section shall be based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the reporting period and must be obtained so as to be representative of the reporting period. The date of month, day of week, and in the case of grab samples, time of day, shall be altered for each sampling cycle. 
(4)  The frequency of monitoring to demonstrate compliance shall be prescribed in the industrial wastewater discharge permit. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments thereto, or with any other test procedures approved by the EPA. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the EPA. Where 40 CFR, Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, or where EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analyses techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the city or other parties, and approved by the EPA. 
(5)  If an industrial user subject to self-monitoring requirements contained in subparagraph (c) of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the industrial wastewater discharge permit, using procedures prescribed in subparagraph (d)(4) of this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)  Reporting of potential problems, including slug loadings: 
(1)  The industrial user shall notify the commissioner within one hour of becoming aware of any spill, dump, or discharge that could cause problems in the water pollution control facility; including, but not limited to, any slug loading as defined in section 154-196. 
(2)  Additionally, within five days of becoming aware of a discharge described in subparagraph(e)(1) of this section, the industrial user must submit a written report to the commissioner. This report shall include the date, time, duration, cause of discharge and, in accordance with section 154-303, provisions of protection against such discharges. 
(f)  Reporting of changes in discharge: The industrial user shall notify the commissioner at least 30 days in advance of any change in the facility or pretreatment operations which may substantially change the volume or character of the discharge. Additionally, any industrial user operating under an industrial wastewater discharge permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based standard shall notify the commissioner within two business days after the industrial user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. 
(g)  Certification and signatory requirements: The reports required in subparagraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section shall include the following statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or these persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information within this document and attachments is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including fines and/or imprisonment for knowing violations." 
Pursuant to 40 CFR § 403.6(a)(2), each report must include a statement describing, and providing evidence and/or reasons a particular industry subcategory is or is not applicable. 
These reports must be signed in accordance with section 154-196(3). 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2013-67(12-O-0563), §§ 4, 5, 12-11-13 ) 
Sec. 154-215. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the commissioner, the state hazardous waste authorities, and the EPA regional waste management division director, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR, Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR, Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: (i) an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the waste; (ii) an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month; and (iii) an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this section needs to be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. This notification requirement does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to section 154-214(d). 
(b)  Users are exempt from the requirements of subparagraph (a) of this section above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous wastes do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the commissioner, the state hazardous waste authorities, and the regional waste management division director of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective data of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any such notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, any permit issues thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-216. - Maintenance of records. 
(a)  Sampling and analysis records: Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements established in section 154-214 of this article shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required by such section 154-214. Such records shall be maintained on site and available for the city's review at any time. These records shall include for all samples: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and names of the person or persons taking the samples; 
(2)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(3)  The name(s) of the person or persons who performed the analyses; 
(4)  The analytical techniques/methods used; and 
(5)  The results of such analyses. 
(b)  Monitoring activities and results record: Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements established in section 154-214 of this article shall be required to retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this article) and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by EPA, the state, and the city. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user, or when requested by the commissioner, State of Georgia, or EPA. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Secs. 154-217—154-225. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit 

Sec. 154-226. - Required permitted discharges. 
It shall be unlawful for any industrial user to discharge any industrial waste or wastewater to any city water pollution control facility without an approved industrial wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-227. - Industrial wastewater discharge permitting process. 
(a)  Approval pre-requisite to plumbing permit. The plumbing inspector shall not issue a plumbing permit for changes in existing plumbing or the installation of new plumbing, to any significant industrial user, until the applicant presents plans reviewed and stamped by the commissioner. 
(b)  Baseline monitoring report required. Any significant industrial user discharging or proposing to discharge an industrial waste or wastewater, may be required by the commissioner to submit a baseline monitoring report as outlined in section 154-214 of this article. 
(c)  Incomplete baseline monitoring reports. Persons who have filed incomplete baseline monitoring reports, as deemed by the commissioner, will be notified of the deficiency and will be given 30 days to correct such deficiency. If the deficiency is not corrected within 30 days or an extended period as allowed by the commissioner, the commissioner can deny the permit and shall notify the applicant in writing of such action. The applicant may object to such action, as provided in this article. 
(d)  Permit application form. The commissioner may require any significant industrial user to submit a completed permit application form prior to issuance of an industrial wastewater discharge permit. A new user must submit an application for a permit within 60 days prior to any wastewater discharge. An existing user must apply for a reissuance of the permit at least 30 days prior to permit expiration. The application may contain a statement describing which categorical pretreatment subcategories might be applicable and cite evidence and reasons why a particular category is applicable and why others are not. Any person signing the application statement pursuant to this section shall make the following certification: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or these persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information within this document and attachments is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including fines and/or imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(e)  Permit issued. Upon receipt of a completed baseline monitoring report or permit application form, the commissioner shall review and evaluate the information and shall issue a permit subject to any necessary conditions. The applicant may object in writing to any conditions within 30 days of permit issuance, as provided in this article. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A statement of permit duration, as per sections 154-229 of this article; 
(2)  A statement on nontransferability, as per sections 154-230 of this article; 
(3)  Pretreatment requirements; 
(4)  Average and maximum wastewater pollutant concentrations; 
(5)  Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(6)  Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(7)  Requirements for self-monitoring of wastewater, including sampling location, frequency, and methods of sampling and analysis; 
(8)  Requirements for maintenance of records and submission of reports relating to wastewater discharge; 
(9)  A compliance schedule to ensure the industrial user's compliance with pretreatment requirements of this article or other applicable law or requirements; 
(10)  Requirements for installation of facilities to prevent and control accidental or unpermitted discharge or spills by the industrial user; 
(11)  Statement of applicable penalties (civil and criminal) for violations; 
(12)  Statement of permission to the commissioner and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper identification, to enter upon the user's property without prior notification for the purpose of inspection, observation, photography, records examination and copying, measurement, sampling or testing; and/or 
(13)  Other conditions deemed necessary by the commissioner to ensure compliance with this article or other applicable ordinance, law, or regulation. 
(f)  Questionnaire required. At the discretion of the commissioner, any user of the water pollution control facility may be required to complete a wastewater discharge questionnaire form furnished by the commissioner, which may contain, but is not limited to, questions concerning type of manufacturing or service activity, location of sewers, quality and quantity of discharge to the city facilities, other disposal facilities and other pertinent data. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-228. - Conditions for issuance of permits. 
The commissioner may decline to issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with the terms and provisions of this article, any lawful orders issued by the commissioner or a previous industrial wastewater discharge permit. The commissioner may require the filing of a bond payable to the city, in a sum determined by the commissioner, to ensure consistent compliance by the user. In appropriate circumstances, the commissioner may require the user to submit proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-229. - Permit duration. 
Permits shall be issued for a time period not to exceed five years. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the commissioner during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements of this article are modified or for any other just cause. The permittee shall be informed of any proposed changes in its permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any more stringent or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-230. - Permit transfer. 
Industrial wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A request for transfer or reassignment shall be submitted in writing to the commissioner at least 60 days prior to the proposed date of transfer or reassignment by the permittee. The permittee must provide a copy of the industrial wastewater discharge permit to the new owner or operator. No user is authorized to operate pursuant to the permit issued to a previous owner or user without the written approval of the commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Secs. 154-231—154-240. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Inspection, Monitoring, and Entry 

Sec. 154-241. - Installation, location, and maintenance of monitoring manhole. 
(a)  When required by the commissioner, industrial users shall install a suitable monitoring manhole on the building sewers on their property to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of wastewaters. The manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the commissioner. The manhole shall be installed by the industrial user at their expense and shall be so maintained by the industrial users as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any industrial user to discharge, or cause or allow to be discharged, any industrial wastewater which bypasses or does not flow through the monitoring manhole, unless discharged through a NPDES permitted facility or disposed of off site at a licensed disposal facility. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-242. - Inspection, testing, and observation. 
The commissioner or other duty authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification, and under appropriate legal authority for entry, shall be given immediate access to all properties without prior notification for the purpose of inspection, observation, photography, records examination and copying, measurement, sampling or testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  Where an industrial user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance prior to entry, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be permitted immediate access. 
(2)  The commissioner shall have the right to set up on the industrial user's property, or require the installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, metering, and/or observation of the user's operations. It shall be a violation of this article for any person or industrial user to tamper with, remove, adjust, disconnect or otherwise interfere with the operation of these devices. 
(3)  The commissioner may require the industrial user to install equipment necessary to conduct sampling, metering, and/or observation of the user's operations. The facilities equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition. All devices used to measure wastewater flow shall be calibrated at least annually to ensure their accuracy. Records of this calibration must be submitted to the commissioner upon request. 
(4)  If the commissioner has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as a part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with the ordinance or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health safety and welfare of the community, then the commissioner may seek issuance of a search warrant. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-243. - Standards for sampling, measurements, testing and analysis of wastewater. 
All sampling, measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastewaters to which reference is made in this article, shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Secs. 154-244—154-255. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Enforcement Procedures 

Sec. 154-256. - Notification of user of violation. 
Whenever the commissioner finds that any person has violated or is violating this article or industrial wastewater discharge permit, the commissioner may serve written notice upon the person, stating the nature of the violation and requiring submission of a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof within a specified time limit. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-257. - Compliance meetings. 
The commissioner may invite representatives of the user to a compliance meeting to review the commissioner's determination that a violation of this article or industrial wastewater discharge permit has occurred, and the consequent remedial action to be taken. If the user and the commissioner can agree to appropriate remedial and preventive measures, such measures and a reasonable compliance schedule shall be incorporated as a supplemental condition of the user's industrial wastewater discharge permit. If an agreement is not reached through this process, the commissioner shall institute such other actions, as deemed advisable, to ensure the user's compliance with the provisions of this article or other laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-258. - Show cause hearing. 
The commissioner may order any user which causes or contributes to violations of this article or industrial wastewater discharge permits, to appear before the commissioner and show cause why enforcement actions should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the date, time, and location of the hearing, the reasons for this hearing, and proposed enforcement actions. Such notice shall be served on any representative of the user or by registered or certified mail. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-259. - Citation to municipal court. 
The commissioner may cite any person to the municipal court for violation of any provision of this article or other portions of the city Code or for violation of any condition of the user's industrial wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-260. - Assessment of damages. 
When a discharge of waste causes an obstruction, damage, or any other impairment to the facilities, or any expense of whatever character or nature to the city, the commissioner shall assess the expenses incurred by the city to clear the obstruction, repair damage to the facility, and any other expenses or damages incurred by the city. The commissioner shall file a claim with the user, or any other person causing said damages, seeking reimbursement for any and all expenses or damages suffered by the city. If the claim is ignored or denied, the commissioner shall notify the city attorney to take such measures as shall be appropriate to recover for any expense or other damages suffered by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-261. - Disconnection for violation. 
In the event of an actual or threatened discharge of wastes or wastewater which, in the opinion of the commissioner, presents an imminent and substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, or causes interference with the water pollution control facilities or cause the violation of any permit held by the city, the commissioner shall seek authority immediately, pursuant to section 74-161 of this Code of Ordinances, to disconnect the water discharge from the city's system by discontinuing water service to that property or by disconnecting sewer service to that property. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-262. - Consent agreements. 
The commissioner is hereby empowered to enter into consent agreements, consent orders, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action(s) to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time frame specified in the order. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-263. - Significant noncompliance. 
Any industrial user whose actions or failure to act meet any or all of the following criteria may be placed in the category of significant noncompliance. 
(1)  Violations of wastewater discharge limits: 
a.  Chronic violations. A pattern of violations of specific pollutant limitations, as defined in this article, indicated by 66 percent or more of the measurements exceeding (by any magnitude) the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit for a given pollutant in a six-month period; or 
b.  Technical review criteria (TRC). A pattern of violations of specific pollutant limitations, as defined by this article, indicated by 33 percent or more of the measurements exceeding the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit by more than the TRC in a six-month period. The TRC = 1.4 for conventional pollutants, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH; or 
c.  Any other violation or violations of a pretreatment effluent limit (longer term average or daily maximum) that has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through; or endangered the health of city personnel or the public. 
(2)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of it's emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(3)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone, contained in an industrial wastewater discharge permit, a compliance directive, a consent agreement, or any other compliance schedule. 
(4)  Failure to provide within 30 days of the due date, any reports such as, but not limited to, the following: self-monitoring reports, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic reports, or any other reports required by the city. 
(5)  Failure to report accurately noncompliance. 
(6)  Any other violation or group of violations which the commissioner determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-264. - Publication of list of violators. 
The city shall publish, annually, in the newspaper with the largest daily circulation in the city, a list of industrial users which during the previous 12 months were significantly violating applicable pretreatment standards as defined in 40 CFR, Part 403.8(f)(2)(vii). 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-265. - Federal, state and municipal enforcement. 
In addition to the enforcement actions provided herein, the commissioner may petition the state or the EPA, as appropriate, to exercise such methods or remedies as shall be available to such governmental entities to seek criminal penalties, injunctive relief, as may be provided by applicable federal or state laws to ensure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards, to prevent the introduction of toxic pollutants in toxic amounts, or other regulated pollutants into the water pollution control facilities or to prevent such other water pollution as may be regulated by state or federal law. 
Under 40 CFR § 403.10, the city has legal authority, pursuant to its Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, sections 1-8 and 74-161 to prosecute violations of the sewer use ordinance, and to abate the violating condition as a public nuisance. Such actions may be brought in Atlanta Municipal Court. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-266. - Revocation of permits. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be suspended or revoked in whole or in part during its terms for the following causes: 
(1)  Any discharge of industrial wastewater which causes or contributes to any violation of any section of this article; 
(2)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the industrial wastewater discharge permit; 
(3)  Obtaining a permit by misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts; 
(4)  Refusal of immediate access to the user's premises; 
(5)  Failure to accurately report the constituents and characteristics of the wastewater discharge; 
(6)  A change in volume or character of the discharge; 
(7)  A discharge which, in the opinion of the commissioner, may cause interference with the operation or maintenance of the water pollution control facilities or threaten human health or safety; 
(8)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of the business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(9)  Failure to pay fines; 
(10)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(11)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(12)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; or 
(13)  Tampering with monitoring equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-267. - Penalty for violation. 
A person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or any combination thereof. With respect to violations of this article that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2013-67(12-O-0563), § 6, 12-11-13 ) 
Secs. 154-268—154-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 154-276. - Establishment of charges. 
Sewer service charges shall be as established by the city. 
Sewer rates are hereby waived by 30 percent for domestic customers, aged 65 and older, with a maximum household income of $25,000.00 or less. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2001-99, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2004-01, § 2, 1-9-04; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 2, 1-5-04) 
Sec. 154-277. - Sewer service charge. 
(a)  Established. It is hereby determined to be necessary, in order to provide facilities for the protection of the public health, safety, welfare, and to comply with state and federal water quality laws and regulations for the protection of the quality of the waters of the state, to fix and collect charges upon all premises or facilities served by the water pollution control facilities of the city. 
(b)  Uses of proceeds. The revenue received from the collection of these charges, as hereinafter authorized, together with other revenue derived from the operation of the system and from the sale of water, shall be deposited with the chief financial officer and credited to the water and sewer revenue fund and shall be used for the operation and maintenance of the water pollution control and water purification systems and incidental expenses connected therewith to (i) pay debt requirements on revenue bonds issued; (ii) provide funds for the planning, design, construction, improvement, repair and extension of the water pollution control and water purification systems, facilities and appurtenances used in connection with the operation of the systems; (iii) acquire necessary easements or the purchase of land; and (iv) provide funds for the necessary reserves for debt and improvements; however, said revenues shall not be used for the construction of lateral or storm sewers. 
(c)  Determination of amounts. For the purposes provided in subparagraph (b) hereof, there is hereby charged and assessed to each premise or facility served by the water pollution control facilities of the city, or otherwise discharging wastewater, industrial wastes, water or liquids, either directly or indirectly into the water pollution control facilities, a sewer service charge and assessment payable as hereinafter provided, and in the amount determinable as follows: 
(1)  The sewer service charge shall be based upon the quantity of water used by the premises or facility therein or thereon as measured by a water meter or meters there in use, or as otherwise currently established. 
(2)  The sewer service charge shall consist of a charge per hundred cubic feet of water consumed, including adjustments thereto. 
(3)  Water used from private sources shall be metered as required in subparagraph (d) of this section and shall be figured at prevailing city water rates and the sewer service charges shall be billed accordingly. 
(d)  Independent water supply; installation of meter. In the event a lot, parcel of land, premises or facility discharging wastewater, industrial waste, water, or other liquids which either directly or indirectly enters into the city's water pollution control facilities, or ultimately enters the facilities, is supplied either in whole or in part with water from wells or any source other than the City Bureau of Operations - Drinking Water, those wells or other sources of supply shall be registered with the City Bureau of Operations - Drinking Water on or before the effective date of this article, and if not measured by a water meter, the owner or occupant shall, at his own cost, install and maintain a meter on the supplies in such a location and in such a manner as is satisfactory to the commissioner. These meters shall serve as a control for the establishment of the sewer service charge and shall be read monthly or bimonthly by employees of the City Bureau of Operations - Drinking Water. Rainwater catchment systems installed and operated pursuant to Atlanta City Code Section 1300 of Appendix C "Plumbing Code Amendments," Chapter I shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(e)  Additional meters. Where it can be shown to the satisfaction of the commissioner that a significant portion of the water used by customers, as measured by the water meter or meters, does not enter the water pollution control facilities, then that portion of water shall not be used for billing of the sewer service charge. The commissioner may require or permit the installation of additional meters or other devices as may be deemed necessary to establish that portion which does not enter the system. 
(f)  Applicability of section. Where the commissioner determines that sewer service is available to any lot, parcel of land, premises, or facility, 60 days' notice will be given to the owner of such lot, parcel of land, premises, or facility directing connection to available sewer, and billing as provided in subparagraphs (a) through (e) above will thereafter be initiated unless an exemption is authorized as set forth in subparagraph (g) below. 
(g)  Exemption authorized. The mayor or his designee is hereby authorized to waive 12 percent of the sewer service charges for those domestic customers in the city who make application for such waiver and who can show to the satisfaction of the commissioner by certification of a master plumber licensed in the City of Atlanta, that they are not connected to the city's water pollution control facilities. Said 12 percent constitutes that part of the sewer service charge imposed for the city's water pollution control facilities' operating costs that is directly associated with the treatment of wastewater. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to waive the entire sewer service charge for those domestic customers in the city who make application for such waiver and who can show to the satisfaction of the commissioner by certification of a master plumber licensed in the city that they are not connected to the city's water pollution control facilities. This certification must state that the lowest floor of their residence which contains rest room facilities, cannot be served by gravity flow. The waiver, once granted, shall continue in force, unless revoked, until plumbing permits are issued by the city's plumbing inspector for connection to the sewer. Such waiver, when authorized by the mayor, shall become effective on the first day of the next billing cycle after the date of authorization. No waiver will be authorized if any portion of the residence is connected to the city's water pollution control facilities. 
Sewer rates are hereby waived by 30 percent for domestic customers, aged 65 and older, with a maximum household income of $25,000.00 or less. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2001-99, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-83, § 8, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2004-01, § 2, 1-9-04; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 2, 1-5-04; Ord. No. 2011-43(11-O-0740), § 2, 9-28-11) 
Sec. 154-278. - Industrial wastewater surcharges. 
(a)  Established. All persons discharging industrial wastes into the public sewers shall be charged and assessed a surcharge, in addition to any sewer service charges, if these wastes have a concentration greater than the following: 
(1)  A COD content of 500 mg/l as determined by laboratory analysis in accordance with procedures prescribed in section 154-282, subparagraph (b). 
(2)  A TSS content of 250 mg/l as determined by laboratory analysis in accordance with procedures prescribed in sections 154-282, subparagraph (b). 
(3)  A TKN content of 25 mg/l as determined by a laboratory analysis in accordance with procedures prescribed in section 154-282, subparagraph (b). 
The amount of the surcharge, which is hereby charged and assessed against all persons discharging industrial wastewater into the public sewers, shall reflect the cost incurred by the city in handling the excess COD, TKN, and TSS. This surcharge shall include a proportionate share of charges for maintenance and operation of the water pollution control facilities including depreciation and other incidental expenses. 
(b)  Formula determining surcharge. When any or all the COD, TKN, and TSS of wastewater or waste accepted for admission to the city water pollution control facilities exceed values of these constituents set forth in subparagraph (a) hereof, the excess concentrations of any or all, as the case may be, shall be evaluated in terms of these values and be subject to a surcharge on the amount derived in accordance with the following formula: Amount of surcharge = (B + C + D) × effluent flow (CCF) 
Where: 

 
(c)  Determination of amounts. The rates of surcharge for each of the aforementioned constituents shall be determined annually by the commissioner in order that the above factors may correctly represent current treatment costs. A schedule of the surcharge shall be filed with the municipal clerk by the commissioner. 
(d)  Changing industrial wastewater surcharge. The industrial waste surcharge cost factors shall not be increased in any year by more than 20 percent of the charges for the preceding year without written approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-279. - Reserved. 
Sec. 154-280. - Billing procedure. 
Industrial wastes surcharges provided for in this article shall be prepared and rendered with the regular water bill. The volume of flow used in billing the industrial waste surcharges shall be based upon metered, estimated, or prorated water consumption for the period during which the sampling was conducted. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-281. - Payment of bills. 
Sewer service charges and surcharges provided in this article shall be payable at the office of the chief financial officer in the city hall or at other authorized locations, at the same time as the water bills for a lot, parcel of land, building, premise or facility are payable and payments for water shall not be accepted unless payment of the sewer service charge or surcharge is made at the same time, provided however, the sewer service and/or surcharge is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-282. - Annual analysis. 
(a)  Frequency of analysis. The industrial wastewater of each significant industrial user discharging into the city sewers shall be subject to periodic inspection and a determination of character and concentration of the wastewater shall be made annually, or more often, as may be deemed necessary by the commissioner. 
(b)  Sampling and analysis procedures. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended. If 40 CFR, Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Secs. 154-283—154-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 154-296. - Discharge of septic tanks. 
(a)  Restricted. It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw or otherwise discharge into any manhole, catch-basin or other opening into city water pollution control facilities, or any sewer connected with and discharging into the collection facilities, the contents of any septic tank or chemical toilet, sludge, wastewater or other similar matter or material, except as provided in subparagraph (b) of this section. 
(b)  Authority of commissioner. The commissioner is hereby authorized to grant permits to discharge the contents of septic tanks or chemical toilets at locations specified by him/her and under his/her supervision, provided that such permits shall be limited to the discharge of domestic wastewaters. The permits may be revoked at any time if, in his/her opinion, continued discharge of that matter will be injurious to water pollution control facilities, or if any provisions of ordinances regulating such discharges are violated by the permittee. Permits shall include provisions, standards, and requirements to be met by the discharger. A current Fulton County Health Department Permit must be presented with the permit application. 
(c)  Fees. The fee for discharges authorized under subparagraph (b) hereof shall be determined annually by the commissioner based on the current costs for treatment of the discharges. The schedule of fees for the discharges shall be filed with the municipal clerk by the commissioner annually. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-297. - City of Atlanta Grease Management Ordinance. 
This division shall be known and may hereafter be referred to as the "City of Atlanta Grease Management Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2003-90, § 1(Exh. A), 9-10-03) 
Sec. 154-297.00. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any owner or agent of the owner of any food service, food sales or food processing establishment submitting an application for a food service wastewater discharge permit to the department of watershed management for consideration for approval. 
Commissioner means the commissioner of the department of watershed management or his designee, or such person as the mayor may designate to carry out the functions set forth herein. 
Department means the department of watershed management. 
Facility means a building or a location where food service, sales or processing, as defined in this section, occurs as identified by the numbering system for public streets used as directions for delivery. 
FOG means fats, oil and grease. 
Food means any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption. 
Food processing establishment means a commercial establishment in which food is manufactured or packaged for human consumption. The term does not include a food service establishment, retail food sales store, or commissary. 
Food sales establishment means retail and wholesale grocery stores, retail seafood stores, bakeries, confectioneries, fruit, nuts, and vegetable stores and places of business, and similar establishments, mobile or permanent, engaged in the sale of food primarily for consumption off premises. 
Food service establishment means any establishment for the preparation and/or serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products. The term includes: restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, luncheonettes, taverns, lunchrooms, places which manufacture retail sandwiches, soda fountains; institutional cafeterias, catering establishments, food vending vehicles and operations connected therewith; and similar facilities by whatever name called. The term "food service establishment" shall not mean a "food sales establishment," as defined in this division, which does not provide seating or facilities for consumption of food on the premises. 
Fryer oil means oil that is used and/or reused in fryers for the preparation of such foods as fried chicken or french fries. 
Grease means rendered animal fat, vegetable shortening, and other such oily matter used for the purposes of and resulting from cooking and/or preparing foods. 
Grease trap means a device or interceptor that is designed, installed and operated in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications to separate and retain fats, oils and grease from liquid waste and allow the remaining liquid waste to discharge into the city's sewer collection system. 
Mobile food unit means a self-propelled vehicle or mounted unit intended to be used as a food service establishment and is not regulated by this division. 
Permit means written authorization to discharge to the city's wastewater collection system granted by the department to the owner of a facility or his/her authorized agent to operate a food service establishment, food sales or food processing establishment and indicates satisfactory compliance with this division. 
Sampling port means the last point downstream of a grease trap that will accommodate sampling to take place prior to the discharge of effluent to the city's sewer collection system. 
Temporary food service establishment means a food service establishment that has no permanent sewer connection and operates at the same location for a period of time of not more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single event, such as a fair, carnival, circus, exhibition or similar temporary gathering, is not regulated by this division. 
User means, for purposes of this division, the owner or operator of a food service, food sales or food processing establishment that discharges wastewater into the city sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2001-5, § II, 1-23-01; Ord. No. 2003-90, § 1(Exh. A), 9-10-03) 
Sec. 154-297.01. - Food processing, sales, and/or service establishment (grease trap) regulations/new installation. 
(a)  Permit required. For new construction after the effective date of this section and after the issuance of a plumbing permit issued by the bureau of buildings, the owner or operator (hereinafter called the user) of a food processing, sales, or service establishment which discharges wastewater into the city's sewer system shall obtain a food service wastewater discharge permit. This permit shall be obtained prior to the issuance of any business license issued by the city. Failure to obtain the food service wastewater discharge permit shall be grounds for revocation of the city business license. 
(1)  Annual fee. There will be an annual permit fee for a food service wastewater discharge permit as set forth in the schedule below: 

 
For each five additional grease traps in excess of 60 traps, the maximum fee shall be increased by $300.00. 
(2)  A re-inspection fee of $100.00 dollars per each trap shall be charged for any facility that fails any grease trap inspection, in addition to any fines that may be imposed by the courts for any other violations as provided in this section. 
(3)  The commissioner will evaluate these fees annually, based on the cost to the city of operation and maintenance, and adjust such fees administratively to ensure full cost recovery; provided however, a fee increase of less than ten percent per year shall not require approval of the city council. Any such fee adjustment shall be posted in the office of the municipal clerk and permittees shall be given written notice prior to the time for renewal of annual permits. 
(4)  Application. All information requested in the food service wastewater discharge permit application shall be certified by the applicant as true and complete prior to review for approval. The application shall apply to all grease traps located at the same facility having the same street address and operated by the same owner and/or management (referred to as "user"). Each grease trap shall be identified by a unique identifier selected and noted in the application by the user. The commissioner shall review completed applications for approval within 30 days of receipt. 
(5)  Permit conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Permit duration; 
b.  Permit fee; 
c.  Permit non-transfer; 
d.  Frequency of inspections; 
e.  Pretreatment requirements; 
f.  Maintenance requirements; 
g.  Limitations on time or rate of discharge; 
h.  Compliance schedules; 
i.  Requirements for maintenance of records and submission of reports; 
j.  Statement of permission to the commissioner and other duly authorized employees of the city to enter upon the user's property without prior notification for the purposes of inspection, observation, photography, records examination and copying, measurement, sampling or testing; and/or 
k.  Other conditions deemed necessary by the commissioner to ensure compliance with this article or other applicable ordinances, laws, or regulations. 
(6)  Denial of permit. If a permit for a location is denied, the applicant will be notified within 60 calendar days of the commissioner's determination to deny the application. 
a.  Notification. The applicant will be advised in writing of the specific cause for the denial. 
b.  Process. An applicant who is denied a permit under this article shall have the right to appeal such denial to the mayor. The appeal shall be filed within three business days after the notice of denial is received. 
(b)  Grease trap requirements. All food service, sales and processing establishments, except for small areas designated as break areas or the equivalent and/or industrial user's wastewater discharge regulated under the pretreatment ordinance, discharging wastewater containing fats, oils and grease (FOG) to the city's sewer collection system and water pollution control facilities shall install, operate, and maintain a sufficiently sized "grease trap" necessary to achieve and maintain compliance as indicated below: 
(1)  Outdoor grease traps requirements. 
a.  Grease traps for new food processing, sales, or service establishments shall have a capacity not less than two 1,500 gallon traps in series for a total capacity of 3,000 gallons. See City of Atlanta Detail entitled Recommended Grease Trap Design. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Limited space available to install outside grease traps. The commissioner may approve the installation of a single 1,500-gallon grease trap in cases where site conditions prevent the installation of two 1,500-gallon traps in series. 
2.  Seating capacities of 100 persons or less. The commissioner may approve the installation of a single 1,500-gallon grease trap in facilities having a seating capacity of 100 persons or less. See City of Atlanta Detail entitled Recommended Grease Trap Design. 
3.  Indoor grease trap. The commissioner may approve the installation of indoor grease traps provided the establishment is not equipped with a dishwasher and/or food waste grinder. All indoor traps shall be sized and installed in accordance with the following Tables I, II, and III, which have been extracted from Plumbing and Drainage Standard PDI-6101, Testing and Rating Procedure for Grease Interceptors with Appendix of Sizing and Installation Data, 1996 or as updated from time to time. 
(2)  It is prohibited to discharge the following materials into an indoor grease trap: 
a.  Wastewater with a temperature higher than 140 degrees Fahrenheit. 
b.  Wastewater discharge from dishwasher. 
c.  Acid or caustic trap cleaners. 
d.  Wastewater discharge from garbage disposals. 
Table I. Typical Sizes and Volumes of Sink Compartments 

 
Table II. Procedure for Sizing Indoor Grease Traps  (Flow rates shall be calculated based on a two minute drainage period) 

 
Table III. Sizing and Rating of Indoor Traps 

 
(c)  Outdoor grease traps shall have the following design features. A tee inlet in which one tee branch extends a minimum of one foot below the liquid level, an outlet tee with a minimum submergence of 2/3 the liquid depth, a baffle to separate the trap into two compartments and two manhole access ways for inspection of inlet and outlet tees. The trap shall have cleanouts and be located for easy access for pump out and inspection. Dishwasher, floor drains, mop sink and food grinder wastewater shall be discharged to outdoor grease traps. See City of Atlanta Detail entitled Recommended "Grease Trap Design. 
(d)  Alternative grease trap technologies. 
(1)  The commissioner may approve the use of alternative grease trap technologies, e.g. skimmers, for controlling FOG discharges in lieu of a passive grease trap if he determines such device would be as effective or more effective. If approved, any such device must be wired directly to the circuit breaker and contain an audio and visual alarm that can only be reset by opening and servicing such device. 
(2)  The user shall provide the following information to allow the commissioner to evaluate the proposed technology: 
a.  A proposal that is specific for the food service, sales or processing establishment under consideration. The commissioner will not consider a general or generic proposal. 
b.  Complete information regarding the performance, and proof of effectiveness of removing FOG of the proposed alternative grease trap technology, including specifications for maintenance service frequency and other performance related documents as may be required. 
c.  The manufacturer's installation and operation manuals. 
(3)  If approved, the user shall install and maintain such device in accordance with the manufacturer's installation and operation specifications; provided however, frequency of maintenance shall not be less than as specified in the user's permit. 
(Ord. No. 2001-5, § II, 1-23-01; Ord. No. 2003-90, § 1(Exh. A), 9-10-03) 
Sec. 154-297.02. - Food service establishment (grease trap) regulations/existing installations. 
(a)  Permit required. The owner or operator (hereinafter called the user) of a food processing, sales, or service establishment which discharges wastewater into the city's sewer collection system, installed before the adoption of the section, shall obtain a food service wastewater discharge permit. This permit shall be obtained prior to the issuance of any business license issued by the city. Failure to obtain the food service wastewater discharge permit shall be grounds for revocation or denial of the city business license. 
(1)  There will be a fee for a food service wastewater discharge permit as set forth in the schedule below. 

 
For each five additional traps in excess of 60 traps, the maximum fee shall be increased by $300.00. 
(2)  A re-inspection fee of $100.00 dollars for each grease trap shall be charged for any facility that fails any grease trap inspection, in addition to any fines that may be imposed by the courts for any other violations as provided in this section. 
(3)  The commissioner will evaluate these fees annually, base on the cost to the city of operation and maintenance, and adjust such fees administratively to ensure full cost recovery; provided however, a fee adjustment of less than ten percent per year shall not require approval of the city council. Any such fee adjustment shall be posted in the office of the municipal clerk and permittees shall be given written notice prior to the time for renewal of annual permits. 
(4)  Application. All information requested in the food service wastewater discharge Permit application shall be certified by the applicant as true and complete prior to review for approval. The application shall apply to all grease traps located at the same facility having the same street address and operated by the same owner and/or management (referred to as "user"). Each grease trap shall be identified by a unique identifier selected and noted in the application by the user. The commissioner shall review completed applications for approval within 30 days of receipt. 
(5)  Permit conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Permit duration; 
b.  Permit fee; 
c.  Permit non-transfer; 
d.  Frequency of inspection; 
e.  Pretreatment requirements; 
f.  Maintenance requirements; 
g.  Limitations on time or rate of discharge; 
h.  Compliance schedules; 
i.  Requirements for maintenance of records and submission of reports; 
j.  Statement of permission to the commissioner and other duly authorized employees of the city, to enter upon the user's property without prior notification for the purposes of inspection, observation, photography, records examination and copying, measurement, sampling or testing; and/or; 
k.  Other conditions deemed necessary by the commissioner to ensure compliance with this article or other applicable ordinances, laws, or regulations. 
(6)  Denial of permit. If a permit for a location is denied, the applicant will be notified within 60 calendar days of the commissioner's determination to deny the application. 
a.  Notification. The applicant will be advised in writing of the specific cause for the denial. 
b.  Process. An applicant who is denied a permit under this article shall have the right to appeal such denial to the mayor. The appeal shall be filed within three business days after the notice of denial is received. 
(b)  Replacement of an existing grease trap shall be subject to the standards applicable to new installation of a grease trap set out in this section, unless otherwise approved by the commissioner pursuant to other authority set out in Part 154 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2001-5, § II, 1-23-01; Ord. No. 2003-90, § 1(Exh. A), 9-10-03) 
Sec. 154-297.03. - Maintenance and inspection requirements for new and existing grease traps. 
(a)  Frequency of maintenance by the owner/user. 
(1)  Maintenance of an outdoor grease trap. Maintenance shall be performed at frequencies necessary to protect the capacity of the sewer system against the accumulation of fats, grease and oils (FOG), as required by the "25 Percent Rule" as defined in paragraph (4) below, and at intervals specified in the permit but, in any event, not less than once every 90 days. 
(2)  Maintenance of indoor grease trap. Maintenance shall be performed at frequencies necessary to protect the capacity of the sewer system against the accumulation of fats, grease and oils (FOG) as required by the "25 Percent Rule" as defined in this section. Indoor grease traps must be cleaned at intervals specified in the permit, but, in any event, at intervals no less than once every 14 days. For those food service, sales or processing establishments that are operated infrequently and only for special events, the commissioner may permit a maintenance frequency related to the event schedule. 
(3)  It is specifically prohibited to maintain grease traps or any component of the plumbing system tributary to a grease trap or interceptor that discharges into the city's waste system by the introduction or addition of bacteriological, chemical, or enzymatic addition or treatment. 
It shall also be prohibited to dispose of fryer oil to the city's wastewater collection system. 
(4)  The "25 Percent Rule" requires that the depth of oil and grease (floating and settled) in a trap shall not be equal to or greater than 25 percent of the total operating depth of the trap. The operating depth of a trap is determined by measuring the internal depth from the outlet water elevation to the bottom of the trap. In application of this rule, the depth of floating oil and grease shall not be greater than 20 percent of total operating depth of a trap since five percent of the oil and grease is generally settled at the bottom of the trap. 
(5)  The user shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the grease trap waste to a transporter and maintenance of records of disposal as specified in this section. All waste removed from each grease trap must be disposed of at an appropriate facility designed to receive such waste. In no manner shall any grease trap pumpage be discharged to the city's sewer collection or stormwater sewer system as otherwise prohibited in the sewer use ordinance. 
Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floatable materials, wastewater, sludges, and solids. Top skimming of outdoor grease traps, decanting or back flushing of the grease trap or its wastes for the purpose of reducing the volume to be hauled is prohibited. 
Further, the discharge of liquid, semi-solids, or solids into a grease trap from vehicles after servicing is prohibited. Vehicles capable of separating water from grease shall not discharge separated water into the grease trap or into the wastewater collection system. 
Grease traps must be operated in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and/or in accordance with generally accepted engineering standards and practices. 
(6)  Record keeping requirement. The user shall be responsible for maintaining records (manifests), permit applications, correspondence, sample data or any documentation as may be requested by the commissioner) as to the dates of service, quantity of waste removed, end disposal site of waste, and waste hauler. These records shall be kept on-site at the user's location for a period of three years and subject to the commissioner review without prior notification. The records shall also be submitted for annual permit renewal as required by the commissioner. 
The manifest shall contain the information listed below: 
Food service, sales or processing  establishment 
Name: 
Address: 
Phone: 
Food service establishment wastewater discharge permit #: 
Trap type and size: 
Authorized signature (verifying that grease trap was cleaned and in operable condition): and 
Date of service: 
Service company information  (waste hauler) 
Name: 
Address: 
Phone: 
Hauler permit #: 
Total gallons removed from grease trap: 
Disposal method: 
Authorized signature and date of service: 
Disposal site 
Name: 
Address: 
Phone: 
Facility permit #: 
Total gallons received: 
Authorized signature and date of disposal: 
(b)  Frequency of inspections by the city. 
(1)  In order to achieve compliance with this section, certain food service establishments located in designated portions of the city which have a small diameter public sewer system (i.e., 8″, 10″, and 12″), shall be inspected a minimum of three times per year. Such inspection frequency shall be indicated on the "permit." 
(2)  Inspection of a grease trap shall be performed at frequencies necessary to protect the capacity of the sewer system against the accumulation of grease and oils, as required by the "25 Percent Rule" as defined in paragraph (a)(4) above. 
(3)  Once a grease trap fails an inspection, the inspector notifies the owner that the grease trap must be cleaned out within three days. After three days, the inspector will inspect the grease trap. If the grease trap is found to be in compliance, the inspector shall schedule the next inspection within 90 days for outside grease traps and 14 days for inside grease traps. If upon re-inspection the grease trap is found to be in compliance, the inspection schedule shall revert to that time period found on the food service establishment's permit. 
Upon the re-inspection, if the grease trap is found to still be in violation, a notice of non-compliance will be issued and the grease trap user must clean the grease trap immediately. 
Any grease trap, which receives three notices of non-compliance within a 24-month period, shall be deemed a nuisance by the commissioner of watershed management and shall require such corrections necessary to abate said nuisance. 
Any mechanically operated grease trap found in non-compliance, shall be deemed a nuisance by the commissioner and must be upgraded to the new installations requirements of this section. 
(c)  Notice of non-compliance. Whenever the commissioner discovers a violation of the "25 Percent Rule," or of the plans or specifications submitted and approved hereunder, or of a permit issued hereunder, a written notice or order shall be served by the commissioner upon the person responsible for directing discontinuance of such illegal action and the remedying of the condition that is in violation of the provisions of 154-297.03(b)(2) of this division. 
(d)  Disregard of notice. If a person served with a notice or order to remove existing unsafe conditions from systems, appliances or equipment or discontinue the use of same, should fail within a reasonable time as set by the commissioner of watershed management to comply with the requirements thereof, the commissioner of watershed management shall institute an appropriate action in the courts to compel a compliance. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 (General Penalty) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Atlanta, which provides: 
"Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be lawful or any offense, or whenever in this Code or ordinance the doing of any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of a provision of this Code or that ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and cost of imprisonment in the City jail for not more than 60 days, or work on the public streets or on public works of the City for not more than 60 days, or by any one or more of these punishments, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the City. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the City as provided by law, and each day that the condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense." 
(2)  The grease trap users are subject to the enforcement provisions set forth in section 154 [§ 256 et seq., article V,] subdivision 4. In addition, food processing, sales, or service establishment grease trap users are subject to the following penalties for violation of this section 154-297. 
a.  First offense. A fine of $1,000.00 
b.  Second offense. A fine of $1,000.00 and a 90-day probationary period with confinement in the city jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
c.  Third offense. A fine of $1,000.00 and a 180 day probationary period with confinement in the city jail for a period not less than seven days and not more than 60 days. 
d.  In addition to the penalties provided above, if user violates the grease discharge permit ordinance three times within 24 months, the food service wastewater discharge permit will be revoked and the Commissioner may formally request that the business license of the violator be revoked and for water service to the property be disconnected. 
The Code of Ordinances provides for penalties of $1,000.00 or a maximum of six months in jail (General Code section 1-8 subpart (c). The city council may modify the penalties set out in Code section 154-256 et seq.] within these limits. 
(3)  Additional pretreatment. If additional pretreatment and/or maintenance is required to meet the provisions in this section, the commissioner may require that food processing, sales, or service establishments in existence prior to the codification of this section upgrade to the provisions provided herein and above. 
(f)  Abatement. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the city from instituting an appropriate civil action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent the use of any equipment, appliance or system covered by this Code. 
(g)  Publication of names. The commissioner may publish the name(s) of users convicted of violation of this section in a local newspaper annually, semi-annually or quarterly. 
(Ord. No. 2001-5, § II, 1-23-01; Ord. No. 2003-90, § 1(Exh. A), 9-10-03) 
Sec. 154-298. - Discharge to storm sewers regulated. 
It shall be illegal to discharge any polluted waters, including but not limited to, sewage, sludges, industrial wastewater, into any privately or city-owned storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-299. - General discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  The discharge of any wastewater, including contaminated storm water, spillage, and clean-up water, except through one of the following procedures is prohibited: 
(1)  Permitted discharge to the city water pollution control facilities; 
(2)  Direct discharge with a NPDES permit; or 
(3)  Off-site disposal by a company licensed to disposal of wastewater. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful, and grounds for revocation of its permit, for any user to introduce or cause to be introduced, directly or indirectly, into a POTW, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the water pollution control facilities, cause a pass-through, or cause the city to be in violation of any permits, whether or not the user is subject to other national pretreatment standards or any national, state, or local pretreatment requirements. No user shall contribute, or cause to be contributed, any of the following to city water pollution control facilities: 
(1)  Any liquid, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious or hazardous in any way to the wastewater treatment facility personnel or the operation of the facility. At no time shall any discharge have a flash point of less than 140° Fahrenheit as measured by a closed cup flash point tester using the test methods specified in 40 CFR § 261.21, nor shall two successive readings on a meter capable of reading L.E.L. (lower explosive limit) at any point in the pollution control facility be more than five percent nor any single reading be greater than ten percent. (Examples of liquids, solids or gases to which this section includes, but is not limited to, are gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, polychlorinated biphenyls, polybromated biphenyls, carbides, hydrides, stoddard solvents, and sulfides.) 
(2)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, offal, plastics, wood, paunch manure, hair and fleshlings, entrails, lime residues, beer or distillery slops, chemical residues, paint or ink residues, cannery waste, bulk solids, fatty oil and grease or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the water pollution control facilities. 
(3)  Any wastewaters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 12.0 at any time, or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the water pollution control facilities. 
(4)  Any wastewaters or wastes containing toxic substances in such concentrations as to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to interfere with any wastewater treatment process, or which results in the discharge of a toxic substance in toxic amounts to the water pollution control facility, or causing alone or in conjunction with other sources, the POTW's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(5)  Any reactive, noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating toxic gases in toxic amounts, vapors, fumes, public nuisance, or acute worker health or safety problems, hazard to life, or of preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance, inspection, and repair. 
(6)  Any substance which may cause the water pollution facility effluent or may cause other products of the water pollution control facility such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse. 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the water pollution control facility to violate its NPDES permit or cause a violation of the water quality standards of the receiving waters. 
(8)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes, paint wastes, pulp and paper manufacturing wastes, and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature exceeding 65.5° Celsius (150° Fahrenheit) or containing heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the water pollution control facility, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the influent to a water pollution control treatment facility exceeds 40° Celsius (104° Fahrenheit). 
(10)  Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants or suspended solids, released at a flow and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference to the operations and maintenance of the water pollution control facilities. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing quantities of radium, or naturally occurring or artificially produced radioisotopes in excess of accepted limits for drinking water. 
(12)  Any wastewater containing more than 100 mg/l of petroleum oil, cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin; as tested by Standard Methods, 19th edition, test number 5520 F (hydrocarbons). 
(13)  Any unpolluted cooling water, process water, ground water, roof drainage, basement drainage, subsurface drainage, or yard drainage through direct or indirect connection to the sanitary sewer, unless a storm sewer or other reasonable alternative for removal of such drainage does not exist, and then only when discharge is permitted by the industrial wastewater discharge permit and the appropriate charges are paid for the volume thereof. 
(14)  Any septage, chemical toilet contents, industrial sludges or similar matter or materials, unless specifically authorized by the commissioner through issuance of a permit pursuant to this article. 
(15)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the commissioner in a wastewater discharge permit. 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW. 
(17)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the commissioner. 
(c)  No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute or dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or for any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2013-67(12-O-0563), §§ 2, 3, 12-11-13 ) 
Sec. 154-300. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
The national categorical pretreatment standards found in 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. The national categorical pretreatment standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that category, shall supersede the limitations imposed under this article and such limits shall become part of this article by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-301. - Specific pollutant limitations. 
(a)  Limitations on wastewater strength. No person or user shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, wastewater at such concentration or mass as to cause interference or pass-through. The limits on process discharges by the user listed below may be used as a guide in design and plant control, but may be altered by the commissioner in the event of a discharge causing interference or pass-through. Allowable pollutant levels are provided as concentration limits and, for industrial users having discharges of less than 10,000 gallons per day (gpd), as mass limits. Industrial users classified as food processors under section 154-196(23) of this article are granted a mass limit on phosphorus on discharges under 25,000 gallons per day (gpd). No person or user shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, wastewater containing in excess of the following limits. 

 
(b)  The maximum levels listed below are based on fume toxicity standards. No person or user shall discharge or cause to be discharged any waters, wastewaters, or wastes containing concentrations in excess of the following. 

 
(i) In cases where the listed maximum allowable concentration is less than the detection limit and the sample result is also less than the detection limit, the user shall report "less than detection limit." 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2007-35(07-O-0937), §§ 1, 2, 6-12-07) 
Sec. 154-302. - Pretreatment of waste. 
Users of the water pollution control facilities shall design, construct, operate, and maintain pretreatment facilities whenever necessary for the user to achieve compliance with the limitations set forth in this article. Plans, specifications, operating procedures, and supporting data must be submitted to the commissioner for review prior to installation of a pretreatment system as specified under section 154-214(b). 
Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-303. - Protection against potential discharge problems, including slug loadings. 
Provision of protection from accidental discharge and slug loading. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article, including the protection against the discharge of slug loadings of any waste. Bi-annually the commissioner shall evaluate whether each SIU needs a slug control plan. Facilities and/or procedures to prevent these occurrences shall be provided and maintained by the user at its expense. A slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the city of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 154-214 of this article; 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-304. - Bypassing. 
(a)  Notice. 
(1)  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, the user shall submit written notification to the commissioner at least ten days in advance and receive approval prior to the bypass. 
(2)  An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass to the commissioner within one hour from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. 
(3)  A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain the following: 
a.  The cause of the bypass; 
b.  The exact dates and times of the bypass; 
c.  A description of the bypassed materials; 
d.  If the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and 
e.  Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. 
(b)  Prohibition of bypass. Bypass is prohibited, and the commissioner may take enforcement action against the industrial user for a bypass. The commissioner may approve a bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the commissioner determines the following: 
(1)  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property drainage; 
(2)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the cessation of production or operation, operational changes to reduce the impact or duration of the bypass, the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass; and 
(3)  The industrial user submitted notices as required under subparagraph (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-305. - Upset provision. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with effluent standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with effluent standards if the requirements of section (c) below are met. 
(c)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence, that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the commissioner within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days and contain the following: 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and the cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with effluent standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-306. - Prohibited discharge provision. 
(a)  User shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of prohibited discharges, including but not limited to discharges described in sections 154-299 and 154-301, where the user can demonstrate: 
(1)  It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from the other sources, would cause pass-through or interference; and 
(2)  a. A local limit designed to prevent pass-through and/or interferences, was developed in accordance with the POTW pretreatment program required by 40 CFR § 403.5(c) for each pollutant in the user's discharge that caused pass-through or interference, and the user was in compliance with each such local limit directly prior to and during the pass-through or interference; or 
b.  A local limit designed to prevent pass-through and/or interference has not been developed in accordance with 40 CFR § 403.5(c) for the pollutant(s) that caused the pass-through or interference, and the user's discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the POTW was regularly in compliance with the POTW's NPDES permit requirements, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable requirements for sewage sludge use or disposal. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 154-307. - Sewage pumping station specifications. 
The sewage pumping station specifications of the city, revised August 1973, copies of which are on file in the office of the municipal clerk and of the commissioner, are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 1998-71, § 2, 10-13-98) 
Secs. 154-308—154-315. - Reserved. 
Chapter 158 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Property to be maintained free of unhealthful conditions, including solid waste, junk, weeds and exterior storage, § 86-6; protection of plants in parks, § 110-69. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 158-1. - Official tree. 
The dogwood (Cornus florida) shall be the official tree of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2036) 
Sec. 158-2. - Poison ivy and poison sumac. 
(a)  Nuisance declared. Toxicodendron or toxicodendron vernix, commonly known as poison ivy and poison sumac, are declared to be nuisances per se, the existing and growing of which constitutes a menace to the health of the citizens of the city and is dangerous to all persons coming in contact therewith. 
(b)  Duty of owner, occupant. It shall be the duty of every person who owns or who is in possession of a lot upon which such plants grow to take such action as will effectively kill and destroy such poisonous plants, and it shall be unlawful for such person to fail to do so. 
(c)  Duty, authority of director, bureau of sanitary services. The director, bureau of sanitary services is authorized and directed to destroy all poison ivy or poison sumac plants growing upon the streets, sidewalks or other property belonging to the city. The director and any employee of that bureau is likewise authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of destroying those plants when it is necessary to protect the public, provided that the written consent of the owner of the property, the owner's agent or the person in possession thereof shall first be secured. 
(Code 1977, § 17-9007) 
Sec. 158-3. - Planting of Lombardy Poplar or Silver Maple trees prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance per se for any persons to set out or plant Lombardy poplar or silver maple trees on the sidewalks or along the streets or in or upon property of any kind owned or controlled by the city. Such trees shall be deemed a nuisance, and the director, bureau of parks and recreation is authorized and directed to cut down and remove any trees planted in violation of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 17-9006) 
Sec. 158-4. - Weed control. 
It is found and declared that uncontrolled weed growth on properties within the City of Atlanta is unhealthy and undesirable in that it provides harborage for rodents and insects, lowers property values, and constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Code 1977, § 17-9014; Ord. No. 2011-51(11-O-0136), §§ 1, 2, 11-16-11) 
Sec. 158-5. - Definitions. 
As used throughout this article, the term: 
Abandoned property means any lot, tract, or parcel of improved real estate that is unoccupied. It shall include any dwelling, building, structure, or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouse, improvement, and appurtenance belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. For the purposes of this section unoccupied shall be evidenced by notice of termination of service by a local utility provider, as well as visual observation by city personnel to include on site visits, or written communication attempts. The term shall expressly include, for means of illustration and not limitation, swimming pools and wells. Also as used in this chapter, the term shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Owner means the current owner of record as shown by the records of the tax commissioner and the deed records of the clerk of superior court for the current calendar year. 
Vacant property means any lot, tract, or parcel of real estate that is unimproved. It shall not mean or include any farm, or any agricultural facility or use for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Weed shall mean all unrestricted vegetative growth, including Kudzu (Pueraria Montana var. lobta), Chinese wisteria (Wisteria sinensis) and nuisance plants. 
(Ord. No. 2011-51(11-O-0136), § 3, 11-16-11; Ord. No. 2017-63(17-O-1275), § 4, 11-6-17 ) 
Sec. 158-6. - Exemptions. 
This section shall not apply to city, county, state or federal property or governmentally mandated buffers, corridors, wetlands; detention ponds, dams, farms, natural areas, lakes, etc. Furthermore, this article shall not apply to utility easements or rights-of-way, or tracts of property under single ownership 40,000 square feet or larger unless they are within a platted subdivision. Nuisance plants or any vegetative growth on exempted property not to encroach into the right of way or onto adjacent improved or greenspace property. Vegetative growth shall not create a fire, health or safety hazard for the right of way or adjacent improved or greenspace property. 
(Ord. No. 2011-51(11-O-0136), § 3, 11-16-11; Ord. No. 2017-63(17-O-1275), § 5, 11-6-17 ) 
Sec. 158-7. - Prohibited. 
It shall be a violation of this Code for the owner of any abandoned or vacant property as defined in this section to permit weeds to obtain a height exceeding 12 inches on at least ten percent of the size of the property tract or 35 percent of the pervious surface, whichever is greater, unless exempted as described in this section. 
Vegetation not to encroach into the right of way or onto adjacent improved or greenspace property or create a fire, health or safety hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2011-51(11-O-0136), § 3, 11-16-11; Ord. No. 2017-63(17-O-1275), § 6, 11-6-17 ) 
Sec. 158-8. - Notice to abate. 
(a)  If any code enforcement officer has reason to believe that a violation as described and declared in this section exists, the owner of the offending property shall be notified and requested to cause the condition to be abated. The notice shall be presented by both a physical posting on the property in the name of the property owner and by certified mail or personal delivery to the owner or owners as their names and addresses are shown on the tax records of the county. Notice shall be deemed complete and sufficient when so physically posted and personally delivered or mailed. 
(b)  The required notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the property, according to the public records of Fulton County, Georgia or DeKalb County, Georgia as applicable; 
(2)  Location of the property on which the violation exists; 
(3)  A statement by the code enforcement officer that the office of code enforcement has reason to believe that a violation of the above section(s) has been determined to exist on the property, which violation constitutes a public nuisance; 
(4)  A description of the condition which causes the property to be in violation; 
(5)  A requirement that the record owner of the property abate the violation within 20 calendar days from the date of the notice, failing which the city will abate the condition and assess against the record title owner of the parcel of land all the costs thereof plus an administrative charge; 
(6)  A statement that, if the costs and administrative charge are not paid within 30 calendar days of invoice date, a lien will be placed on the property; 
(7)  A schedule of the charges which may be assessed against the record owner if the city has to abate the violation; 
(8)  An estimate of the total cost, based on the schedule of charges, if the violation is abated by the city. Such estimate is not to be interpreted or construed as the final cost which may be assessed, but only a good-faith approximation of such cost. The final assessable cost may be greater or lesser than the estimate; and 
(9)  A statement that the record owner of the property may, within 20 calendar days from the date of the notice, contest the notice by making a written request that charges and summons issue, as contemplated by Sec. 18 of the Atlanta Housing Code and a hearing occur before the Atlanta Municipal Court for the purpose of showing that the cited condition constitutes a violation. 
(c)  Within 20 calendar days from the date of the notice, the owner of the property may contest the notice by making a written request, as evidenced by a postmarked stamp or actual receipt, to the code enforcement officer that charges and summons issue, as contemplated by Section 18 of Atlanta Housing Code and that a hearing occur before the Atlanta Municipal Court for the purpose of showing that the noticed condition constitutes a violation. Thereafter, the matter shall proceed in the manner provided for by Section 18 of the Housing Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-51(11-O-0136), § 3, 11-16-11) 
Sec. 158-9. - Abatement by city. 
If after 20 calendar days from the date of the notice no hearing has been requested and the condition described in the notice has not been abated, the code enforcement officer or his/her designee may cause the condition to be abated by the city at the expense of the property owner. Abatement of such condition shall also include the removal of any junk, trash and debris also found on the abandoned property. If the Atlanta Municipal Court finds a violation to exist, the code enforcement officer or his/her designee may cause the condition to be abated by the city at the expense of the property owner after 72 hours unless the Atlanta Municipal Court directs otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2011-51(11-O-0136), § 3, 11-16-11) 
Sec. 158-10. - Collection of costs and records; secured property. 
Upon failure to comply after proper notice, the code enforcement officer shall certify to the office of revenue the expense incurred in abating the condition in accordance with the preceding section. Such expense plus any administrative penalty as provided in the following section shall become payable within 30 calendar days of notice of abated condition after which a special assessment lien and charge shall be attached to the property which shall be payable with interest at the rate of eight percent per annum from the date of such invoice date until paid. Such lien shall be in favor of the City of Atlanta and may be satisfied at any time by payment thereof including accrued interest. Notice of such lien shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the superior court and recorded among the public records of Fulton County, Georgia or DeKalb County, Georgia as applicable. A notice of such lien may include the aggregate expense, including any administrative penalty or penalties, for each instance of abatement of the condition for any time within the past four months. The office of revenue shall provide quarterly reports to the city council of liens filed pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-51(11-O-0136), § 3, 11-16-11) 
Sec. 158-11. - Administrative charge; administrative penalty. 
(a)  In addition to the actual cost of abating the violation noticed under the above sections, the city, in lieu of performing the services internally, may assess a charge to cover expenses incurred in securing and monitoring the services of a private contractor to abate the violation. 
(b)  If a second notice is issued against the same owner within 12 months from the date of the first notice, an administrative penalty of $250.00 shall additionally be assessed at the time of the second notice. If a third notice is issued against the same owner within 12 months from the date of the first notice, an administrative penalty of $500.00 shall additionally be assessed at the time of the third notice. Violations of this article may be referred to the city attorney for appropriate legal action including, but not limited to, injunctive relief, in addition to enforcement as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-51(11-O-0136), § 3, 11-16-11) 
Secs. 158-12—158-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREE PROTECTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 74. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 158-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person seeking approval to take action under this article. 
Boundary tree means a tree on adjacent property whose root save area intrudes across the property line of the site under consideration. 
Buildable area means that area of the lot available for the construction of a dwelling and permissible accessory uses after having provided the required front, side, rear and any other special yards required by part 15 or part 16 of the city code. 
City shall mean City of Atlanta. 
City arboricultural standards means the arboricultural specifications and standards of practice, prepared by the city forester and city arborist and approved by the tree conservation commission, which are adopted pursuant to this article. 
City arborist shall mean an agent of the department of city planning responsible for administering this article regarding private property, or an agent of the department of parks and recreation responsible for administering this article regarding public property. 
City forester means an agent of the department of parks and recreation responsible for preparing and regularly maintaining the arboricultural specifications and standards of practice, for preparing and administering the master plan and for regulating and conserving trees on public land. 
Cover area means that area which falls within the drip line of any tree. 
Critical root zone shall mean root save area, as defined below. 
Destroy means any intentional or negligent act or lack of protection that is more likely than not to cause a tree to die within a period of five years, as determined by the city forester or city arborist. Such acts include, but are not limited to: performing grade changes (including lowering or filling the grade) that affect more than 20 percent of the root save area; trenching of roots; cutting, girdling or inflicting other severe mechanical injury to the trunk, roots or other vital sections of the tree; removing in excess of 20 percent of the live crown of the tree; inflicting damage upon the root system of a tree by the application of toxic substances, including solvents, oils, gasoline and diesel fuel; causing damage by the operation of heavy machinery; causing damage by the storage of materials; and/or deliberately or negligently burning or setting fire to a tree. In addition, topping, tipping, or any similar improper pruning practices will automatically be deemed as destruction of a tree. 
Diameter at breast height (DBH) means the diameter of the main stem of a tree or the combined diameters of a multi-stemmed tree as measured 4.5 feet above the natural grade at the base. The top diameter of a stump less than 4.5 feet tall shall be considered the "DBH" of an illegally destroyed tree for the purpose of calculating recompense. 
Disease means any fungal, bacterial, or viral infection that will result in the death of the tree, as determined by the city forester or city arborist. Disease shall also mean any fungal, bacterial or viral infection that has progressed to the point where treatment will not prevent the death of the tree, as determined by the city forester or city arborist. In order for the city forester or city arborist to deem that a tree has a disease, the person requesting such determination must present a lab report identifying and presenting the etiology (the cause and origin) of the fungal, bacterial or viral infection. 
Established recompense value means the dollar value to the city of a tree on private or public property used for the purpose of calculating cash recompense for removal or destruction. The established recompense value as of January 2003 is $100.00 per tree and $30.00 per diameter inch. This figure shall be evaluated and adjusted periodically by amendment to this ordinance, as proposed by the tree conservation commission in consultation with the city arborist. 
Fair or better condition means that the tree has a relatively sound and solid root, trunk, and canopy structure, no major insect infestation or other pathological problem, and a life expectancy greater than 15 years as determined by the city arborist or city forester. 
Flush cutting means the removal of limbs by cutting immediately adjacent to the trunk, destroying the protective branch collar and exposing the trunk to decay organisms. 
Fully stocked means a site occupied by trees at a density of 1,000 inches DBH/acre (e.g., 40 trees averaging 25 inches DBH on a one-acre site). 
Hardship means a unique or otherwise special existing condition that is not addressed by the ordinance. 
Hazard tree means a tree with uncorrectable defects severe enough to pose present danger to people or buildings under normal conditions, as determined by the city arborist or city forester. 
Heat island means a ground area covered by an impervious surface that retains solar or other heat energy and thereby contributes to an increase in the average temperature of the ecosystem. An external heat island is one situated outside a site, including but not limited to public streets. An internal heat island is one situated within a site, including but not limited to patios, driveways and other vehicular maneuvering and/or parking areas. Recreational areas including but not limited to swimming pools and game courts are excluded from this definition. 
Historic tree means a tree that has been designated by the tree conservation commission, upon application by the city arborist or any other interested person, to be of notable historic value and interest because of its age, size or historic association, in accordance with the city arboricultural specifications and standards of practice. Such designation may occur only by resolution of the commission, and the city arborist shall maintain and file with the municipal clerk a complete listing of the location of each historic tree. 
Illegally removed tree means any tree that is removed or destroyed without a permit. 
Impacted tree means a tree that will suffer injury or destruction of more than 20 percent but not more than 33 percent of its root save area. 
Incursion means any occasion of prohibited activity within an area protected by a tree protection fence. 
Injure means any intentional or negligent act, including various tree climbing practices, spiking, trimming, flush cutting, incursion into a designated root save area, and the use of climbing spurs or gaffs on trees not subject to removal that exposes the cambium of a tree to insects or decay organisms. 
Live stake means a dormant cutting installed as a component of a City of Atlanta stream bank erosion control or stabilization, or of a City of Atlanta stream or wetland restoration project, that is of at least three-quarters inches in diameter and at least 24 inches in length and cut from a live tree species that will readily sprout roots and grow when driven into the soil. Live stakes include, but are not limited to the following species: Salix x cottetii (Banker's Willow), Salix exigua (Sandbar Willow), Salix nigra (Black Willow), and Salix purpurea (Streamco Willow). 
Lost tree means any tree whose root save area will suffer injury or destruction in excess of 33 percent or is otherwise not protected according to the provisions of this article. 
Master plan means the comprehensive urban forest master plan. 
Mid-canopy tree means a tree that normally attains a DBH of ten—25 inches and a height of 30—60 feet at maturity. Examples include Southern sugar maple, "October Glory" Red maple, River birch, Deodar cedar, Persimmon, Gingko, American holly, Foster holly, Eastern Red cedar, Blackgum, Sourwood, Chinese pistasche, Nuttall oak, Chinese elm, European hornbeam. 
New lot of record means a tract of land that has been newly subdivided and so recorded as a separate property of record with the county land registrars office. 
Pine means only a member of the genus Pinus, and does not include other needled trees commonly known as cedar, fir, spruce, hemlock, or any other members of the family Pinaceae. 
Private arborist means any person who is not employed by the City of Atlanta, and who is a Georgia Registered Forester, or at a minimum, certified by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) as an arborist and a member in good standing of the ISA. 
Private arborist report means a typed report that is submitted and signed by a private arborist, as defined above, and that at a minimum clearly states the arborist's name, contact information and qualifications, and identifies the site address and each individual tree to be considered by the city forester or city arborist. 
Private property tree means for purposes of this article, where reference is made to a tree being on "private property", the tree shall be deemed to be on private property where more than 50 percent of the flair of the tree, where the tree interfaces with the earth, is located on private property. 
Protective pruning means pruning to elevate branches/limbs that are likely to be damaged by construction activities. Pruning must not exceed 20 percent of the live crown. Protective pruning is not an ISA term. 
Pruning means that definition of the term as set forth in both the most recent International Society of Arboricultural pruning standards and guidelines and American National Safety Institute 300.33. At no time shall trimming, topping, tipping or flush cutting of trees be deemed a form of "pruning." 
Public property tree means for purposes of this article, where reference is made to a tree being on "public property", the tree shall be deemed to be on public property where at least 50 percent of the flair of the tree, where the tree interfaces with the earth, is located on public property. 
Public utility means any publicly, privately or cooperatively owned line, facility or system for producing, transmitting or distributing communications, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil products, water, steam, clay, waste, storm water not connected with highway drainage and other similar services and commodities, including publicly-owned fire and police and traffic signals and lighting systems, which directly or indirectly service the public or any part thereof. 
Overstory tree means a tree that normally attains a DBH in excess of 25 inches and a height in excess of 60 feet at maturity. Examples include Red maple, Pecan, Hickory, American beech, ash sp., Tulip poplar, Southern magnolia, White oak, Water oak, Southern red oak, Shumard oak, Baldcypress, elm sp. 
Required yard area means the open space on a lot not occupied by a structure. 
Root save area means the area surrounding a tree that is essential to that tree's health and survival. For a free-standing tree with no apparent root restrictions the root save area shall consist of a circle having a radius of one foot for each one inch of diameter at breast height of the tree. Adjustments to the root save area may be made by the city arborist if justified by specific documented site conditions. 
Sampling means the employment of recognized statistical survey methods to count and measure existing trees on a site. 
Saved tree means any tree that is to be protected and not destroyed or injured during construction as required by this article. 
Silvicultural prescription means any typed site or individual tree prescription developed by a private arborist, as defined above, that is aimed at preserving a tree. Prescriptions must include without limitation: the private arborist's name, signature, and contact information; the site address and individually identified trees at issue; a harvesting or stand improvement plan, soil and foliar analysis/treatment, schedule of treatment, fertilizer application, soil amendments, pesticide application with a copy of the pesticide labeling, and pruning. Trimming, topping, tipping or flush cutting of trees will not be accepted as a part of any silvicultural prescription. 
Specimen tree means a tree that meets the following criteria: 
(1)  Large hardwoods (eg. oaks, elms, poplars, etc.) and softwoods (eg. pine sp.) in fair or better condition with a DBH equal to or greater than 30 inches; 
(2)  Smaller understory trees (dogwoods, redbuds, sourwoods, persimmons, etc.) in fair or better condition with a DBH equal to or greater than ten inches; and 
(3)  Lesser-sized trees of rare species, exceptional aesthetic quality, or historical significance as designated by the tree conservation commission. 
Spiking means the use of metal spurs or gaffs to climb live trees for any purpose other than tree removal or human rescue. 
Severe mechanical injury means a wound or combination of wounds, measured at its or their widest extent, that expose or destroy the cambium layer of 30 percent or more of the circumference of the tree, measured at the top of the wounded area. 
Structural root plate means the zone of rapid root taper that provides the tree stability against windthrow. The radius of the root plate is proportional to the stem diameter (DBH) of a tree. The table below provides examples of root plate radii for upright trees without restricted roots. 

 
Subdivision means a tract of land that has been newly subdivided in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance and so recorded as a separate property of record with the county land registrars office. 
Tipping means the cutting of a lateral limb in such manner as to leave a prominent stub extending beyond a branch node or the trunk. 
Topping means the cutting of a leader trunk in such manner as to leave a prominent stub extending beyond the node (crotch) of another leader trunk or major branch that may become a leader trunk. 
Tree means any self-supporting woody, perennial plant that has a trunk diameter of two inches or more when measured at a point six inches above ground level and which normally attains an overall height of at least ten feet at maturity, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
Tree conservation commission means the commission established pursuant to section 158-61. 
Tree replacement plan means a drawing which depicts the location, size and species of existing and replacement trees on the lot for which a permit is sought, and a table detailing, by species and DBH, the existing trees to be saved, lost or destroyed, and, by species and caliper, the replacement trees to be planted. 
Tree structure means branch and trunk architecture that result in a canopy structure that resists failure. 
Trimming means cutting a stem to an indiscriminate length, as determined by the city forester or city arborist. While trimming is unacceptable, pruning- the act of cutting stems at nodes- is permissible. 
Understory tree means a tree that normally attains a DBH of less than ten inches and a height of less than 30 feet at maturity. Examples include Trident maple, Serviceberry, American hornbeam, Redbud, Fringetree, Dogwood, Smoketree, Burford holly, Nellie R. Stevens holly, treeform Crape myrtle, Little gem magnolia, Golden raintree, cherry sp. 
Vacant lot means a property of record that has not had a structure on it in the past five years. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2035; Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2006-04, § 5, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), § 1, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 2009-13 (09-O-0399), § 1, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 158-27. - Authority. 
This article is enacted pursuant to the city's planning authority granted by the constitution of the state, including but not limited to Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, ¶¶ 3 and 4; the city's general police power; appendix I of the City Charter, paragraphs 15, 21, 25, 30, 31, 47 and 57; and all other state and local laws applicable to this article. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2032; Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 158-28. - Policy, purpose and intent. 
It is the policy of the city that there shall be no net loss of trees within the boundaries of the city. The purpose of this article is to establish the standards necessary to assure that this policy will be realized and that the city will continue to enjoy the benefits provided by its urban forest. The provisions of this article are enacted to: 
(1)  Establish and maintain the maximum amount of tree cover on public and private lands in the city by prohibiting the destruction and removal of trees except in accordance with the standards set forth in this article; 
(2)  Maintain trees in the city in a healthy and nonhazardous condition through professionally accepted arboricultural practices; 
(3)  Establish and revise as necessary standards for the planting and maintenance of trees so as to improve the economic base of the city by improving property values, to enhance the visual quality of the city and its neighborhoods and to improve public health by lessening air pollution and the incidence of flooding; 
(4)  Minimize hazards and damage to streets and sidewalks and lessen public rights- of-way maintenance costs; 
(5)  Provide for the designation of historic and specimen trees; and 
(6)  Promote efficient and cost-effective management of the urban forest through the development of a comprehensive long-range urban forest master plan. 
(7)  Provide latitude in the interpretation and application of city administrative rules, standards and guidelines when reasonable and necessary to minimize the destruction of trees. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2033; Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 158-29. - Scope. 
The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to all private property and all public property subject to city regulation, including all public school property, public housing property, parks, rights-of-way, and easements granted to other private or public entities, including public utilities, except where superseded by franchise agreements. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2034; Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), § 19, 6-12-07) 
Sec. 158-30. - Parking lot requirements. 
The owner of any surface parking lot that is being built and/or resurfaced, and that will have a total of 30 or more parking spaces, whether primary or accessory in use, and whether commercial or noncommercial, must present a plan to the city arborist for approval, indicating that the parking lot will meet the minimum barrier curb and landscaping requirements as follows: 
(1)  Barrier curbs shall be installed around the perimeter of the parking lot and around landscaped areas that are required in this article, except where the perimeter abuts an adjacent building or structure and at points of ingress and egress into the facility, so as to prevent encroachment of vehicles onto adjacent property, rights-of-way and landscaped areas. 
(2)  Barrier curbs shall be a minimum of six inches in height and a minimum of eight inches in width and permanent in nature. Barrier curbs shall be concrete or stone. Such curbs shall be securely installed and maintained in good condition. 
(3)  Where the end of a parking space abuts a landscaped area, barrier curbs may be placed in the parking space at a maximum of two feet from the end of the parking space. This two-foot wide area may have the pavement removed and be developed as part of the required landscaped area. 
(4)  Surface parking lots shall have a minimum landscaped area equal to at least ten percent of the paved area within such lot. In no case shall a parking lot owner be required to provide landscaped areas that exceeds ten percent of the paved area. The director of the bureau of buildings, in consultation with the city arborist, shall have the authority to grant a variance from the requirements of this subsection if: the parking lot existed prior to 1977; and the director of the bureau of buildings finds that the applicant's circumstances meet the requirements set forth in subsection 158-30(15); and the director of the bureau of buildings finds that it is impossible to achieve the minimum landscaping requirement. For surface parking lots with fewer than 30 spaces, this variance may reduce or completely eliminate the amount of landscaped area required. For surface parking lots with 30 or greater spaces, this variance may reduce the landscaping requirement, but in no event shall the parking lot be permitted to have landscaped area that is less than ten percent of the paved area. 
(5)  A minimum of one tree per eight parking spaces shall be included in the required landscaped areas. For the purpose of satisfying this requirement, existing trees that are two and one-half inches or more in caliper as measured at a height of 36 inches above ground level shall be considered to be equivalent to one or more newly planted trees on the basis of one tree for each two and one-half inches of caliper. 
(6)  In addition to trees, ground cover shall also be provided in order to protect tree roots and to prevent erosion. Ground cover shall consist of shrubs, liriope, pine bark mulch and other similar landscaping materials. 
(7)  Shrubs shall be maintained at a maximum height of two and one-half feet, except where such shrubs are screening the parking surface from an adjacent residential use. 
(8)  If landscaped areas are in the interior of a parking lot they shall be a minimum of six feet in width and six feet in length with a minimum area of 36 square feet. 
(9)  Continuous landscaped buffer strips shall be constructed along sidewalks and public rights-of-way where surface parking lots are adjacent to such sidewalks or public rights-of-way except at points of ingress and egress into the facility. Such landscaped buffer strips shall be a minimum of five feet in width and shall contain, in addition to ground cover, trees planted a maximum of 42½ feet on center along the entire length. 
(10)  Newly planted trees shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches in caliper as measured at a height six inches above ground level, shall be a minimum of ten feet in height, shall have a 40-foot minimum mature height and shall be drought-tolerant. Trees shall be planted at a minimum of 30 inches from any barrier curb so as to prevent injury to trees from vehicle bumpers. 
(11)  Where landscaped area is located adjacent to vehicle overhangs, the trees shall be planted in line with the side stripes between parking spaces in order to avoid injury to trees by vehicle bumpers. 
(12)  All landscaped areas, including trees located in the public right-of-way that are counted in the fulfillment of this requirement, shall be properly maintained in accordance with approved landscape plans. If a tree or any plant material dies, it shall be replaced within six months so as to meet all requirements of this section and to allow for planting in the appropriate planting season. 
(13)  If it is determined by the city arborist that implementation of these regulations will result in the loss of parking spaces in existing lots, the director of the bureau of traffic and transportation may increase the allowable percentage of compact car spaces from 25 percent up to 35 percent so as to minimize the loss of parking spaces, but only with the approval of the city arborist. 
(14)  Notwithstanding subsection (13) of this section, existing parking lots shall not be required to reduce the number of parking spaces by more than three percent as a result of implementing these landscaping regulations. 
(15)  Upon written application by any person subject to the provisions of this section, the director of the bureau of buildings is hereby authorized to grant administrative variances to the requirements of this section only upon making all of the following findings: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, topography, subsurface conditions, overhead structures or the existence of sufficient trees in the public right-of-way within ten feet of the property line. 
b.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
c.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this article and of part 16 of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2038; Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), § 2, 6-12-07) 
Sec. 158-31. - Easements to plant trees on private property. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with the owners of private property located within the city for the purpose of acquiring easements to plant trees on such property, in consideration for which such private property owner shall acquire ownership of such trees as the city may plant. Provided, however, that any such agreement shall limit the duration of the easement to a time period of two years and shall limit the property interest acquired by the city to that distance sufficient to allow the planting of trees, in no case to exceed a maximum of a 15-foot setback from the property line or right-of-way held by the city. Provided further, that under such agreement the private property owner shall agree to maintain the trees planted thereon and shall also agree to hold the city harmless for any liability attributable to the planting or presence of the trees on the private property. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2043; Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 158-32. - Conservation easements and fee simple donations. 
The mayor is hereby authorized, but is not required to accept conservation easements created pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq., as amended from time to time, or any successor provision of law, the' purpose of which easements are to preserve land in its natural scenic landscape or in a forest use. Such easements must be perpetual in duration and shall contain such other terms and provisions as the mayor or her/his designee shall deem appropriate. In addition, the mayor is authorized, but not required, to accept fee simple donations of land, the purpose of which is to preserve the land in its natural scenic landscape or in a forest use. Such donation shall contain the terms and provisions deemed appropriate by the mayor or her/his designee. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2044; Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), § 3, 6-12-07) 
Sec. 158-33. - Enforcement. 
The bureau of parks and the bureau of buildings shall be charged with the enforcement of this article. The city forester and the city arborist have police power to do all acts necessary to ensure that the provisions of this article are not violated, including, but not limited to, the issuance of citations for the violation of any provision of this article. In instances in which an individual or firm is found cutting or otherwise destroying a tree without a permit to do so in their possession, the Atlanta Police Department shall require such person or persons to cease such operations until a permit is obtained. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2045; Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 158-34. - Penalties. 
(a)  Legal. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Atlanta Code of Ordinances. The tree conservation commission shall have the authority to determine when a person has violated any of the provisions of this article and shall have the authority to impose and enforce the fines described herein. Where the tree conservation commission is able to determine the exact number of trees upon which a tree protection ordinance violation occurred, a fine imposed for the first violation shall be no less than $500.00, and the fine imposed for each subsequent violation shall be $1,000.00. Each tree upon which a violation occurred shall be deemed a separate violation of the tree protection ordinance. Where the tree conservation commission is unable to determine the exact number of trees upon which a tree protection ordinance violation occurred, the commission shall assume a density of 1,000 inches DBH of trees per acre, and specifically shall assume that the lot contains 60 trees of 16.67 inches DBH per acre, and shall impose a fine of $60,000.00 per acre of land where the offense(s) occurred. Where the subject property is smaller than one acre, the fine shall be pro rated. Each day's continuance of a violation may be considered a separate offense. The owner of any building, structure or site, or part thereof, where anything in violation of this article exists, and any architect, builder, contractor or agent of the owner, or any tenant who commits or assists in the commission of any violation of this article shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to paying the penalties set forth in subsection (a) above, any tree of six inches or larger DBH except pines, or any pine tree of 12 inches DBH or larger, that is removed or destroyed in violation of this article shall be replaced or recompensed by the violator, as set forth in section 158-103. 
(c)  Tree protection. Fences surrounding root save areas must be erected before the commencement of any land disturbance, demolition or construction. Fences must comply with City of Atlanta arboricultural standards. More substantial wood or steel fencing may be required by the arborist on commercial or other heavy construction sites or upon multiple violations. No activity, including construction material storage, shall occur in areas protected by tree fences. Tree protection fences must remain in place and upright until such time as final landscaping of a site requires their removal. The arborist may assess recompense against the violator if, in the arborist's opinion, the incursion has converted trees from the status of saved trees to the status of injured, lost, or destroyed trees, as set forth in this section above. 
(d)  Additional actions and penalties. In addition to all other actions and penalties authorized in this section, the city attorney is authorized to institute injunctive, abatement or any other appropriate judicial or administrative actions or proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove any violations of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2046; Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2006-04, § 3, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), § 4, 6-12-07) 
Secs. 158-35—158-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE CONSERVATION COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Boards and commissions, § 3-401. 
Cross reference— Boards, councils, commissions and authorities, § 2-1851 et seq. 

Sec. 158-61. - Establishment; appointment of members. 
There is established a tree conservation commission of the city, referred to in this article as the commission. The commission shall consist of 15 members, eight of which shall be appointed by the mayor and seven by the council. All members shall be confirmed by the city council. Each of the members shall contain specialized knowledge about trees, the Tree Protection Ordinance, and/or the impact of construction activities on trees. The membership shall consist of the following: 
(1)  One member shall be appointed by the mayor who is a registered landscape architect. 
(2)  One member shall be appointed by the mayor who is either a botanist, forester, horticulturist or nursery worker. 
(3)  One member shall be appointed by the mayor who is a registered architect. 
(4)  One member shall be appointed by the mayor who is a member of an environmental organization. 
(5)  One member shall be appointed by the mayor who is a real estate professional. 
(6)  One member shall be appointed by the mayor who is a private arborist. 
(7)  Two members shall be lay citizens appointed by the mayor interested in environmental protection. 
(8)  One member shall be appointed by the council who is a residential builder. 
(9)  One member shall be appointed by the council who is a residential developer. 
(10)  One member shall be appointed by the council who is a commercial or industrial developer. 
(11)  Three members shall be citizens appointed by the paired districts in consultation with the at-large council member. 
(12)  One member shall be an urban planner or an environmental resource planner appointed by the president of council. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2041(a); Ord. No. 1998-65, § 1, 9-23-98; Ord. No. 2000-17, § 1, 3-29-00; Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), § 5, 6-12-07) 
Sec. 158-62. - Terms; vacancies; compensation. 
(a)  The initial tree conservation commission membership shall contain three members appointed for a term of one year and four members appointed for a term of two years. Thereafter, all subsequent appointments shall be for a term of two years. Members of the tree conservation commission may be appointed for consecutive terms consistent with general laws regulating service on city boards and commissions. The mayor may recommend removal and replacement of a member of the commission for nonperformance of duty. Each member shall receive a $75.00 per month honorarium, but only if the member attends at least two of the hearings and/or business meetings (or at least one of each) per month. The commission shall select from its members a chairperson to serve for a one-year term. 
(b)  The council shall appoint seven of the 15 tree conservation commission members as described in subsection 158-61. With regard to the citizens appointed by the paired districts, pursuant to subsection 158-61(11), the council shall appoint the three members in the following manner: 
(1)  Districts 1, 2, 3 and 4 and at-large post 1. 
(2)  Districts 5, 6, 7 and 8 and at-large post 2. 
(3)  Districts 9, 10, 11 and 12 and at-large post 3. 
(c)  In the event that an appointment to fill vacancies by the mayor or council is not made within 60 days of the mayor's or council's request, the president of council can proceed to nominate a person for the position, and the nomination shall be forwarded to the committee on council. 
(d)  If a tree conservation commission board position becomes vacant and a member is not appointed pursuant to section 158-61 within six months, the tree conservation commission, by a majority vote of the remaining members, may temporarily appoint someone to the missing category until such time that a permanent board member is appointed as described in section 158-61. The person appointed by the tree conservation commission need not meet the specific requirements of the vacant position, but must contain specialized knowledge about trees, the tree protection ordinance, and/or the impact of construction activities on trees. 
(e)  The executive branch shall provide such staff as is required for the efficient operation of the board. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2041(b); Ord. No. 2000-17, § 2, 3-29-00; Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), § 6, 6-12-07) 
Sec. 158-63. - Functions; powers; duties. 
The functions, powers and duties of the tree conservation commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  Assisting the city arborist in establishing and maintaining a record of historic trees, specimen trees and other unique environmentally significant trees within the city. 
(2)  Hearing and deciding appeals of decisions of administrative officials as provided in section 158-65. 
(3)  Establishing educational and other programs to encourage proper management and maintenance of trees on private property in the city. 
(4)  Reviewing and approving the city arboricultural specifications and standards of practice promulgated by the city arborist and city forester and required pursuant to this article. 
(5)  Providing consultation and assistance to the city forester in the preparation of the master plan required pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2041(c); Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 158-64. - Meetings; clerk; court reporter; rules of procedure. 
The tree conservation commission shall establish a regular meeting schedule, and all meetings of the commission shall be open to the public. The commission shall have a clerk, designated by the commissioner of the department of planning, development and neighborhood conservation, who shall be a full-time employee of the department. The clerk shall serve as secretary to the commission and shall be responsible for the clerical administration of the appeals process, including the creation and maintenance of files in appeals cases, the filing of documents submitted by the parties to an appeal, and the maintenance of evidence submitted in connection with appeals cases. The clerk shall also direct and supervise the giving of notices required by the commission and by this article in connection with appeals, and shall certify, when necessary, the actions of the commission in such matters. The clerk shall also be responsible for the maintenance and preservation of all records of the commission. The meetings of the tree conservation commission shall be recorded by a court reporter contracted for by the city and paid for by the city from the proceeds of the tree trust fund. The commission shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of meetings, hearings and attendance requirements for members. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2041(d); Ord. No. 2000-21, § I, 4-12-00; Ord. No. 2000-26, § II, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2003-113, § 1, 12-10-03) 
Sec. 158-65. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals from the decisions of administrative officials. 
(1)  Who may appeal. 
a.  For a decision by a city administrative official based on the tree protection ordinance regarding tree(s) on private property, an appeal may be made by any person who is aggrieved by the decision and who resides or owns property or a business either within 500 feet or within the NPU of the property on which the tree(s) at issue are located, except that appeals may not be made for decisions made by the city arborist pursuant to subsection 158-101(h) of this article. The appeal may be made only if the appellant is able to identify on the notice of appeal (as described in subsection 158-65(3)c.) the specific section of the tree protection ordinance that the appellant believes was misinterpreted or misapplied by the city administrative official, and the way in which the appellant believes the section should be interpreted or applied; and/or any facts material to the city administrative official's decision that the appellant believes were misinterpreted or misunderstood. 
b.  For a decision by a city administrative official based on the tree protection ordinance regarding tree(s) on public property, an appeal may be made by any citizen of Atlanta, any owner of property or a business in Atlanta, and/or any civic association in the neighborhood planning unit in which the tree(s) at issue are located, who is aggrieved by the decision, except that appeals may not be made for decisions made by the city arborist pursuant to subsection 158-101(h) of this article. The appeal may be made only if the appellant is able to identify on the notice of appeal (as described in subsection 158-65(3)c. the specific section of the tree protection ordinance that the appellant believes was misinterpreted or misapplied by the city administrative official, and the way in which the appellant believes the section should be interpreted or applied; and/or any facts material to the city administrative official's decision that the appellant believes were misinterpreted or misunderstood. 
(2)  Timing of appeal. 
a.  Appeals regarding tree(s) on private property must be filed within five calendar days of the city arborist's preliminary decision regarding the tree(s) at issue. At the time that a permit application is filed with the city arborist regarding tree(s) on private property, the city arborist shall pre-post the property on which the tree(s) are located for a minimum of ten calendar days prior to making a preliminary decision. The pre-posting shall indicate to the public that a permit application has been filed. If and when the city arborist grants preliminary approval of the permit application, s/he shall post the property for five working days with a final posting, indicating to the public that preliminary approval has been granted. 
b.  Appeals regarding tree(s) on public property must be filed within 15 calendar days of the city arborist's preliminary decision regarding the tree(s) at issue. 
(3)  Appeal requirements. 
a.  All appeals must be filed with the clerk of the tree conservation commission. 
b.  An appeal shall not be deemed filed until the clerk receives a completed notice of appeal, along with either a $75.00 administrative fee used to help defray the administrative costs of the appeal or a hardship letter. The hardship letter must explain in detail why the appellant is unable to pay the fee and must be signed by the appellant. At its earliest convenience, but in no event later than at the appeal hearing, the tree conservation commission shall determine whether to waive the $75.00 fee. 
c.  The notice of appeal shall state at a minimum: the name, address, phone number, and email address (if any) of the appellant, and whether the appellant is an Atlanta citizen; if the tree(s) at issue are located on public property and the appellant is not an Atlanta citizen, whether the appellant owns property or a business in Atlanta, and if so, the address; if the tree(s) at issue are located on public property, whether the appellant is a civic association in the neighborhood planning unit in which the tree(s) at issue are located; if the tree(s) at issue are located on private property, whether the appellant owns and/or resides on property or owns a business on property located within 500 feet from the property on which the tree(s) at issue are located; the date of the decision being appealed; the name of the person(s) who filed the permit application about which the appeal is made; the address of the subject property; the specific section of the tree protection ordinance that the appellant believes was misinterpreted or misapplied by the city administrative official, and the way in which the appellant believes the section should be interpreted or applied; and any facts material to the city administrative official's decision that the appellant believes were misinterpreted or misunderstood. 
d.  An appeal may challenge the decisions regarding one property only. 
(4)  After the appeal is filed. 
a.  Once an appeal is filed, any activity authorized by the decision appealed shall be stayed automatically. Despite the authorization given by the decision appealed, no permits shall be issued, no trees cut, nor earth disturbed. 
b.  The tree conservation commission shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and shall give public notice thereof as well as prompt notice in writing to the parties in interest. Public notice shall be given by the clerk of the tree conservation commission in such a manner as shall be provided for in the rules for appeals adopted by the tree conservation commission, but in no event shall such notice be given less than 15 calendar days before the date of the hearing. 
c.  At least two weeks prior to the appeal hearing, each party shall submit to the clerk of the tree conservation commission and the other parties in interest a written summary of their argument and a copy of all documentary evidence supporting their argument. This requirement shall apply to any property owner or resident, on which the subject tree(s) is located, that is not a party to the appeal, and any other person wishing to present evidence at the hearing. The parties shall submit to the tree conservation commission and the other parties in interest all rebuttal arguments and rebuttal documentary evidence at least one week prior to the hearing. Submissions of new evidence at the appeal hearing will not be accepted or considered by the tree conservation commission unless a showing can be made and the tree conservation commission finds that the evidence was not available one week prior to the hearing. 
(5)  The appeal hearing. 
a.  At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by an agent or by an attorney. 
b.  At least three members of the tree conservation commission must preside over each hearing. The decision on any appeal shall be determined by a majority vote of the tree conservation commission members present and voting on the particular appeal. 
c.  The tree conservation commission shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. All appeals to the tree conservation commission must be concluded or resolved within two months of the initial hearing. If the appeal is not concluded or resolved within that time, the tree conservation commission will issue an "appeal approved" or "appeal denied" final ruling no later than the two month deadline. 
(6)  Tree conservation commission's ruling. 
a.  The tree conservation commission shall sustain an appeal upon an express finding that the administrative official's action was based upon an erroneous finding of a material fact or upon an erroneous application of law. If no such finding is made, the tree conservation commission shall deny the appeal. The tree conservation commission shall have the authority to reverse, affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the administrative official's decision being appealed, and to that end shall have all of the powers of the administrative official. These powers shall include, where applicable, the power to direct the issuance of a permit, provided that all requirements imposed by this article and all other applicable laws are met. 
b.  In the event that the tree conservation commission rules that recompense and/or a fine should be assessed, but also finds that the amount of recompense owed or fine assessed cannot be paid as a result of financial hardship, the commission shall have the authority to reduce the fine or recompense. The commission shall create written guidelines by which to determine whether and to what extent financial hardship exists. These guidelines shall include a requirement that the person requesting a finding of financial hardship make a written request and provide documentary evidence of such hardship. The specific documents to be provided shall be determined by the commission and listed in the guidelines. The commission shall apply these guidelines consistently any time that a hardship request is made. Where the commission finds, based upon the hardship request, the supporting documentation, and the guidelines, that a financial hardship exists, the commission shall have the authority to reduce or completely eliminate the amount of recompense and/or fine owed, as long as said decision is consistent with the guidelines. The commission shall issue a written decision regarding the financial hardship request and shall provide in writing the basis for that decision. 
c.  Any person desiring to appeal a decision of the tree conservation commission under subsection 158-65(b) shall notify the clerk of the commission, in writing, of such intent within six working days of the date of the written decision of the commission. Barring such notice of intent, the stay on the activity that was the basis for the decision appealed shall be lifted, within the constraints imposed by the commission's ruling. 
(b)  Appeals from decisions of the tree conservation commission. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the tree conservation commission, or any city official, bureau, office, department or board affected by such decision, may appeal such decision through a writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County, pursuant to the procedures set forth by Georgia law. The filing of an appeal in the superior court from any decision of the commission shall not ipso facto act as a supersedes, but the city shall abide by any supersedes granted by Fulton County Superior Court. 
(c)  Frivolous appeals. An appeal may be dismissed as frivolous by a vote of the commission in advance of the time that would be set for hearing. In such instances, the members of the commission may be polled without meeting. An appeal is frivolous if it clearly appears from the face of the notice of the appeal and the justification set forth, that no facts could be brought forth at a hearing that could sustain such an appeal as a matter of law. In the event that an appeal is dismissed as frivolous, all parties shall be notified in writing by the clerk, and the clerk shall also give immediate notice by telephone, e-mail, or facsimile transmission to the appellant, advising the appellant of his or her right to appeal. Any person desiring to appeal a decision of the commission under subsection 158-65(c) shall notify the clerk of the commission in writing of such intent within three working days of the written decision of the commission. Barring such notice of intent the stay on the activity appealed from shall be lifted. 
(d)  Appeals of cash recompense. An appeal whose sole purpose is to request an adjustment in cash recompense shall not prohibit the issuance of the arborist's final approval of a plan if the appellant submits with the appeal, a bank certified check, or a money order payable to the City of Atlanta in the amount of the calculated recompense that occasions the appeal. The check or money order shall be retained by the clerk of the tree conservation commission until such time as the appeal is decided. If recompense relief is granted and the arborist has receipt of recompense paid to the City of Atlanta in the recompense amount determined by the appeal, the clerk shall surrender the check or money order to the appellant. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2039; Ord. No. 2000-21, § II, 4-12-00; Ord. No. 2000-26, § III, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), § 7, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 2008-25(08-O-0486), § 1, 4-28-08) 
Sec. 158-66. - Tree trust fund. 
(a)  Establishment and administration. The tree conservation commission shall establish a tree trust fund for the protection, maintenance, and regeneration of the trees and other forest resources of Atlanta. During any given fiscal year, five percent of the funds received by the tree trust fund during the immediately preceding fiscal year or $100,000.00, whichever is greater, shall be placed into a tree trust fund education outreach account ("education account"), and such monies shall be used for educational materials, educational programs, and educational outreach. Any amount not utilized in the given fiscal year shall remain in the account to be utilized in future years. A maximum of $60,000.00 per year of the fund may be used to pay for the annual salary and benefits of a Tree Commission administrative analyst whose primary responsibility shall be education. In the event that the cost of the salary and benefits exceeds $60,000.00, the remainder of the cost shall be paid for from the education account. A maximum of $50,000.00 per year of the fund may be used for costs arising directly from administering and enforcing the tree protection ordinance that would not have arisen in the absence of the tree protection ordinance, including but not limited to the cost of posting trees to be removed, the cost of advertising tree commission hearings, and the cost of court reporter services at tree commission hearings. The honoraria for tree conservation commission members, as described in subsection 158-62(a), may also be paid from the fund. 
A maximum of $75,000.00 per year of the fund may be used to pay for the annual salary and benefits of an office of parks arborist senior position. The person in this position shall act as a project manager for the various projects on city-owned property being paid for by the tree fund, namely new tree plantings, tree maintenance work, removal of invasive species, and fulfillment of ongoing tree maintenance work orders. The position may also be utilized to prepare for future projects that are paid for by the Tree Fund, such as preparation of RFP's, evaluation of proposals, and performance of research regarding the same. The specific responsibilities of this position shall be determined by the Commissioner of the Department of Parks and Recreation or her/his designee, after consultation with the Tree Conservation Commission. 
A maximum of $110,000.00 per year of the fund may be used to fund the annual salary and benefits of the two arborist positions. In the event that the costs of the salary and benefits positions exceeds $110,000.00, the remainder of the cost shall be assumed by the general fund budget in the department of city planning. 
A maximum of $200,000.00 per year of the fund may be used to pay for the annual salary and benefits of an office of parks tree trimming crew. The tree trimming crew shall be comprised of one forestry crew supervisor, one tree trimmer senior, and one tree trimmer. The members of this crew will be responsible for providing services that maintain and enhance the health of the city's tree canopy, including trimming, pruning, and limbing trees that are located in city-owned parks and rights-of-way. 
(b)  Procurement of forested property. As set forth in subsection 158-66(a) above, "protection, maintenance, and regeneration of the trees and other forest resources of Atlanta" shall include procurement of privately-owned forested property. The tree trust fund may be utilized to purchase forested property provided that the following minimum criteria are satisfied: 
(1)  The property must contain one or more of the following, as determined by or at the direction of the department of parks and recreation commissioner and the department of city planning commissioner: i) 80 percent or more canopy cover; ii) minimum forestation standards of 1,000 DBH inches; and/or iii) 50 mature trees per acre. 
(2)  The purchase of the forested property must be authorized by a duly-enacted city ordinance, and said ordinance shall include the following: 
a.  The property must explicitly be dedicated and preserved in perpetuity as forested land; 
b.  The property must be available for public use without cost (subject to Atlanta's park rules and other applicable city ordinances); 
c.  Use of the property must be restricted to passive recreational activities with minimal environmental impact, as determined and established in writing by the department of parks and recreation commissioner based on the characteristics of the property; and 
d.  The department of parks and recreation commissioner shall provide a property maintenance plan as an attachment to the ordinance. The plan will describe the types of maintenance that may be needed at the property, will estimate the property's annual maintenance cost, and will identify the source of funding for the estimated annual maintenance cost. To the extent that the commissioner identifies the tree trust fund as the source of maintenance funding, any specific allocation of maintenance dollars from the tree trust fund shall be authorized as a separate procurement or expenditure, in a manner consistent with applicable city ordinances. 
(3)  The department of parks and recreation commissioner and the department of city planning commissioner shall jointly develop a written list of factors and a process for evaluating parcels that may be suitable for acquisition as forested property. An ordinance authorizing procurement of forested property, as described in subsection 158-66(b)(2) above, shall include as attachments an affidavit from each of the two commissioners providing her/his recommendation regarding the procurement based upon these factors. 
(4)  The department of parks commissioner and the department of city planning commissioner shall jointly provide a report to the community development/human resources committee each time a privately-owned afforested property procured by the city, which shall include the amount appropriated from the tree recompense fund and the acreage of the property. 
(c)  Recompense for illegal removal or destruction. Developers, builders, contractors, homeowners and others who violate the criteria for removal or destruction of section 158-102 shall contribute to the fund the replacement value of the trees illegally removed or destroyed according to the recompense formulas of section 158-34. 
(d)  Recompense for permitted removal or destruction. Developers, builders, contractors, homeowners and others who are unable to meet the standards for tree replacement and afforestation of section 158-103 shall contribute to the fund the replacement value of the trees removed in excess of the trees replaced in the course of new construction, landscaping, or other permitted activities according to the recompense formulas of subsections 158-103 (b) and (c). 
(e)  ( Reserved. ) 
(Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2003-113, § 2, 12-10-03; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), § 8, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 2008-64(08-O-1260), § 1, 7-30-08; Ord. No. 2008-77(08-O-1716), § 12, 10-14-08; Ord. No. 2011-31(11-O-0901), § 1, 7-14-11; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13; Ord. No. 2016-42(16-O-1353) , §§ 1, 2, 11-30-16; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17) 
Secs. 158-67—158-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REMOVAL AND RELOCATION 

Sec. 158-101. - Permit to remove, destroy, or injure. 
(a)  Required. No person shall directly or indirectly remove or destroy [or injure] any tree located on public property that is subject to the provisions of this article, or any tree having a diameter at breast height (DBH) of six inches or more which is located on private property subject to the provisions of this article, without obtaining a permit as provided in this section. 
(b)  Permits for construction, renovation, demolition. Permits to remove, destroy, or injure trees for construction, renovation or demolition shall be obtained by making application in a form prescribed by the city to the director of the bureau of buildings. 
(c)  Other permits. Permits to remove, destroy, or injure trees for safety, landscaping, silvicultural or other purposes shall be obtained by making application to the city arborist. All permits shall be posted for public inspection on site. 
(1)  Applications to remove dead, dying, diseased, or hazardous trees may be made by phone, fax, mail, or other means. Each application shall include the address of the property and the owner's name, phone, and fax number. If applicable, it shall also include the name, phone, and fax number of the tree service proposing to do the work. Each tree shall be identified as to its species, its diameter within two inches of the actual diameter, location and identifying characteristics or added markings. Permits to remove dead, dying, diseased, or hazardous trees shall be approved at the determination of the city arborist. Such permits are not subject to the notice of preliminary approval of subsection 158-101(d), the posting requirements of subsection 158-101(e), the standards for tree replacement or afforestation of subsection 158-103(1), the recompense formulas of subsection 158-103(b), or to public appeal. Applicants may appeal a notice of denial to the tree conservation commission as provided in this article. The permit shall be valid for six months from the date of its issuance, though the city arborist may extend the expiration date of the permit by no more than six additional months based upon extenuating circumstances, as determined by the city arborist. 
(2)  Applications to remove, destroy, or injure trees for landscaping improvements or other purposes shall be accompanied by a tree replacement plan meeting all of the requirements of section 158-103. The work prescribed by an approved tree replacement plan shall be completed within one calendar year. Replacement tree plantings shall be inspected by the city arborist and verified by the dated signature of the city arborist on the approved plan. Applications to remove, destroy, or injure trees for landscaping and other purposes shall be subject to the notice of preliminary approval of subsection 158-101(d), the posting requirements of subsection 158-101(e), the standards for tree replacement or afforestation of subsection 158-103(a), and the recompense formulas of subsection 158-103(b). Applicants may appeal a notice of denial to the tree conservation commission as provided in this article. 
(3)  Applications to remove, destroy, or injure trees for thinning or other silvicultural prescription for forest stand improvement shall be approved at the determination of the city arborist, with or without requirement for tree replacement. Each application shall include a silvicultural prescription that is prepared by a private arborist. Payment of recompense for tree(s) on private property, and tree replacement for tree(s) on public property, is required for trees included in any silvicultural prescription that includes timber harvesting or stand improvement, except in cases where the intended harvesting or stand improvement is to reduce or prevent the spread of pests or disease. Applications to remove, destroy, or injure trees for silvicultural purposes shall be subject to the notice of preliminary approval of subsection 158-101(d), the posting requirements of subsection 158-101(e), the standards for tree replacement or afforestation of subsection 158-103(a), if applicable, and the recompense formulas of subsection 158-103(b). Applicants may appeal a notice of denial to the tree conservation commission as provided in this article. 
(d)  Application review; notice of preliminary approval or denial of permit to remove, destroy, or injure trees. Upon receipt of a complete application by the city to remove, destroy, or injure trees for construction, renovation, demolition, landscaping, silviculture, or other non-safety related purposes, the city arborist shall review the application pursuant to the requirements of this article. The city arborist shall either give a notice of preliminary approval of the application if the application meets the requirements of this article, or shall give a notice of denial of the application if the application fails to meet the requirements of this article. The city arborist shall submit copies of such notices promptly to the clerk. The city arborist may impose conditions to the issuance of the permit consistent with this article. An applicant may submit a new application at any time after a notice of denial of an application under this chapter. An applicant may appeal the notice of denial to the tree conservation commission as provided in this article. Any person aggrieved by the notice of preliminary approval may also appeal to the tree conservation commission. 
(e)  Posting. 
(1)  For trees located on private property, two postings shall be required. The first posting shall remain for a minimum of ten calendar days and shall notify the public that an application to remove the designated tree(s) was filed with the city. The city will not accept any appeals filed within this ten day notice period. The second posting, providing notice of preliminary approval, shall be made if and when the city issues preliminary approval of the application to remove the designated tree(s) from private property. This second posting shall not begin until after the first posting is removed. The second posting shall remain in place for five business days, during which time the city will accept appeals. 
(2)  For trees located on public property, only one posting shall be required. The posting shall indicate the issuance of a notice of preliminary approval of the designated public property tree(s), and shall remain in place for 15 calendar days, during which time the city will accept appeals. 
(3)  Immediately after an applicant receives preliminary approval for removal of a tree on public or private property, s/he shall mark all trees to be removed, destroyed, or injured. 
(4)  The notice of preliminary approval for both public and private property trees, shall be posted in the office of the city arborist that is ruling on the removal permit (either the office of planning or the office of parks), on the City of Atlanta website (www.atlantaga.gov), and in a prominent manner upon the property affected so that it may be seen and read by passers-by. The notice of preliminary approval shall inform any reader that an appeal may be filed with the clerk of the tree conservation commission, and shall indicate the deadline by which the appeal must be filed. The notice shall further indicate that the failure to appeal within the designated time period will result in the issuance of the removal permit without further right of appeal. If the notice of preliminary approval is not [posted as required by this section, no permit shall be issued. The commission] may provide further additional rules regarding the manner and method of posting to the extent that such rule is consistent with the requirements of this section. 
(f)  Time limits. For tree(s) on public property, if no appeal is filed within 15 calendar days from the date of posting of a notice of preliminary approval upon the affected property, then the permit shall be issued in accordance with the terms of said notice of preliminary approval. For tree(s) on private property, if no appeal is filed within five working days from the date of posting of a notice of preliminary approval upon the affected property, then the permit shall be issued in accordance with the terms of said notice of preliminary approval. In the event that an appeal is filed within 15 calendar days for tree(s) on public property, or five working days for tree(s) on private property, from the date of posting of a notice of preliminary approval upon the affected property, no permit shall be issued until the sixth business day after the date of the tree conservation commission's written decision on the appeal, or until the appeal is voluntarily dismissed, whichever is earlier. At that time, the stay shall expire, unless a notice of intent to appeal the tree conservation commission's decision (if any) to the superior court is filed with the clerk of the tree conservation commission pursuant to subsection 158-65(a). 
(g)  Finality. Once a permit has been issued in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section there can be no further appeal of the arborist's decision, except as provided in subsection 158-65(b) of this article pertaining to appeals to superior court. 
(h)  Minor amendments. After the time for appeals has expired with respect to any notice of preliminary approval, the city arborist may approve minor amendments to the permit without there being any new right of appeal from such approval, provided that the arborist, in connection with such approval, shall certify in writing to the following, which certification shall be attached to the permitted amendments: 
(1)  That the amendments do not alter or amend any rulings of the tree conservation commission made in connection with the particular case; and 
(2)  That the amendments do not affect any trees on the property in question which are eligible under this article to be designated historic or specimen trees; and 
(3)  That the amendments in the aggregate do not increase by more than ten percent either the total number or the total DBH of the trees permitted for removal or destruction. 
(i)  Permit for tree removal based upon location to house. The provisions set forth in subsections 158-101(b) through 158-101(h) shall not apply to permits issued pursuant to this subsection 158-101(i). The provisions provided below in this subsection shall pertain to this subsection 158-101(i) only. The city arborist may issue a permit to remove any tree located on private property within five feet of the structural foundation of an existing single family residential dwelling structure or duplex located on property subject to the provisions of this article, subject to the following: 
(1)  The owner of the property on which the subject tree is located has submitted an application to the city arborist in a form prescribed by the city arborist. 
(2)  The application is not for the removal of a boundary tree unless the adjoining property owner is a co-applicant for the permit. 
(3)  The application is not for the removal of a right-of-way tree or any other public tree. For the purpose of this section a right-of-way tree is a tree deemed by the arborist to have majority of its root system in the public right-of-way. 
(4)  There has been no removal of a tree pursuant to this subsection 158-101(i) for five years from the date of an application previously approved pursuant to this subsection, unless the tree(s) previously permitted and removed was leaning by greater than 20 degrees, as measured at breast height of the tree, toward an existing single family residential dwelling structure or duplex located on the subject property. The five year time period between a previously approved application and a new application shall apply to the property and shall not be affected by any change of ownership or reconfiguration of the property boundaries. Any property which is combined with any part of any other property which has already removed a tree pursuant to this subsection within the five-year time period shall not be eligible for removal under this subsection. In the event that a lot with reconfigured property lines has received more than one approval under this subsection, the latest approved application shall be considered for deciding when a new application may be received. 
(5)  No lot of record which is not developed with a single family residential structure or duplex within its property lines shall be granted a permit to remove a tree pursuant to this subsection regardless of whether the zoning of the property will only allow the development of single family residences or duplexes on the property. 
(6)  When determining the distance of the tree from the structure, the tree shall be measured at the base of the tree, where the trunk of the tree meets the ground, on the side of the tree that is closest to the structure at issue. 
(7)  When determining the location of the foundation of the structure at issue, any portion of the structure constructed on piers or pilings shall not be deemed to be part of the foundation. 
(8)  No posting of the property is required prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(9)  Only the property owner shall have appeal rights associated with the permit. such appeal rights shall be as set forth in section 158-65 of this article. 
(10)  Where a permit is issued, the property owner shall not be required to replace the tree or pay recompense, except that where removal of the tree will result in the loss of ten percent or more of the tree canopy on the subject property, as determined by the city arborist, issuance of the permit shall be contingent upon the property owner's planting a replacement tree(s) on the subject property pursuant to the criteria set forth in this article. 
(11)  Where a tree is removed without a permit, recompense and fines shall be calculated and owed as prescribed throughout the tree protection ordinance, even if the property would have been eligible for a tree removal permit pursuant to this subsection 158-101(i). 
(12)  The city arborist shall not issue a permit if the tree at issue is located on property that was the subject of a violation of the tree protection ordinance within one year of the filing of the permit application. 
(j)  Permit for tree removal based upon compliance with federal consent decrees. The provisions set forth in subsections 158-101(b) through 158-101(i) shall not apply to permits issued pursuant to this subsection 158-101(j). The provisions provided below in this subsection shall pertain to this subsection 158-101(j) only. 
(1)  The city arborist in the department of city planning may issue a permit to the department of watershed management to remove, destroy, or injure any private property tree, including without limitation trees located on city easements over private property, when such removal, destruction, or injury is performed as a result of the City of Atlanta's compliance with the CSO Consent Decree entered in Civil Action No. 1:95-CV-2550-TWT (U.S. District Court, Northern District of Georgia), and/or with the First Amended Consent Decree entered in Civil Action No. 1:98-CV-1956-TWT (U.S. District Court, Northern District of Georgia) (for purposes of this subsection (j), collectively the "decrees" or the "consent decrees"), provided that the following requirements are met: 
a.  The city's department of watershed management has submitted an application to the city arborist in the department of city planning in a form prescribed by said city arborist. 
b.  For trees located within a city easement that are not boundary trees, the department of watershed management may destroy, remove and/or injure trees as prescribed in section 158-103(c)(6) of this tree protection ordinance, except that the number of trees to be destroyed, removed and/or injured may be determined by acre rather than by tree per tree or sampling techniques, and except that specimen trees need not be identified. A maximum shall be set on recompense at $5,000.00 per acre, prorated. A site plan drawn to scale shall be required for these trees showing locations impacted by acre, but not showing individually impacted trees. No survey shall be required. For purposes of this section 158-101(j), the city shall be deemed to have an easement on land above city sewer lines. 
c.  The department of watershed management shall submit a site plan that meets the standards set forth in 158-105 of the tree protection ordinance for: 1) destruction or removal of or injury to a boundary tree located on a city easement whose subject boundary abuts private property or public property; or 2) destruction or removal of or injury to a boundary tree whose structural root plate extends from private property or public property into the city easement; and 3) destruction or removal of or injury to all other private property trees. This site plan must include each tree's critical root zone, structural root plate, whether it's a boundary tree, silvicultural prescriptions to be used if applicable, and the construction methodology to be utilized by location. It shall also provide a calculation of the percentage of impact on each tree that is not removed. A survey shall be required showing all impacted trees falling within this category, though the survey may be performed by GPS coordinates, via a sketch describing each tree and showing its DBH. The sketch need not be performed by a registered surveyor or landscape architect. The application shall include recompense calculations, and proposed plantings of new trees. The city shall give recompense credit to the department of watershed management for newly planted trees only if the replanting requirements set forth in the tree protection ordinance are met (other than those requirements set forth in subsections 158-101(b) through 158-101(i)), but shall not give any recompense credit for new trees planted within the city's easement. The department of watershed management shall not be required to replant trees within a city easement. 
d.  Except for trees located within a city easement that are not boundary trees, the department of watershed management's site plan must designate all specimen trees. The department of city planning 's city arborist may discuss with the department of watershed management alternative routes for the work to be performed that may allow the specimen tree to survive, though the city arborist may not deny the removal/destruction application in the event that the department of watershed management does not agree upon an alternative route. 
e.  In the event that a public property tree, as defined in section 158-26 above, is located in part on a city easement or other private property, the permitting decision shall be made by the city arborist in the department of parks and recreation. 
(2)  The city arborist in the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs may issue a permit to the department of watershed management to remove, destroy, and/or injure any public property tree, including without limitation trees located on city parks, streets, sidewalks, and other property owned by the City of Atlanta, when such removal, destruction, or injury is performed as a result of the City of Atlanta's compliance with the consent decrees, provided that the following requirements are met: 
a.  The city's department of watershed management has submitted an application to the city arborist in the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs in a form prescribed by said city arborist, provided that applications may be made by projects, as defined in the consent decrees. Applications may be made on a quarterly basis provided that the application for each tree to be removed is submitted and approved prior to the tree's removal. 
b.  For destruction or removal of or injury to a public property tree, the department of watershed management shall submit a site plan drawn to scale that meets the standards set forth in 158-105 of the tree protection ordinance. This site plan must include each tree's critical root zone, structural root plate, size, species, silvicultural prescriptions to be used if applicable, and the construction methodology to be utilized by location. It shall also provide a calculation of the percentage of impact on each tree that is not removed. A survey shall be required showing all impacted trees falling within this category, though the survey may be performed by GPS coordinates, via a sketch describing each tree and showing its DBH. The sketch need not be performed by a registered surveyor or landscape architect. The application shall include tree DBH inches removed, and proposed plantings of new trees. 
c.  The department of watershed management's site plan for public property trees must designate all specimen trees. The office of parks' city arborist may discuss with the department of watershed management alternative routes for the work to be performed that may allow the specimen tree to survive, though the city arborist may not deny the removal/destruction application in the event that the department of watershed management does not agree upon an alternative route. 
d.  In the event that a private property tree, as defined in section 158-26 above, is located in part on city-owned property, the permitting decision shall be made by the city arborist in the department of city planning . 
e.  The department of watershed management must replace all public property trees that it destroys, removes, or injures on public property owned by the City of Atlanta, such that the DBH of the replacement trees is equal to or greater than the cumulative DBH of the trees removed, destroyed, and/or injured. The city shall give credit to the department of watershed management for newly planted trees only if the replanting requirements set forth in the tree protection ordinance are met (other than those requirements set forth in subsections 158-101(b) through 158-101(i)), with the following exceptions: 
i.  The replacement trees need not be located within the same NPU district or within one mile of the NPU boundary from which the tree was removed, destroyed or injured, as prescribed by section 158-103. For purposes of this section, the city arborist shall consider the entire city for purposes of eligible areas for replanting. 
ii.  The city arborist in the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs need not approve a tree replacement plan prior to issuing a tree removal permit, provided that: 
(a)  The commissioner of the department of watershed management or her/his designee, working in good faith cooperation with the director of the office of parks or her/his designee, is unable to identify locations in which to plant the requisite number of replacement trees at the time of granting the tree removal permit. 
(b)  The director of the office of parks, or her/his designee, calculates the number of caliper inches of trees that must be replanted in order to satisfy the tree protection ordinance's inch per inch replacement requirement. S/he shall communicate that number in writing to the commissioner of the department of watershed management or her/his designee. 
(c)  The department of watershed management agrees to plant, at its own expense, the requisite number of trees, as calculated by caliper inch, within the time frame described in the immediately following subsection (d). It shall be the responsibility of the department of watershed management to identify potential sites for replanting, but upon request, the director of the office of parks, or her/his designee, shall make a good faith attempt to assist the department of watershed management with this task. The exact location of the replacement trees, the type of trees, and the size of each tree must be approved by the director of the office of parks or her/his designee prior to the trees being planted. The director of the office of parks shall forward this replanting information to the impacted councilmember for review. The department of watershed management shall guarantee the life of each replacement tree for two years from the time of planting. 
(d)  The commissioner of the department of watershed management and the commissioner of the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs enter a letter of understanding that accompanies each decree tree removal permit (as defined below). The letter of understanding must set forth those replacement inches for which locations have already been identified, and additionally the number of caliper inches that the department of watershed management must and agrees to plant by a date certain but for which locations have not yet been located. The date certain shall be no greater than one year after the effective date of the decree tree removal permit, except that under extenuating circumstances, the commissioner or her/his designee may approve an extension. The letter of understanding shall also include the requirements set forth in subsection (c) immediately preceding this subsection (d). 
(e)  The department of watershed management prepares an annual report showing, for each project for which a letter of understanding was executed, the number of trees planted, the size by caliper inch of each tree planted, the type of each tree planted, the approximate date of planting, and the remaining balance of trees for each application. This report shall be submitted to the director of the office of parks by no later than May 1 of each year. 
iii.  The city arborist need not require the replacement trees to meet the descriptions set forth in section 158-103, but rather may give replacement tree credit as follows: 
(a)  For replacement trees that meet the requirements of section 158-103, the replacement credit shall be the DBH of the replacement tree. 
(b)  The department of watershed management may plant understory trees on public property for the purpose of restoring stream banks or other environmentally sensitive areas. The replacement credit shall be the DBH of the replacement tree. 
(c)  The department of watershed management may be given replacement credit for planting a live stake on public property for the purpose of stream bank erosion control, stream bank stabilization, or stream or wetland restoration. The replacement credit shall be the DBH of the live stake, except that a live stake with a DBH that is less than one caliper inch shall be credited as one caliper inch. 
(d)  The department of watershed management may be given replacement credit for removal of invasive species from trees on public property where the species threatens the life of the tree. The replacement credit shall be the DBH of the tree saved. 
(3)  The following provisions shall apply to the issuance of tree removal permits by the city arborist in the department of city planning and in the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs, where the removal or destruction of a tree is performed as a result of City of Atlanta compliance with the consent decrees ("decree tree removal permit"): 
a.  Sections 158-101(j)(1) and (2) above notwithstanding, no city arborist shall require the department of watershed management, as part of its decree tree removal permit application, to produce evidence of consent by a private property owner regarding removal or destruction of a tree that impacts said private property owner's property. Impact of tree removal from privately owned property will be addressed directly by the department of watershed management. 
b.  No posting of the property is required prior to the issuance of a decree tree removal permit. 
c.  There is no appeal right associated with a decree tree removal permit. The tree conservation commission shall not have the authority to hear or in any other way consider an appeal regarding the granting or denial of such permit. 
d.  The department of watershed management may not remove, destroy, or injure any private property tree or public property tree in order to comply with the consent decrees prior to being issued a decree tree removal permit by the city arborist in the department of city planning , or in the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs respectively. 
e.  Where a tree is removed, destroyed, or injured without a decree tree removal permit during work related to the decrees, the department of watershed management must report the removal, destruction, or injury to a city arborist by the close of the following business day. In such instance, the appropriate city arborist shall calculate the recompense due and/or tree replacement required. Where a city arborist learns of a decree-related tree removal or destruction caused and not timely reported by the department of watershed management or its contractor/subcontractor, the appropriate city arborist shall issue penalties pursuant to section 158-34 above, and shall also require that recompense be paid and/or replacement be performed. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2037(a)—(c); Ord. No. 2000-4, 1-27-00; Ord. No. 2000-21, §§ III, IV, 4-12-00; Ord. No. 2000-26, § IV, V, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2006-04, § 4, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), §§ 9—11, 19, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 2007-38(07-O-1101), § 1, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 2008-25(08-O-0486), § 2, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 2009-13 (09-O-0399), § 2, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17) 
Sec. 158-102. - Criteria for removal, destruction or injury. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued for the removal, destruction, or injury of any living and non-hazardous tree unless: 
(1)  A tree replacement plan meeting the requirements of section 158-103 has been approved; 
(2)  All other requirements of this article are met; and 
(3)  One of the following conditions exists: 
a.  The tree is located within the buildable area of the lot and the applicant has been granted a building, landscaping, or other permit to make improvements otherwise permissible under all applicable ordinances of the city; 
b.  The tree is located in that portion of the setback or required yard area of the lot that must be used for vehicular ingress and egress or for the installation of utilities that cannot be accomplished in a manner allowing preservation of the tree; 
c.  The tree is diseased or injured to the extent that death is imminent within two years, or is in imminent danger of falling, or is so close to existing or proposed buildings so as to endanger them, or physically interferes with utility services in a manner that cannot be corrected by anything less than destruction or removal of the tree, or creates unsafe vehicular visual clearance, or is otherwise deemed a hazard by the city arborist or city forester; 
d.  The tree removal qualifies for a permit pursuant to section 158-101(i) or section 158-101(j). 
(b)  The following species of trees, if 12 inches or smaller DBH and located on private property, are exempt from the posting, replacement, and recompense portions of this article, and from section 158-102(a)(3) of this article whereby a property owner may remove the tree located on her/his property without posting, replacing the tree or paying recompense: Mimosa - Albizia julibrissin; Tree of heaven - Ailanthus altissima; White mulberry - Morus alba; Paper mulberry - Broussonetia papyrifera; Chinaberry - Melia azederach; Princess tree - Paulownia tomentosa; Carolina cherry laurel - Prunus caroliniana; Bradford Pear - Pyrus calleryana; Leyland cypress -x Cupressocyparis leylandii. Where such species of tree is larger than 12 inches DBH and located on private property, the property owner need not post the tree, and need only replace the tree or pay recompense if the tree cover on the lot from which the tree is removed is less than the minimum tree cover per zoning district, as set forth in section 158-103(g). Removal of trees of one of the above-listed species, where the tree is six inches DBH or larger, requires the homeowner to apply for and receive a permit from the office of buildings, and said application must include: 
(1)  At least two pictures of the tree at issue that identify the species of tree; and 
(2)  A site plan showing the appropriate zoning information of the property; and 
(3)  A tree survey including but not limited to location, quantity, types and DBH, prepared by ISA certified arborists or landscape architects. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2037(d); Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), §§ 10, 18, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 2009-13 (09-O-0399), § 3, 3-24-09) 
Sec. 158-103. - Standards for tree replacement and afforestation. 
(a)  Minimal impact on trees; replacement trees. Each applicant for a permit to remove, destroy or injure trees shall, to the maximum extent feasible, minimize the impact on the trees on the site. The applicant shall plant replacement trees on site that equal the total number of trees being removed, destroyed, or injured, provided that where the removed, destroyed or injured trees were located on public property, the cumulative DBH of the replacement trees shall be equal to or greater than the cumulative DBH of the trees removed, destroyed and/or injured. Where construction of improvements or existing dense tree cover precludes the planting of the total number of replacement trees required on the site, the city arborist may approve a plan which results in the planting of the number of trees on the site which can reasonably be expected to be accommodated in a manner which will allow mature growth of the replacement trees. The remainder of the total number of trees may be planted in a local park, on public lands, or along right-of-ways, subject to approval of the City of Atlanta Parks Department, provided such plantings are within the same NPU district or within one mile of the NPU boundary. 
(1)  Where appropriate site conditions exist, replacement trees shall be overstory or mid-canopy species. Understory trees shall be permitted where site conditions do not allow the planting of overstory or mid-canopy trees. Overstory trees shall be planted at a minimum 35 feet on center. Mid-canopy trees shall be planted at a minimum 25 feet on center. Understory trees shall be planted at a minimum 15 feet on center. Certain columnar species used primarily for screening may be accepted for partial recompense in accord with the planting distance established for understory trees. 
(2)  The following species of trees may not be used as replacement trees: Mimosa - Albizia julibrissin; Tree of heaven - Ailanthus altissima; White mulberry - Morus alba; Paper mulberry - Broussonetia papyrifera; Chinaberry - Melia azederach; Princess tree - Paulownia tomentosa; Carolina cherry laurel - Prunus caroliniana; Bradford Pear - Pyrus calleryana; Leyland cypress -x Cupressocyparis leylandii. In addition, no recompense credit shall be provided for the planting of said species of trees. 
(b)  Recompense. The difference between the number of trees removed, destroyed or injured (Nrem) and the number of trees replaced (Nrep) on a site times the established recompense value shall be calculated as partial recompense to the tree trust fund. In addition, the difference between the total diameter at breast height of the trees removed or destroyed (TDBHrem) and the total caliper inches of the trees replaced on site (TCIrep), as indicated on the approved tree replacement plan, shall be calculated as partial recompense to the tree trust fund. Total recompense(R) shall be calculated according to the formula 
R = $100.00 (Nrem - Nrep) + $30.00 (TDBHrem - TCIrep), C >=0 
(c)  Limits and adjustments. 
(1)  For recompense purposes of this section, all trees except pines with a minimum DBH of six inches shall be included in the formula. Pines with a minimum DBH of 12 inches shall be included in the formula. 
(2)  For new subdivisions, new lots of record, and vacant lots, a maximum shall be set on recompense at a pro rated per acre basis by zoning classification as tabulated below, provided that no less than the specified minimum of existing trees, by total DBH inches, are retained on a site. Credit based on the established recompense value formula will be given for trees planted. This credit may be subtracted from maximum recompense per acre, provided trees are spaced at no more than one tree per 400 square feet. 
Table 158-103 

 
*Vacant lots shall be based upon the lower Minimum Trees Retained total DBH inches, new subdivisions and new lots of record shall be based upon the higher Minimum Trees Retained total DBH inches. 
**Where an underlying zoning category does not apply, the Minimum Trees Retained (MTR) for planned developments shall be derived by multiplying the required percentage of the site required to be retained in pervious area by a factor of .60 which will establish the Minimum Trees Retained percentage (MTR%). This amount shall be calculated according to the formula: 
Required Pervious Area (K) x .60 = MTR% 
Maximum Recompense Per Acre = $10,000.00 
(3)  Provided that no less then the specified minimum of existing trees, by total DBH, are retained on a site in accordance with Table 158-103 then the maximum recompense per acre may be further reduced by the replanting of new trees. Adjusted maximum recompense per acre (AMRPA) shall be calculated according to the formula: 
Reduction from MRPA = $100.00 (Nrep) + $30.00 (TCIrep) 
AMRPA = MRPA - Reduction from MRPA 
(4)  For sales housing units which have a pro-forma sales price equal to or less than 1.5 times median family income as defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, the percent of minimum trees retained may be reduced to 50 percent of the above percentage values in order to qualify for maximum recompense per acre. 
(5)  For sales housing units which have a pro-forma sales price greater than one and one-half times median family income but not exceeding two and one-half times median family income as defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, the percent of minimum trees retained may be reduced to 75 percent of the above percentage values in order to qualify for maximum recompense per acre. 
(6)  For trees removed in the required construction of streets and related infrastructure in new subdivisions or other planned developments, a maximum shall be set on recompense at $5,000.00 per acre, pro rated. Credit based on the established recompense value formula shall be given for trees planted. This credit may be subtracted from maximum recompense per acre, provided trees are spaced at no more than one tree per 400 square feet. For infrastructure development that requires disturbance of one acre or more, a recognized sampling technique performed and certified by a registered forester may be substituted for an actual count of the trees to be removed. All specimen trees must be identified by species and location regardless of the counting procedure adopted. 
(7)  Conservation easements [and fee simple donations] (section 158-32) that result in the preservation of wooded lands, or newly created wooded parkland afforested to 100 inches DBH per acre, and that are perpetual in duration shall receive a credit of $20,000.00 per acre, pro rated, against recompense fees. Natural water detention areas established in lieu of the construction of detention ponds shall qualify as conservation easements if so deeded as a conservation easement. In addition, a fee simple donation of land that is afforested to 100 inches DBH per acre, and that is accepted by the city, will receive a credit of $20,000.00 per acre, pro rated, against recompense fees, but only if the city dedicates the land for a use that will preserve the land in its natural scenic landscape or in a forest use. 
(8)  For rental housing units that have at least 20 percent of the total number of residential units constructed being within the ability to pay of those households whose annual incomes do not exceed 60 percent of the median family income for the Atlanta metropolitan statistical area, the percent of minimum trees retained may be reduced to 50 percent of the above percentage values in order to qualify for maximum recompense per acre. 
(d)  An impacted tree will not be considered destroyed and will not be charged recompense only if all the following are met: 
(1)  Tree save fencing is established and maintained to protect at least 67 percent of the root save area, and the structural root plate is not disturbed. 
(2)  An ISA certified arborist or registered forester is retained to prescribe and monitor the implementation of measures to maximize the survival and protection of the tree, including but not limited to root pruning, canopy pruning, mulching, watering, fertilization, and enhanced protective fencing. 
(3)  The prescription of the retained arborist is approved by the city arborist or city forester in advance of construction. 
(4)  A report on the effectiveness of the prescribed measures is submitted by the retained arborist to the city arborist or city forester prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(e)  A lost tree shall be charged recompense regardless of whether or not it is removed from the site. 
(f)  The city arborist shall prepare a quarterly report to be presented to the tree conservation commission. The report shall include the total number and DBH of trees removed and/or the total number and DBH of trees replanted during the preceding quarter in each of the following categories: maximum recompense per acre, dead/dying/diseased/hazardous removal, landscaping permit, silvicultural removal, buildable area removal, parking lots, illegal removal, off-site planting, or any other permit or penalty category not listed. The report shall also include acreage, total number of trees and total DBH for any newly created conservation easements or newly created parklands. 
(g)  Minimum tree cover. In any request for a permit for construction in which no trees are proposed to be removed, or in cases where trees are being removed but the total tree cover on the lot is less than the minimum tree cover per zoning district, the city arborist shall require an afforestation standard such that the minimum tree cover per zoning district is satisfied, provided that all such trees so planted can reasonably be expected to be accommodated in a manner which will allow mature growth of the new trees. 
Tree replacements per zoning district and the minimum required tree coverage (TDBH + TCI) on a site, regardless of any loss of trees, are as follows: 
R-5, R-4-A and R-4-B districts: 35 inches per acre 
R-3, R-3-A and R-4 districts: 40 inches per acre 
R-2 and R-2-A districts: 100 inches per acre 
R-1 districts: 150 inches per acre 
RG, PD and all other districts: 90 inches per acre 
Replacement trees shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches in caliper. Regardless of caliper or diameter at breast height, replacement trees shall not subsequently be removed or destroyed without a permit from the city arborist. 
(h)  Planting priority. The location of tree plantings required by this section normally shall be prioritized as follows: 
(1)  Heat islands. Streets and other external heat islands shall be shaded by new or existing trees at a spacing not to exceed 35 feet on center on average, with a minimum of two trees per lot when feasible. Street trees shall be planted as close to the street as is practicable. Internal heat islands shall be shaded at a minimum rate of one tree per 750 square feet of heat island area. 
(2)  Soil stabilization. Replacement trees shall next be planted on steep slopes and other erodible areas and on the banks of wetlands and waterways. 
(3)  Following satisfaction of priorities (1) and (2), the applicant shall have discretion to satisfy additional tree planting requirements either by planting on the subject site, on another location approved by the city arborist, or by contributing the appropriate amount to the tree trust fund. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2037(e); Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2004-02, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2006-04, §§ 2, 6, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), §§ 9, 10, 12, 6-12-07) 
Sec. 158-104. - Protection of trees. 
(a)  The city arborist shall require that improvements be located so as to result the protection of the trees on the site. It is the specific intent of this section to require that damage to trees located within the setback and required yard areas and to trees located on abutting properties owned by others be minimized to the greatest degree possible under the particular circumstances, as determined by the city arborist according to the following guidelines: 
(1)  On lots and subdivisions of one acre or more, the applicant shall identify environmentally sensitive areas as part of the site plan required in section 158-105 below. Such areas shall include wetlands, floodplains, permanent and intermittent streams, stands of trees and other significant aspects of the natural environment on site. Limits of disturbance to these areas shall be established and detailed on the site plan. In order to protect the more environmentally sensitive areas, development shall be confined to the portion of the lot required for the intended construction. 
(2)  On lots and subdivisions of less than one acre, root save areas shall be established in the setback and required yard areas to preserve trees in those areas. Grading, trenching, or other land disturbance in these areas shall be limited to necessary hydrologic and erosion control measures and access corridors to streets, utility connections, or other features required by code. In order to protect the trees in the setback and required yard areas, building shall be confined to the portion of the lot required for the intended construction. 
(3)  A maximum of ten percent of the trees in a designated wetland or 100-year floodplain may be approved for removal or destruction. 
(Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2006-04, § 3, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), § 13, 6-12-07) 
Sec. 158-105. - Site plan required. 
(a)  General requirements. The site plan shall include a tree survey identifying the size, species and location of all trees having a diameter at breast height (DBH) of six inches or greater. Such site plan shall contain topographic information at two-foot contour intervals and shall show all existing and proposed buildings and structures, driveways and parking areas, drainage structures, water detention areas, utilities, construction material staging grounds and all areas of required cut and fill. Single family lots of record may be exempt from the requirement of the topographic survey provided that no grading or cut or fill or other changes in topography will occur. Such plan shall denote each tree to be saved, lost or destroyed, the percentage of root save area that will be impacted, the required tree protection fences for trees to be saved, and the proposed tree replacement plan. The proposed tree replacement plan shall set forth the manner in which the newly planted trees will be watered, for example, manually, drip irrigation, Gator bags, etc. In addition, the proposed tree replacement plan shall have attached a copy of a paid maintenance contract if applicable. Pines of less than 12 inches DBH are exempted from being denoted on the tree survey. A construction limit line shall be delineated on each site plan submitted for a building permit. Within the construction limit line, the tree replacement requirements of this article shall be shown. Outside this limit line, no tree survey shall be required, and the applicant shall be required to leave undisturbed all areas of trees. 
(b)  Boundary trees. Boundary trees shall be included in the site plan. The on-site portion of the root save area of a boundary tree shall be enclosed in a tree protection fence according to established arboricultural standards. In consultation with the owner or owner's representative of a boundary tree, the city arborist may prescribe and the applicant shall institute additional protective measures to limit impact on the tree during construction, including but not limited to watering regimes, root treatments, mulching, deadwood removal and protective pruning. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2037(g); Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2006-04, § 4, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), § 14, 6-12-07) 
Sec. 158-106. - Preconstruction conference. 
Upon approval of any permit for grading, demolition or construction, no work shall commence, no grading shall be undertaken and no trees shall be removed prior to a preconstruction conference on the site between the city arborist and the applicant or their designees. The city arborist shall inspect the site to assure the accuracy of permit application data and shall inspect tree protection fences and other protective devices which have been installed to protect trees. After the inspection is complete, the city arborist shall notify the director, and thereupon demolition, grading and construction may proceed. It is further provided that for any permit for an addition to a one-family or two-family residence, the city arborist may rely on data submitted in the application and certified by the applicant for the building permit in lieu of a preconstruction conference on the site. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2037(h); Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 158-107. - Certificates of occupancy. 
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the director, bureau of buildings with respect to any permit unless and until the city arborist shall have inspected such site and confirmed that all replacement trees have been planted in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2037(i); Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03) 
Sec. 158-108. - Maintenance of trees. 
The owner shall be responsible for maintaining the health of all replacement trees for a period of two years from the date of planting. The owner shall replace any tree which dies during this time period. Subsequent applicants for a building permit entailing no additional loss of trees on a site that has been certified as compliant by the city arborist and which has maintained that compliance shall not be required to provide additional tree replacement except as required by subsequent law. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2037(j); Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), § 15, 6-12-07) 
Sec. 158-109. - Exemptions. 
The following are exempted from the terms of this article: 
(1)  When the parks arboricultural manager or city arborist finds any tree to present hazard or danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public, such tree may be removed immediately by the owner or the owner's agent upon verbal authorization by the parks arboricultural manager or city arborist. Any property owner or resident who reasonably believes and can demonstrate that a tree on her/his property presents imminent hazard or danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public, may contact the city arborist or her/his designee by phone to inform the city arborist of the emergency. Based upon the information provided by phone, the city arborist or her/his designee may give verbal approval of the tree's removal. Within five working days of said approval, the owner, resident, or her/his agent must provide to the department of city planning 's arborist division photos of the tree at issue along with a tree removal application. Failure to follow these procedures may result in an assessment of recompense and fines. In addition, should the photos and application, and any other information obtained by the city arborist, cause the city arborist to find that the tree did not present imminent hazard or danger, the city arborist shall assess recompense and may impose a fine. Should the emergency be identified by the property owner or resident during non-working hours, s/he may remove the tree immediately, but must contact the city arborist or her/his designee during the next working day to discuss the emergency, and must submit the information described above within five working days of the tree's removal. The owner and/or resident may be subject to recompense and fines under the circumstances described above in this subsection. No permit is required. 
(2)  During the period of any emergency, such as a tornado, ice storm, flood or an other act of nature, the requirements of this article may be waived by the mayor and the mayor's designee. 
(3)  All licensed plant or tree nurseries and tree farms shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this article only in relation to those trees which are planted and are being grown for sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of business, or for some public purpose. All licensed tree museums or public botanical gardens which employ a full-time arborist or horticulturist, and which are located upon property owned by the city and leased to such tree museums or botanical gardens and are growing for display to the public in furtherance of the museums and botanical gardens, or for some other public purpose. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2040; Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), § 16, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17) 
Sec. 158-110. - Dead or diseased trees; nuisances. 
The provisions of this section shall apply to all property in the city, as follows: 
(1)  Generally. Any dead or diseased tree or part of a tree is a nuisance when, by reason of such condition, natural forces may, more readily than if such tree or part thereof were live or not diseased, fell or blow such tree or part thereof onto public ways or public property, off of the property of the owner of such tree, and thereby imperil life or property or impede traffic. When a dead or diseased tree which is alleged to constitute a nuisance is brought to the attention of the parks arboricultural manager or city arborist, the parks arboricultural manager or city arborist, in their discretion, may submit through the director, bureau of parks a written opinion to the director, bureau of buildings. Upon receiving a written opinion from the director, bureau of parks that any tree or part thereof is a nuisance as defined in this section, the director, bureau of buildings shall commence nuisance abatement proceedings. 
(2)  Notice to owner to remedy conditions; failure to comply. The director, bureau of buildings shall give written notice to the owner or the person in possession, charge or control of the property where a tree nuisance as defined in this section exists, stating that in the city arborist's opinion the tree or part of a tree does constitute a nuisance that shall be removed, and requesting that such removal be done within a reasonable time to be specified in such notice. In no event shall such reasonable time exceed ten working days. Such notice shall further state that unless the tree or part thereof is voluntarily removed within the time specified, the director may cause summons to be issued requiring the party notified to appear in the municipal court to have there determined whether the tree or part of a tree involved constitute a nuisance and should be abated. If the tree is not removed within the time specified by the director, the director may cause the owner of such tree, or the person in possession, charge or control thereof, to be summoned to appear before the judge of the municipal court to determine whether or not the tree or part of a tree involved constitutes a nuisance. 
(3)  Hearing; failure to comply with order to abate. If upon such a hearing as provided for before the judge of the municipal court, the judge shall find that the tree or part of a tree constitutes a nuisance and orders the defendant to abate the same within a specified time, then each ten days that the conditions adjudicated to be a nuisance by the judge are maintained subsequent to the expiration of the time fixed in the judgment of the judge the same to be abated shall constitute an offense. 
(4)  Emergencies. Such nuisance trees pose immediate hazards and, because of the imminence of danger, are too great a risk to leave standing while standard procedures for giving notice take place. In such cases where danger to the public is imminent, the director of the office of parks shall have the right, but not the obligation, to enter the property and abate the nuisance, and the reasonable costs of such work, as documented by the office of parks, shall be reimbursed by the department of city planning . The department of city planning shall have the authority to obtain reimbursement from the property owner. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2042; Ord. No. 2001-102, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2007-32(07-O-0362), § 17, 6-12-07; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17) 
Chapter 162 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Bureau of taxicabs and vehicles for hire, app. IV, § 46. 
Cross reference— Ground transportation services at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, § 22-201 et seq.; businesses, ch. 30; bureau of taxicabs and vehicles for hire, § 98-29; traffic, ch. 150. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 162-1—162-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES AND TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 1, approved June 24, 2015 , amended the title of Art. II to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. II was titled, "Animal-Drawn Vehicles, Limousines, Taxicabs and Similar Vehicles." See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 162-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business license means the license required of any business operating within the city by chapter 30, article III. 
Certificate of public necessity and convenience, CPNC means a license permitting a person to operate one vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city. Subject to the regulations contained in this article, a CPNC may be leased; shall be fully transferable pursuant to a purchase, gift, bequest, or acquisition of the stock or assets of a corporation to any person otherwise meeting the requirements of this article; and may be used as collateral to secure a loan. 
Company means any person, association, corporation or other organization operating or intending to engage in the business of operating vehicles for hire. 
Department means the Atlanta Police Department. 
Fees means nonrefundable payments required in this article. 
Highways means any of the public streets, roads, boulevards, avenues, drives or alleys of the city. 
Narcotic drugs, barbituric acid derivatives and central nervous system stimulants: 
(1)  Narcotic drugs means coca leaves, opium, cannabis, marijuana, isonipecaine and every synthetic substance known to have narcotic action. 
(2)  Barbituric acid derivative means each of the salts and derivatives of barbituric acid, also known as malonyl urea, and derivatives, compounds, mixtures or preparations thereof. Barbiturates include all hypnotic or somnifacient drugs, whether or not derivatives of barbituric acids. 
(3)  Central nervous system stimulants means amphetamine and desocyephedrine and any derivative, compounds, mixture or preparation thereof. 
Nolo contendere is to be construed as a guilty plea and is to be considered a conviction. 
Open stands means any location on the streets of this city that shall be used by any taxicab or animal-drawn vehicle on a nonexclusive, first come, first served basis and not by private vehicles or other public conveyances. Open stands may not be utilized by limousine, sedan or rideshare operators or other vehicles for hire which are not operated under a CPNC issued pursuant to this article. 
Taxicab means a motor vehicle or similar vehicle, device, machine or conveyance used to transport passengers, uses a taximeter, and is authorized to provide taxi services pursuant to this article. 
Taximeter means an instrument or device approved by the department attached to a vehicle and designed to measure mechanically or electronically the distance traveled by such vehicle, to record the times the vehicle travels or is in waiting and to indicate the fare to be charged. 
Use of narcotic drugs applies to any person who uses one or more of the narcotic drugs or barbituric acid derivatives or central nervous stimulants as defined in this section to any extent, with or without medical need or authority or prescription. 
Vehicle for hire means taxicabs and animal-drawn vehicles. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8001; Ord. No. 1995-37, § 1, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 1995-38, § 1, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2005-68, § 1, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 1, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 1, 9-17-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-33(16-O-1477) , § 1, 9-28-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 162-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-35(09-0-0976), § 1, approved June 23, 2009, renumbered former § 162-27 as § 162-33. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 162-28. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)  The department and agents of the Fulton County Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals appointed as special deputy sheriffs by the sheriff of Fulton County, shall enforce this article. 
(b)  Violations of this article are punishable as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8021; Ord. No. 1995-37, § 19, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 1, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 1, 9-17-15 ) 
Sec. 162-29. - Hearing officers. 
(a)  The mayor shall have the authority to appoint 16 hearing officers for the purpose of acting as fact finders regarding charges brought by the department against individuals and entities for violation of this article. Each hearing officer shall be appointed for a two-year term and shall receive $75.00 for each day or part thereof the hearing officer appears for hearing. Six of the hearing officers shall be attorneys at law with at least three years in the practice of law. A panel of three hearing officers shall be designated by the department for each case heard. Each panel shall have at least one attorney at law but shall not have more than two attorneys. No person shall be appointed as a hearing officer who holds any interest in any licenses issued under the police powers of the city or who represents any interest which may be adverse to that of the city. 
(b)  Hearing officers shall have the following functions: 
(1)  Hold hearings regarding the imposition of any fine by the department for violation of any section in this article. 
(2)  Hold hearings regarding any proposed denial, suspension or revocation of any CPNC, or ground transportation vehicle for hire company permit issued in accordance with chapter 22 of the city Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Hear any other matter which requires approval under this article. 
(4)  Hear any appeal of administrative penalties assessed against ground transportation vehicle for hire company permit holders in accordance with chapter 22 of the city Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  (1)  After hearing evidence on the charges presented by the department for violations of this article and the individual or entity charged, the panel of hearing officers shall issue findings of fact and shall render a recommendation as to any penalties or fines in writing with reasons for the recommendation. Such findings and recommendations shall be submitted to the police chief, whose decision shall be final, subject to the writ of certiorari as provided by law. 
(2)  No action shall be taken pursuant to this subsection unless the individual or entity charged has been given five days' notice prior to the hearing. Hearings shall be scheduled by the department as often as necessary to promote expeditious handling of the charges. 
(d)  After hearing an appeal of an administrative penalty accessed in accordance with chapter 22 of the city Code of Ordinances, the panel of hearing officers shall render an recommendation as to whether a preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment of administrative penalties or other enforcement decision, and the panel of hearing officers shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce administrative penalties or reverse any other enforcement decision where warranted. 
(e)  All hearings are administrative in nature, and the strict rules of evidence as applied in court trials shall not apply. 
(f)  Department officials and employees shall not communicate with hearing panel members about cases the hearing officers will be deciding except as part of their duties within the context of an administrative hearing. 
(g)  All testimony at the hearings shall be under oath and shall be subject to cross-examination. 
(h)  The department shall record each hearing, and such recording with any documentation presented to the hearing panel shall constitute the official record of the hearing. Such recordings shall be maintained until 30 days after final action is taken by the chief. 
(i)  The police chief shall deny, grant, or remand to the panel of hearing officers, any final decision on their recommendation within 30 calendar days of receipt of the findings and recommendation from the panel of hearing officers. Upon review of the panel of hearing officers' findings and recommendation and/or the record created during the panel hearing, if the police chief determines there exists the need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the police chief may remand the matter back to the panel of hearing officers for further hearing. In remanding the matter back to the panel of hearing officers, the police chief shall provide written instructions to the panel of hearing officers and the department identifying specific issues and/or matters the police chief requires the panel of hearing officers to conduct further hearing upon. All matters remanded to the hearing panel of officers shall be scheduled for further hearing before the hearing panel of officers no later than 30 days after the date of remand. A CPNC or permit holder shall be entitled to a five-day written notice from the department stating the specific issues and/or matters to be addressed on remand, along with the place, date and time of the remand hearing. If the police chief does not make a decision on the recommendation of the hearing panel within the 30 calendar days provided, and does not choose to remand the decision to the hearing panel of officers, the recommendation of the hearing panel of officers shall become the final decision of the police chief. The decision of the chief is subject to review via certiorari to superior court. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8022; Ord. No. 1995-37, § 20, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 1996-10, 3-11-96; Ord. No. 2005-68, § 2, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 1, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 1, 9-17-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-33(16-O-1477) , § 2, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 162-30. - Power of mayor to suspend and revoke permits and CPNCs and impose civil fines. 
(a)  The mayor or the mayor's designee, upon receiving the recommendation of the hearing officers, shall have the authority to suspend and revoke, where applicable, ground transportation vehicle for hire company permits issued in accordance with chapter 22 and CPNCs, and to impose civil fines for violations of this article. Such fine shall not exceed $1,000.00 per violation. 
(b)  Failure to pay any fines imposed pursuant to this section or administrative penalties assessed in accordance with chapter 22 of the city Code of Ordinances shall constitute due cause for further action by the police chief. 
(c)  Persons or entities issued citations or assessed administrative penalties in accordance with chapter 22 of the city Code of Ordinances may elect to pay fines and waive hearing before the hearing officers for certain offenses as provided in this article. 
(d)  The mayor or the mayor's designee shall make the final determination on all denials, suspensions, revocations or other matters, after hearing as set out in section 162-29. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-8023, 14-8024; Ord. No. 1995-37, § 21, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 1996-10, 3-11-96; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 1, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 1, 9-17-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-33(16-O-1477) , § 3, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 162-31. - Classification of vehicles. 
The following classifications of vehicles for hire are established: 
(1)  Taxicabs; and 
(2)  Animal-drawn vehicles. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8003(a); Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 1, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 1, 9-17-15 ) 
Sec. 162-32. - Classifications of drivers. 
The following classifications of drivers of vehicles for hire are established: 
(1)  Taxicab drivers; and 
(2)  Animal-drawn vehicle drivers. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8005(a); Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 1, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 1, 9-17-15 ) 
Sec. 162-33. - Applicability of article; payment of fees. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all vehicles for hire for which a permit has been issued under this article, whether or not such vehicle is operated exclusively within the geographical legal limits of the city, as well as to vehicles for hire which operate in and out of the geographical legal limits of the city to locations not more than ten miles from the geographical legal limits of the city, including any airport owned and operated by the city, whether located within or outside Fulton County or the city. 
(b)  All fees proscribed in this article must be paid for by money order, certified check or cashier's check. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-8019, 14-8020(i), 19-14.033; Ord. No. 1996-10, 3-11-96; Ord. No. 2005-68, § 3, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 2008-33(06-O-1908), §§ 1—4, 5-27-08, eff. 6-30-08; Ord. No. 2009-35(09-O-0976), § 1, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 1, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 1, 9-17-15 ) 
Note— Formerly § 162-27. 
Sec. 162-34. - Inspections, generally. 
(a)  Taxicabs authorized to operate in accordance with chapter 22 of the city Code of Ordinances shall only be subject to inspections in accordance therewith. 
(b)  Animal-drawn vehicles shall be subject to semiannual inspections. 
(c)  Nothing in this Article shall prohibit the inspection of a vehicle for hire based upon the reasonable suspicion of violations under this article by a department code enforcement agent or police officer. 
(d)  There shall be no fees imposed for inspection performed under this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8013; Ord. No. 1995-37, § 23, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 1995-38, § 4, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2002-69, § 9, 9-25-02; Ord. No. 2009-77(08-O-1044), § 1, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 1, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 1, 9-17-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-33(16-O-1477) , § 4, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 162-35. - Taximeters. 
Taxicabs authorized to operate in accordance with chapter 22 of the city Code of Ordinances shall only be subject to inspections of taximeters in accordance therewith. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8003(h); Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 1, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 1, 9-17-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-33(16-O-1477) , § 5, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 162-36. - Taxicab comfort. 
Taxicabs authorized to operate in accordance with chapter 22 of the city Code of Ordinances shall only be subject to inspections of taxicab comfort standards in accordance therewith. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8010; Ord. No. 1995-37, § 13, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2005-68, § 4, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 1, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 1, 9-17-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-33(16-O-1477) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 162-37. - Animal-drawn vehicle inspections. 
(a)  Criteria. All animal-drawn vehicles shall comply with the following at all times, and all semiannual inspections shall be conducted by the department at designated inspection stations and shall consist of the following: 
(b)  Animal-drawn vehicles shall be inspected for proper markings and materials, exterior lights, glass (no cracks), license plate and license plate lights (if applicable), doors and door locks, body and interior check for conditions of upholstery and floor and proper lubrication of body, springs and wheels. In addition, the harness must be oiled and cleaned so as to be soft at all times, and the harness must be properly fitted and maintained and kept free of makeshift materials such as wire, sisal rope and rusty chaining. 
(c)  Correction slip. If an animal-drawn vehicle fails to pass the requirements of the department's inspection, a correction slip shall be issued to the driver, listing the items that need correction and showing the status of the inspection. The vehicle shall not be operated as a vehicle for hire until it successfully passes inspection; provided that the police chief or the chief's designee, in the chief's discretion, for two periods not to exceed 15 days each, may allow the continued use of a vehicle for hire which substantially complies with the inspection requirements. The police chief shall forward to the company holder a copy of the correction slip. 
(d)  Sticker. Animal-drawn vehicles passing the semiannual inspection shall have affixed an inspection sticker issued by the department showing the vehicle's CPNC number and the date of the inspection. 
(e)  Time of inspection. Animal-drawn vehicles shall be inspected during the month of the expiration of the current inspection sticker issued by the department. Willful failure to have a vehicle for hire inspected as required in this section shall be a ground for suspension of the CPNC pursuant to section 162-63. 
(f)  Schedule. The police chief or the chiefs designee shall establish a schedule of inspection for all animal-drawn vehicles for hire for which CPNCs have been issued. 
( Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 1, 9-17-15 ) 
Sec. 162-38. - Agents for service of citations. 
The CPNC holder shall designate a company and its officers for which a vehicle for hire is driven as agents of the CPNC holder for the purpose of serving citations on the CPNC holder for failing to comply with this article. As condition of their CPNC, a CPNC holder shall be responsible for violations of this article by either a person driving the vehicle operating under their CPNC or any company for which the vehicle is being driven. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8011; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 1, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 1, 9-17-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-33(16-O-1477) , § 7, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 162-39. - Minimum customer service requirements. 
(a)  Taxicabs authorized to operate in accordance with chapter 22 of the city Code of Ordinances shall only be subject to inspections of minimum customer service requirements in accordance therewith. 
(b)  Within 24 hours of the discovery of any personal property left by a passenger in a vehicle for hire, a driver shall forward such property to the department. 
(c)  A driver shall take the most direct route to a passenger's destination unless otherwise authorized or directed by the passenger. 
(d)  CPNC holders shall be prohibited from refusing to display to department employees any information required by this article, and shall be prohibited from failing to cooperate with department employees in performing their duties. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to drive, or for companies or CPNC holders to allow to be driven, any vehicle for hire which does not have a valid inspection sticker (in the case of animal-drawn vehicles). 
(f)  Completed receipts must be offered to passengers showing the amount of fare paid, name of company and contact information, the drivers name, CPNC number, number of passengers, location of trip, origination and location of trip termination. If the passenger refuses to accept a receipt, such refusal shall be annotated in the driver's trip sheet. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to carry a number of passengers that exceeds the seating capacity of the vehicle for hire according to the vehicle manufacturer's specifications. 
(h)  Companies and CPNC holders shall be responsible for the failure of their drivers to comply with this section. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8012; Ord. No. 1995-37, § 14, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 1999-57, § 1, 7-12-99; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 1, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 1, 9-17-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-33(16-O-1477) , § 8, 9-28-16) 
_____
Sec. 162-40. - Table of violations. 
Taxicab companies authorized to operate in accordance with chapter 22 of the city Code of Ordinances shall be subject to the corrections table set forth herein. 
TABLE OF FINES AND DISCIPLINE 
Information displayed on exterior and interior of cab. 
Failure to meet comfort requirements. 
Minimum customer service requirements. 
APPEARANCE REQUIRED BEFORE HEARING PANEL  ONLY ON THIRD OFFENSE WITHIN A YEAR 
Offense: 
Use of taxicab stands, including line jumping. 
Fine: 
$50.00 
CORRECTIONS AND RELATED MATTERS 

 
( Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 1, 9-17-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-33(16-O-1477) , § 9, 9-28-16) 
_____
Sec. 162-41. - Facilitation of unlicensed vehicles for hire, or unlawful staging by employees or agents of hotels, lodginghouses, or roominghouses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any agent or employee of any entity required to have a license pursuant to Chapter 30, Article XI of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances, to direct patrons to any unlicensed and/or un-permitted vehicle for hire, or for any such entity to knowingly permit or allow any of its agents or employees to direct patrons to any unlicensed and/or un-permitted vehicle for hire. For purposes of this section, "unlicensed and/or un-permitted vehicle for hire" shall mean a vehicle for hire which has not been properly licensed or permitted either under this Article or the State of Georgia. 
(b)  In addition, it shall be unlawful for any agent or employee of any entity required to have a license pursuant to Chapter 30, Article XI of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances to allow a vehicle which is not pre-arranged, to stage as prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 36-60-25(e). 
( Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 1, 9-17-15 ) 
Secs. 162-42—162-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CPNC 

Sec. 162-56. - Required. 
(a)  No vehicle for hire shall be operated on the highways of the city until its owner or lessee has obtained for such vehicle a valid certificate of public necessity and convenience, and until the company with which it is affiliated has obtained a business license from the city. No such business license shall be issued until the CPNC and company permits have been issued by the department. 
(b)  No taxicab shall be operated on the highways of the city without a decal corresponding to the CPNC number under which the vehicle is operating issued by the department, properly affixed thereto. To secure decal issuance, the company shall certify the make, model, year and vehicle identification information of the vehicle to be operated under the CPNC by on a form to be provided by the department. There shall be no fee imposed by the department for the issuance of a CPNC decal. 
(c)  Companies and CPNC holders shall be responsible for the failure of their drivers to comply with this section. 
(d)  No fine shall be imposed for failure to have a CPNC decal affixed to a taxicab in violation of this section before January 1, 2016. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8003(b); Ord. No. 1995-37, § 2, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 2, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 2, 9-17-15 ) 
Sec. 162-57. - Qualifications of applicant. 
(a)  In order to secure a CPNC, an applicant must first provide a document showing a current CPNC holder's willingness to sell or lease a CPNC, except where conveyed pursuant to section 162-62(f), and must provide information showing its qualification on a form provided by the department. The applicant must: 
(1)  Be at least 18 years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or otherwise granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Not have been convicted of any felony if such violation is related to the operation of a motor vehicle or with operation of a vehicle for hire and not have been convicted of any section of this Code or other ordinance of the city governing the conduct of CPNC holders; provided, however, that all such persons shall be entitled to the full benefits of O.C.G.A. tit. 42, ch. 8, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq.), the First Offender Act and be considered as provided in section 30-29. 
(b)  Should the applicant for a CPNC be a corporation or partnership, the chief executive officer of the corporation or, if a partnership, the partner with the greatest proprietary interest shall possess all of the requirements set out in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8003(c), (d); Ord. No. 1995-37, § 2, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 2, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 2, 9-17-15 ) 
Sec. 162-58. - Notice of changes; company affiliation. 
In order to maintain a CPNC for a vehicle for hire, any person and any taxieab driver or company operating within the city using such CPNC must: 
(1)  Within ten days of any of the following, the CPNC holder shall so notify the department in writing: 
a.  Change in the chief executive officer, if a corporation, and the notification shall set out the names of the persons involved in the change. 
b.  Change in the CPNC holder of 50 percent or more of the proprietary interest, if a partnership, corporation, firm or association, and the notification shall set out the names of the persons involved in the change. 
c.  Change of address of the CPNC holder. 
(2)  Each CPNC holder of the taxicab classification shall be affiliated with a company, except when the CPNC holder is a company. The CPNC holder shall notify the department of any change in the holder's company affiliation within three days of any such change on a form to be provided by the department. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8003(c), (d); Ord. No. 1995-37, § 2, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2007-06, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 2, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 2, 9-17-15 ) 
Sec. 162-59. - Replacement vehicle. 
If a vehicle for hire for which a CPNC has been issued is replaced by another vehicle, no new CPNC application shall be required. However, the vehicle identification information and certification by the company set forth in section 162-56, shall, within five days of replacement, be submitted to the department for issuance of a CPNC decal. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8003(f); Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 2, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 2, 9-17-15 ) 
Sec. 162-60. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 2, approved June 24, 2015 , repealed § 162-60, which pertained to temporary CPNC for limousines. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 162-61. - Number limited; costs. 
(a)  The maximum number of taxicab CPNC's outstanding shall be 1,600, which is the number of CPNC's issued as a result of the legislative limitation established in 1995. This limitation is specifically based upon the relationship between the number of taxicabs operating within a geographic area and the quality of service they provide. An excessive number of taxicabs results in a reduced level of service and more passenger complaints. 
(b)  The maximum number of animal-drawn vehicle CPNC's outstanding shall be 31, which is the number of CPNC's issued as a result of the legislative limitation established in 1995. This limitation is specifically based upon the quality of service provided by animal-drawn vehicles and upon the necessity for humane treatment of the animals involved. 
(c)  The market value of any type of CPNC will be determined on January 1 of each year. For purposes of this article only the term "market value" shall mean the value calculated by the department based upon the sales prices for each CPNC during the prior year. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8004; Ord. No. 1995-37, § 2, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 1995-38, § 3, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 1998-8, § 1, 2-23-98; Ord. No. 2000-48, § 1, 8-13-00; Ord. No. 2009-09(09-O-0204), § 1, 2-23-09; Ord. No. 2009-58(09-O-1651), § 1, 9-30-09; Ord. No. 2011-54(11-O-1684), § 1, 11-20-11, eff. 1-1-12; Ord. No. 2012-51(12-O-1725), § 1, 12-12-12; Ord. No. 2013-68(13-O-1397), § 1, 12-11-13 ; Ord. No. 2014-28(14-O-1338), § 1, 7-16-14, eff. 7-15-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-57(14-O-1592), § 1, 12-10-14, eff. 1-1-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 2, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 2, 9-17-15 ) 
Sec. 162-61.1. - Renewal. 
The CPNC holder shall apply for and obtain an annual renewal of the CPNC upon payment of a fee of $100.00 and provision of evidence that the holder continues to possess the necessary qualifications for holding a CPNC. This fee shall be paid by the last day of the month in which the CPNC was initially issued. Those persons holding CPNC's who paid annual CPNC fees between September 17, 1997 and the date on which this section becomes effective, and who can produce a receipt or other proper proof of such payment, will receive credit for such payments toward future CPNC annual renewal fees. 
(Ord. No. 1995-37, § 2, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 1995-38, § 2, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 1996-10, 3-11-96; Ord. No. 2000-48, § 2, 8-13-00; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 2, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 2, 9-17-15 ) 
Sec. 162-62. - Transferability. 
(a)  A CPNC for a vehicle for hire shall be transferred pursuant to a purchase, gift bequest or acquisition of the stock or asset of a corporation, provided that the following requirements are met: 
(1)  A written statement is submitted to the department including the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the transferor and the transferee; 
b.  The CPNC number and the date the transferor received same; 
c.  A description of the vehicle transferred or a description of the vehicle to which the CPNC is being transferred, which includes make, model, year and vehicle information number (serial number). 
(2)  The transferee shall submit an application for a CPNC and shall meet all requirements for same. 
(3)  A certified copy of a binding agreement to transfer the CPNC shall be provided, if such an agreement exists. 
(4)  The vehicle of the transferee shall have been inspected and approved for the issuance of an inspection sticker in the case of an animal-drawn vehicle or a CPNC decal in the case of a taxicab, and otherwise comply with all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(5)  No voluntary transfer or sale of a CPNC may be made if a judgment has been filed with the department against the holder of a CPNC and remains unsatisfied and notice of said judgment has been filed with the department, except that a transfer may be permitted if an appeal is pending from an unsatisfied judgment and a bond is filed in an amount sufficient to satisfy the judgment but not to exceed the fair market value of the CPNC or CPNC's being transferred. Transfer may also be permitted without filing a bond, provided that all the judgment creditors of unsatisfied judgments file written permission for such a transfer with the department. 
(6)  The transferee shall supply proof to the department that he or his transferor has filed a bond to cover all of the outstanding tort liabilities of the transferor in excess of the amount covered by a bond or insurance policy in effect at the time the claim arose; however, this requirement shall not apply to a legatee or distributee of a descendant's estate owning a CPNC. 
(7)  An owner's interest in a CPNC may be transferred involuntarily and disposed of by public or private sale in the same manner as personal property. However, upon such involuntary transfer, the owner's CPNC shall immediately be canceled and a new CPNC issued to the transferee, provided that the transferee has satisfied the requirements of this article, except that if the involuntary transfer is by reason of a tort judgment against an involuntary transferor, no bond need be provided with respect to the same judgment. 
(8)  All open items, including summons, outstanding fines and penalties against the CPNC must be cleared before a transfer will be approved. When the transferor is a corporation and there are two or more CPNC's open items against all CPNC's must be cleared in order to transfer one CPNC. 
(b)  A CPNC may not be transferred during a period of suspension. 
(c)  If a CPNC has been revoked, transfer will be permitted in accordance with subsection (a). 
(d)  In the event of the death of any person holding a CPNC, the CPNC may be transferred by the chief to the administrator, executor or any lawful heir of the deceased person if the transferee meets all requirements for obtaining a CPNC. The CPNC shall be automatically suspended upon the death of the CPNC holder pending the presentation of letters of temporary administration to the department. If no application for a transfer has been filed within one year from the time of the presentation of letters of temporary administration to the department, this shall constitute due cause for the revocation of the CPNC. When a CPNC or stock in a corporation owning a CPNC is distributed from an estate to a legatee or distributee, the following documents shall be submitted with the transfer application: 
(1)  A certified copy of the relevant death certificate; 
(2)  A certified copy of letters testamentary or letters of administration; and 
(3)  A copy of the will, if any, certified by the attorney for the estate. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the transfer of a security interest in a CPNC from its owner to a financial or lending institution or corporation or individual so that such CPNC may be used as collateral for a loan. Notice of the use of any CPNC as collateral for a loan must be provided by the person to whom the CPNC has been issued within five days to the department on a form provided by the department. 
(f)  Any CPNC conveyed by the City of Atlanta will be conveyed in accordance with Chapter 2, Article X of the Atlanta Code of Ordinances. No CPNC sold by the city will be sold for less than market value during that year. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8014(a), (b); Ord. No. 1995-37, § 15, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2008-03(07-O-2585), § 1, 1-30-08; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 2, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 2, 9-17-15 ) 
Sec. 162-63. - Revocation and suspension. 
(a)  Upon a finding of due cause, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the mayor or the mayor's designee shall have the authority to revoke or suspend any CPNC for a vehicle for hire issued by the city. 
(b)  Due cause for the revocation or suspension of a CPNC shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The failure of the CPNC holder to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of the CPNC as set forth in sections 162-57 and 162-58. 
(2)  Obtaining a CPNC by providing false information. 
(3)  Violation of any section of this article. 
(4)  If the holder of the CPNC has knowledge or in the exercise of reasonable care should have had knowledge of the violation of a driver who is affiliated with the CPNC holder of any of the following offenses: 
a.  Driving under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs. 
b.  Criminal homicide, rape, aggravated battery, mayhem, burglary, aggravated assault, kidnapping, robbery, child molestation, criminal solicitation to commit any of such, criminal attempt to commit any of such or possession, sale or distribution of narcotic drugs, barbituric acid derivatives or central nervous system stimulants, if such violation is related to the operation of a vehicle for hire or violation of any section of this Code or other ordinance of the city governing the conduct of drivers of vehicles for hire. 
(c)  No CPNC issued by the city shall be revoked or suspended except upon a finding of due cause as defined in subsection (b) of this section and after a hearing and upon a prior five-day written notice to the CPNC holder stating the place, date, time and purpose of such hearing and setting forth the charge upon which the hearing shall be held. The hearing shall be held within 15 days of the date the notice is issued. 
(d)  A panel of duly appointed hearing officers shall conduct the hearings and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor or the mayor's designee. The mayor or the mayor's designee, upon receiving the report, may revoke or suspend any CPNC. In lieu of suspension or revocation, the mayor or the mayor's designee may impose a fine upon any CPNC holder, such fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. The maximum period of suspension of a CPNC shall be 12 months. 
(e)  After revocation of a CPNC pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section, no application for a CPNC shall be accepted or considered for a period of 36 months from the date of revocation. 
(f)  For due cause, for a violation of this article which results in a situation in which continued operation by the CPNC holder endangers the health, welfare or safety of the public, the mayor or the mayor's designee may suspend any CPNC under this section. Such immediate temporary suspension may be done upon summary consideration of facts that indicate due cause and of facts that indicate an immediate danger. Notice of the temporary suspension shall be given immediately to the CPNC holder stating the facts upon which the suspension is based and stating the time and place of a full hearing as provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(g)  Whenever any person holding a CPNC is convicted of or pleads guilty to or pleads nolo contendere to any of the following offenses in any court, such disposition shall constitute due cause for suspension, revocation or a fine in accordance with subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section: driving under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs, criminal homicide, rape, aggravated battery, mayhem, burglary, aggravated assault, kidnapping, robbery, child molestation, criminal solicitation to commit any of such, criminal attempt to commit any of such, or possession, sale or distribution of narcotic drugs, barbiturate acid derivatives or central nervous system stimulants. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8007; Ord. No. 1995-37, § 11, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 2, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 2, 9-17-15 ) 
Secs. 162-64—162-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 3, approved June 24, 2015, repealed Div. 3, §§ 162-76—162-84, which pertained to driver permits. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 162-76—162-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COMPANY PERMITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-33(16-O-1477) , § 10, approved Sept. 28, 2016, amended division 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 4, §§ 162-97—162-104, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1977, §§ 14-8006(a)—(e), (g), 14-8009, 14-8014(c); Ord. No. 1995-37, § 10, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 1995-38, §§ 6, 15, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2005-68, §§ 12, 13, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 4, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 3, 9-17-15 . 

Sec. 162-97. - Company permits. 
Only taxicabs affiliated with a taxicab company holding a ground transportation permit issued in accordance with chapter 22 of the city Code of Ordinances and authorized to operate in accordance therewith shall be allowed to operate at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. No further company permits shall be required. 
( Ord. No. 2016-33(16-O-1477) , § 10, 9-28-16) 
Secs. 162-98—162-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 162-116. - Color scheme. 
The CPNC holder shall require the company for which a vehicle for hire is driven to have all of its taxicabs painted the same color, such color to be chosen by the company and approved by the department, and shall have all of its taxicabs marked with a uniform logo or insignia. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8015; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 5, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 4, 9-17-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-33(16-O-1477) , § 11, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 162-117. - Use of open stands. 
(a)  The department shall maintain a list of all open taxicab stands. Taxicab stands shall be created by the department based on the criteria of traffic conditions, public necessity and convenience and the effect on police functions. 
(b)  Open stands shall be used exclusively by taxicabs for which CPNCs have been issued by the city. Open stands may not be utilized by limousine, sedan or rideshare operators or other vehicles for hire which are not operated under a CPNC issued pursuant to this article. No taxicab shall be placed upon or occupy any taxicab stand except for the purpose of being held forth for hire. Taxicabs shall be placed on stands only from the rear and shall be moved forward and to the front of the stand immediately as space becomes available by the departure or movement of preceding taxicabs. No driver may solicit a customer from anywhere to the rear of the first position in the stand. Violation of these rules constitutes line jumping. When a taxicab stand is occupied to its full capacity, no taxicab shall wait outside of a cab stand in violation of any traffic laws of the city. The driver of any taxicab occupying a stand shall not leave that taxicab unattended. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the airport taxicab waiting area known as the Taxi Assembly Arca shall be considered a taxicab stand. 
(d)  Companies and CPNC holders shall be responsible for the failure of their drivers to comply with this section. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8016; Ord. No. 1995-37, § 16, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 5, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 4, 9-17-15 ) 
Sec. 162-118. - Schedule of fares. 
(a)  All CPNC holders shall require all taxicab companies and drivers to charge up to the following schedule of maximum fares, except as otherwise provided in this section: 
(1)  The first one-eighth mile, $2.50. 
(2)  Each additional one-eighth mile, $0.25. 
(3)  Waiting time, $21.00 per hour. 
(4)  For each additional passenger in excess of one riding in the vehicle on the same trip, $2.00 per person. Only one child in the company of an adult will be charged the additional passenger fee; any additional children will not be charged any additional passenger fee. Children under six will not be charged. 
(5)  There shall be no charge for use of additional space for luggage, trunks or cargo for which the trunk space in a four-door sedan would not be adequate. 
(6)  A 20 percent discount on a metered fare be given to a disabled person or person age 65 or older. 
(7)  Fuel surcharge. Once the gasoline price for regular unleaded fuel has averaged between $2.90 and $4.39 over a 14 consecutive day period according to the AAA published data, there shall be imposed a fuel surcharge of $2.00 per trip. 
(8)  Initial airport fare. A charge of $1.50 shall be applied to all taxicab services originating from the Atlanta Airport. No mileage, waiting time, or other charges are included in the initial airport fare. Additional Atlanta Airport flat rate zone fares shall apply in the manner set forth in this section. 
Once the gasoline price for regular unleaded fuel has averaged more than $4.40 over a 14-consecutive day period according to the AAA published data, there shall be imposed a fuel surcharge of $3.00 per trip. 
(b)  For taxicab trips between (to and from) the Atlanta airport and destinations within the Downtown Flat Rate Zone described in subsection (d) of this section, passengers shall be charged a flat rate fare of $30.00, with an additional $2.00 charge for each passenger. In addition to such flat rate fares, a charge of $21.00 per hour of waiting time shall be imposed. If passengers on the same trip desire different destinations within the same flat fare zone, after the first stop, a $1.00 charge, in addition to the per-passenger fare, will be assessed to each passenger discharged. 
For taxicab trips between (to and from) the Atlanta Airport and to a destination within the Buckhead Flat Rate Zone described in subsection (d) of this section, passengers shall be charged a flat rate fare of $40.00, with an additional $2.00 charge for each passenger. In addition to such flat rate fares, a charge of $21.00 per hour of waiting time shall be imposed. If passengers continue in the same flat fare zone, after the first stop, a $1.00 charge, in addition to the per-passenger fare, will be assessed to each passenger discharged. 
For taxicab trips between (to and from) the Atlanta Airport and to a destination within the Midtown Flat Rate Zone described in subsection (d) of this section, passengers shall be charged a flat rate fare of $32.00, with an additional $2.00 charge for each passenger. In addition to such flat rate fares, a charge of $21.00 per hour of waiting time shall be imposed. If passengers continue in the same flat fare zone, after the first stop, a $1.00 charge, in addition to the per-passenger fare, will be assessed to each passenger discharged. 
All fares listed in this section shall include applicable sales tax. 
(c)  If two or more passengers enter the same taxicab at the airport and the destinations of such passengers are not all within the downtown zone, the passenger going to the downtown zone shall pay the flat rate as set out in subsection (b) of this section, and the remaining passenger shall pay the same fare as the first passenger plus the fare computed on the meter as set out in subsection (a) of this section for the remaining segment of the trip. If passengers on the same trip desire different locations within the same flat fare zone, after the first stop, a $1.00 charge or $0.50 for senior and disabled citizens, in addition to the per-passenger fare, will be addressed to each passenger discharged. 
(d)  The legal description of the Downtown Flat Rate Zone shall be as follows: Starting at the intersection of Ashby Street and North Avenue, then proceeding east on North Avenue to the intersection of North Avenue and Boulevard. Then proceeding south on Boulevard to the intersection of Boulevard and Atlanta Avenue. Then proceeding west on Atlanta Avenue to the intersection of Atlanta Avenue and Interstate 75/85. Then proceeding north on Interstate 75/85 to the intersection of Interstate 75/85 and Georgia Avenue. Then proceeding west on Georgia Avenue to the intersection of Georgia Avenue and Glenn Street. Then proceeding west on Glenn Street to Ralph David Abernathy Boulevard continuing west on to the intersection of Ralph David Abernathy Boulevard and Ashby Street. Then proceeding north on Ashby Street to the intersection of Ashby Street and North Avenue and the starting point. 
The legal description of the Midtown Flat Rate Zone shall be as follows: 
Starting at the intersection of North Avenue and Interstate 75/85, then proceeding east on North Avenue to the intersection of North Avenue and Boulevard. Then proceeding north on Boulevard to Monroe Drive continuing to the intersection of Monroe Drive and Piedmont Avenue. Then proceeding north on Piedmont Avenue to the intersection of Piedmont Avenue and Interstate 85. Then proceeding south on Interstate 85 to the intersection of Interstate 85 and Interstate 75. Then proceeding north on Interstate 75 to the intersection of Interstate 75 and Northside Drive. Then proceeding south on Northside Drive to the intersection of Northside Drive and North Avenue. Then proceeding east on North Avenue to the intersection of North Avenue and Interstate 75/85 and the starting point. 
The legal description of the Buckhead Flat Rate Zone shall be as follows: Starting at the intersection of Peachtree Road and Wieuca Road and proceeding east on Peachtree Road to Roxboro Road. Then proceeding south on Roxboro Road to West Roxboro Road continuing south of West Roxboro Road to the intersection of West Roxboro Road and Shady Valley Road. Then proceeding south on Shady Valley Road to Buford Highway continuing south to the intersection of Buford Highway. Then proceed south on Buford Highway to the intersection of Buford Road and Sidney Marcus Boulevard. Then proceed west on Sidney Marcus Boulevard to the intersection of Sidney Marcus Boulevard and Piedmont Road. Then proceed north on Piedmont Road to the intersection of Piedmont Road and East Wesley Road. Then proceed west on East Wesley Road, continuing to West Wesley Road to the intersection of West Wesley Road and Northside Drive. Then proceed north on Northside Drive to the intersection of Northside Drive and Hillside Drive. Then proceeding east on Hillside Drive to the intersection of Hillside Drive and Powers Ferry Road. Then proceeding north on Powers Ferry Road to the intersection of Powers Ferry Road and Wieuca Road. Then proceeding east on Wieuca Road to the intersection of Wieuca Road and Peachtree Road and the starting point. 
(e)  For taxicab trips originating from a business (e.g. hotel, restaurant, mall, or other commercial enterprise) and concluding at another business within the Buckhead Flat Rate Zone described in subsection (d) above, a single passenger shall be charged $8.00. Each additional passenger on the same trip shall be charged $2.00. Trips engaged within the zone but destined to terminate outside the zone will be metered. Drivers are prohibited from engaging another passenger whose destination is more than a two-block diversion from the destination of any other passengers already engaged. 
(f)  For taxicab trips originating from a business (e.g. hotel, restaurant, mall, or other commercial enterprise) and concluding at business within the Downtown Flat Rate Zone described in subsection (d) above, a single passenger shall be charged $8.00. Each additional passenger on the same trip shall be charged $2.00. Trips engaged within the zone but destined to terminate outside the zone will be metered. Drivers are prohibited from engaging another passenger whose destination is more than a two-block diversion from the destination of any other passengers already engaged. Drivers will be permitted to load and unload passengers at any location within the Downtown Zone unless such loading or unloading impedes the traffic flow or is unsafe for any other reason. 
For taxicab trips originating from a business (e.g. hotel, restaurant, mall, or other commercial enterprise) and concluding at business within the Midtown Flat Rate Zone described in subsection (d) above, a single passenger shall be charged $8.00. Each additional passenger on the same trip shall be charged $2.00. Trips engaged within the zone but destined to terminate outside the zone will be metered. Drivers are prohibited from engaging another passenger whose destination is more than a two-block diversion from the destination of any other passengers already engaged. 
(g)  The schedule of fares established in this section shall constitute the maximum fare which may be charged, unless the mayor and council shall provide a different maximum fare by ordinance. Any fares provided in this section or otherwise by ordinance do not prohibit taxicab operators or companies from charging lower fares. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8020(a)—(g); Ord. No. 1995-37, § 18, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 1995-38, § 5, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 1996-10, 3-11-96; Ord. No. 2002-43, §§ 1—3, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 2002-69, §§ 1—5, 9-25-02; Ord. No. 2005-66, § 1, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 2005-79, § 1, 11-30-05; Ord. No. 2008-56(08-O-1125), §§ 1, 2, 7-14-08; Ord. No. 2009-25(08-O-2296), § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 5, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 4, 9-17-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-33(16-O-1477) , § 12, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 162-119. - Abuse of driver by passenger prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for a taxicab passenger to abuse a taxicab driver. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3020; Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 5, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 4, 9-17-15 ) 
Sec. 162-120. - Information to be displayed on taxicabs. 
(a)  Required. All taxicabs shall have affixed to the exterior the following: 
(1)  CPNC number, affixed by means of permanent, nonmagnetic decals to the front left hood, the rear right trunk lid and each front fender, at least five inches in height, news gothic bold in style, with a width of at least three-eighths of an inch and black or white in color, whichever is most prominent against the background color. 
(2)  Name of company, painted or affixed by decal, according to specifications provided by the police chief, to the right and left front doors. 
(3)  Schedule of maximum rates, painted or affixed by decal to the left and right rear doors. 
(b)  CPNC decal. Each taxicab shall have affixed to the upper right corner of the front windshield a current CPNC decal issued by the Department in accordance with section 162-56. 
(c)  Schedule of rates; identifying information. Each taxicab shall have a schedule of passenger rights, which shall include the right to an air-conditioned cab, the right to direct the driver to use a certain route to a destination, except in a flat rate zone and an explanation of all rates and charges including flat rate fares, its CPNC number and the company's name and telephone number in addition to the department's telephone number for complaints and comments on the rear passenger window. 
(d)  Logo and identification scheme. Each CPNC holder shall require the company for which a vehicle for hire is driven to submit to the police chief a company logo and identification scheme which shall not be the same or similar to any other and which within ten days shall be approved or rejected. Upon approval, the company logo and identification scheme shall be affixed to each vehicle for hire in the company's fleet. The logo and identification scheme shall be affixed to the left and right front doors and any other part of the vehicle, if applicable, and shall not be less than 12 inches in height, but not greater than 24 inches in height. 
(e)  Dome light on roof. All taxicabs shall be equipped with a dome light not less than six inches in height, permanently affixed to the roof, bearing the term "taxi" or the company name. 
(f)  Responsibility for compliance. CPNC holders shall be responsible for compliance with this section. 
( Ord. No. 2015-45(15-O-1361), § 4, 9-17-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-33(16-O-1477) , § 13, 9-28-16) 
Secs. 162-121—162-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-35(15-O-1250), § 6, approved June 24, 2015 , repealed, Div. 6, §§ 162-131—162-135, 162-141.1—162-141.5, 162-142.1—162-142.5, which pertained to limousines or extended limousines. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 162-131—162-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - EQUINE-DRAWN VEHICLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, approved May 14, 2002, amended the title of division 7 to read as herein set out. Further, said ordinance amended division 7 in its entirety, included as §§ 162-146—162-166 to read as herein set out. Formerly said division pertained to similar subject matter. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 

Sec. 162-146. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division the following terms are defined as follows: 
Bureau means the bureau of taxicabs and vehicles for hire. 
Business license means the license required of any business operating within the city by chapter 30, article III. 
Carriage means any vehicle for hire designed to be drawn by equine and to carry passengers only. 
CNPC means a certificate of public necessity and convenience license permitting a person to operate one vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city. 
Company means any person, association, corporation or other organization operating or intending to engage in the business of operating vehicles for hire. 
Company permit means a permit issued by the bureau authorizing a person to engage in the business of operating vehicles for hire. 
Driver means any person permitted to drive an equine-drawn carriage. 
Drivers permit means a valid document issued by the bureau to operate an equine-drawn carriage. 
Equine means any member of the Equidae species, including horses, mules and asses. 
Humane care means, but is not limited to, the provision of adequate food and water consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the equine's size, species, and breed. 
Law enforcement agent means a sworn member of the Atlanta Police Department. 
Owner means any person owning, having possession or custody of, or in charge of an equine. 
Stable means a facility where an equine is permanently or temporarily boarded, housed, or maintained. 
Vehicle for hire means any motor vehicle, animal-drawn vehicle or other vehicle or device designed or used for the transportation of passengers for hire, the charges for use of which are determined by agreement. 
Veterinarian means a person licensed by the State of Georgia to practice veterinary medicine and who specializes in equine or large animal medicine. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-147. - Removal of equine from service for violation. 
(a)  Upon discovery of a violation of any section in this article relating to equine-drawn vehicles for hire, the bureau may issue an order to the person responsible for the violation requiring the removal of the subject equine from service. 
(b)  No equine which has been removed from service for violation of this section shall be returned to service until the equine has been inspected by the bureau and approved for return to service in writing. 
(c)  Any person who refuses to comply with the order of the bureau or who complies with the order and returns the equine to service before being inspected and approved by the bureau shall be guilty of the offense of refusing to obey an order of the bureau. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-148. - Equine identifying number and certificate of veterinary inspection. 
(a)  Each equine used to draw a vehicle for hire must have its own legible identifying number permanently affixed to its body in a manner approved by the bureau. 
(b)  A certificate of veterinary inspection ("CVI"), that has been prepared no more 30 days prior to the date the equine is placed in service and includes the identifying number, shall be furnished to the bureau when an equine is placed in service and again each 12 months thereafter. The certificate shall show that a veterinarian licensed by the state, and accredited, has given the equine a complete physical examination including a Coggins test with negative results as required by state law and the equine's body temperature. The certificate shall also state that the equine is fit for service in pulling vehicles for hire. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-149. - Operating regulations. 
(a)  Equine-drawn vehicles shall adhere to the following operating specifications during the hours of operation: 
(1)  Vehicles shall not make any left turn movements except from one-way streets and those included in routes authorized by the bureau. 
(2)  Vehicles shall travel in the curb lane except when passing parked vehicles or other obstructions which prevent use of the curb lane. 
(3)  Vehicles shall not travel on streets with grades equal to or greater than ten percent without approval of the bureau and bureau of traffic and transportation. 
(4)  Vehicles shall not stop within the roadway other than at designated loading and unloading areas except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
(5)  Vehicles shall observe all applicable rules of the road as set forth in the state rules of the road. 
(b)  The driver of an equine drawn carriage shall: 
(1)  Possess and display at all times his or her license to operate an equine-drawn carriage in the front/passenger compartment of the carriage. 
(2)  A driver shall not drive a carriage when a passenger is standing in the carriage or not seated securely inside of the carriage. 
(3)  If a trainee is aboard a carriage they must have a training permit issued by the bureau in his or her possession. 
(4)  A driver shall provide humane care and treatment of the equine under his or her direct supervision and control. 
(5)  No person shall drive or operate an equine drawn carriage on any public street in the city at any hour other than those so designated, without first obtaining a "special event" permit from the bureau. Such a permit should be applied for at least seven days in advance of the event. (i.e., weddings, parades, etc.). The maximum duration an equine may be utilized for a special event shall be six hours. The driver of the carriage shall have such permit in his or her possession at all times, and must produce it on demand of any law enforcement agent. 
(6)  No person shall drive or operate an equine drawn carriage on any public street in the city on any day or time designated by the chief of the police department. 
(c)  The hours of operation shall be 6:30 p.m. until 6:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, excluding holidays. Saturday, Sunday and holiday hours of operation shall be 1:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-150. - Route system. 
A proposed detailed route system of an equine-drawn vehicle for hire shall be submitted to the bureau of traffic and transportation for review, recommendation and approval. The bureau of traffic and transportation shall designate streets and hours of the day that equine-drawn vehicles will be prohibited. A route system shall be submitted for each vehicle to be placed into operation. This detailed route system shall include the following information: 
(1)  The hours of operation for the vehicle. 
(2)  The days of the week the vehicle will be in operation. 
(3)  The duration of the operation, i.e., summer only or year-round. 
(4)  All locations for loading and unloading passengers. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-151. - Health of equine. 
No equine shall be permitted to pull any vehicle for hire unless the equine is in good health and meets at least the following requirements: 
(1)  The equine must be at least 36-months old. 
(2)  The equine must weigh no less than 900 pounds. 
(3)  The equine shall have no open sores or wounds, shall not be lame or have any other ailment. Any equine found to have an ailment shall not be used without the approval of an approved veterinarian. 
(4)  The equine must be groomed daily and not have fungus, a dirty coat or exhibit symptoms of illness or irritation. 
(5)  The equine must have adequate flesh and muscle tone. 
(6)  The equine must be no more than six months pregnant. 
(7)  The body weight of the equine must be submitted to the bureau prior to the equine being placed in service and upon request certified in accordance with standards established by the bureau. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-152. - Equine working conditions. 
(a)  No equine used as provided in this article shall be worked under any of the following conditions and any owner allowed to let the conditions exist will be found in violation of this article: 
(1)  If the equine or combination of equine shall pull any combined weight, including passengers and driver, in excess of two times the equine's body weight. No equine or combination of equine shall pull any vehicle which is occupied by a number of persons which exceeds such vehicle's normal safe seating capacity; 
(2)  If the equine works more than ten hours in any 24-hour period without at least one 20-minute rest break or two ten-minute rest breaks per hour; 
(3)  If the equine pulling a vehicle for hire is moving at a speed faster than a slow trot. A slow trot means a speed of five to 15 miles per hour; 
(4)  If the equine works more than 50 hours in any seven-day period or if the equine works more than five consecutive days; 
(5)  If the equine is worked with equipment, other than normal blinders, which causes an impairment of vision; or 
(6)  If the equine is subjected to any condition or treatment which will impair the good health and physical condition of the equine. 
(7)  If the equine is subjected to any conditions that constitute a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12.4, relating to cruelty to animals. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, working hours of equine shall include time spent on rest breaks and all the time equine are available for hire. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-153. - Use of harness. 
(a)  Under this article, no equine will be worked without a padded saddle or a bit that is approved by the bureau. 
(b)  The harness must be oiled and cleaned so as to be soft at all times. 
(c)  All pads must be clean and kept soft at all times. 
(d)  The harness will be properly fitted and maintained and kept free of makeshift material such as wire, sisal rope and hazardous rusty chain. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-154. - Inspection of vehicles. 
(a)  Vehicles for hire pulled by equine must be properly lubricated and wheels must spin freely. Such vehicles for hire must be inspected and approved for service by the bureau at least every six months, but are subject to removal of service pending repair and reinspection. The inspection sticker shall be placed on the vehicle in a location approved by the bureau. 
(b)  Vehicles used for the purposes as outlined in subsection (a) of this section shall conform to the following vehicle specifications: 
(1)  The wheel base shall be equal to or less than 14 feet. 
(2)  The total overall length of the vehicle shall be equal to or less than 28 feet. 
(3)  The maximum overall width of the vehicle shall be equal to or less than 78 inches. 
(4)  The tires shall be rubber or other resilient material. Metal tires shall be prohibited. 
(5)  The vehicle right turn radii shall not be greater than 12 feet for the right rear wheel and 24 feet for the left front wheel. 
(6)  The vehicle shall be drawn by no more than two equine, except at parades and at special events approved by the bureau. 
(7)  Vehicles shall be equipped with one red light on each outer extremity of the rear of the vehicle body and mounted between two and five feet above the road surface. Similarly mounted yellow lights shall be mounted on the front of the vehicle body. Each light shall be no less than four inches in diameter. Vehicles shall also be equipped with a slow-moving vehicle emblem as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4. 
(8)  A certification prepared in accordance with standards established by the bureau indicating the weight of the carriage should be submitted to the bureau at least once yearly, but in any case each time the carriage is modified in any way. 
(c)  Each company operating carriages must identify each carriage with the CPNC number and the name of the company prominently displayed on each side of the rear of each vehicle. The CPNC number shall be displayed, along with the insurance sticker, on a plate or tag approved by the bureau. Each company will have its listed telephone number printed on the vehicle so as to receive comments and complaints regarding the equine-drawn vehicle service. Each company shall identify each of its carriages by a carriage number assigned by the bureau. This number shall be in addition to the CPNC number and shall be affixed to each side and the rear of the carriage, in a color which contrasts with the carriage background color. The carriage number shall be at least five inches high. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-155. - Use of whips. 
No driver of an equine-drawn vehicle for hire may whip an equine with more than a light touch by a whip approved by the bureau. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-156. - Diapers. 
No equine shall pull a vehicle for hire unless such equine is wearing a diaper. Diapers must be properly fitting and constructed of a sturdy material to ensure comfort to the equine and complete waste disposal. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-157. - Shoes. 
No equine shall be used to pull a vehicle for hire without properly fitting shoes on each properly trimmed hoof. Should an equine throw a shoe during its shift, the time and location must be noted on the trip sheet, and the hoof must be examined by the driver and any nails removed. The equine may complete the fare, but must be shod prior to the next day's shift. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-158. - Water. 
Adequate water for equine pulling vehicles for hire will be provided in the stables at all times and in working areas as often needed and as climate and working conditions require. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-159. - Stalls and stables. 
(a)  Ventilation and fresh air shall be provided in stalls housing equine used to pull vehicles for hire so as to minimize drafts, odors and moisture condensation. 
(b)  Ceilings in stalls and stables must be at a height sufficient to allow an equine to fully extend the head and neck without any restriction. 
(c)  Bedding in stalls and stables shall be highly absorbent and comfortable, if in direct contact with the equine and shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Bedding shall be deep enough so as to adequately absorb wetness. 
(2)  Bedding so used shall not be a type that will harm or in any way be a discomfort to the equine. 
(3)  Bedding shall be deep enough to provide adequate cushion and support. 
(4)  Surfaces, including floors, with bedding shall be free of odor and waste and shall be cleaned and disinfected regularly. 
(d)  Stalls and stables shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the equine from injury, and to contain them. 
(e)  Stalls and stable floors or surfaces shall be constructed and maintained to protect the equine's feet and legs from injury. 
(f)  Stalls and stables shall be constructed and maintained so as to enable the equine to remain dry and clean. 
(g)  Stalls shall be constructed and maintained to provide sufficient space to allow each equine to turn about freely and to easily stand, sit or lie in a comfortable, normal position. 
(h)  Stalls and stables shall be constructed and maintained so that the equine contained therein have easy access to food and water, and such food and water shall be kept free of contamination. 
(i)  Stalls and stables shall be kept sanitary and receive periodic cleaning to remove feces and other waste materials, including trash and dirt, so as to minimize disease hazards and reduce odors. Such disposal shall meet the guidelines established by city and state health regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-160. - Trailers. 
Any trailer or vehicle involved in transporting equine governed in this article must be in good working order and must be near the working location to provide speedy removal of any equine in an emergency situation. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-161. - Drivers. 
In addition to the requirements imposed upon all drivers for hire by division 3 of this article, drivers of equine-drawn vehicles shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Each driver must have in possession a completed trip sheet, the form of which shall be provided by the bureau, for the vehicle the driver is driving and the driver's current shift. The trip sheet shall be submitted to the bureau within 30 days. 
(2)  Drivers must have a working knowledge and general experience involving equine and driving carriages or equine-drawn vehicles. A driver must also have knowledge concerning proper equine grooming, care, equipment and nutrition. 
(3)  Companies must provide new drivers with 35 hours of training, and guidelines for and the results of training programs shall be submitted to the bureau. 
(4)  A driver must complete a written examination prepared and administered by the bureau. 
(5)  A driver must wear a uniform adopted by the company and approved by the bureau or meet the following guidelines: 
a.  Wear shoes that entirely cover the foot (no sandals). 
b.  Wear ankle length dark pants or a dark skirt or dress. 
c.  Wear a solid white or light blue shirt or blouse with sleeves and folded collar, that shall be tucked in at all times. (No tee shirts or sweatshirts shall be worn) 
(6)  For the purpose of obtaining a permit to operate an equine-drawn vehicle for hire, a driver need only to have been in possession of a valid Georgia state driver's license, and a resident of the state, for a minimum of 90 days. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-162. - Fares. 
(a)  A schedule of fares shall be conspicuously displayed on signs that shall be hung or painted on the exterior sides of the carriage. These signs shall bear the amount to be charged per trip and the maximum number of passengers to be carried. It shall be unlawful to charge any rate in excess of the fares so displayed or to carry more than the specified number of passengers. The displayed rates do not pertain to fares charged for special events and reservation events. 
(b)  The maximum charges shall be: 
(1)  $45.00 per person (tour) 
(2)  $10.00 per child ten [years of age] and under (tour) 
(3)  $20.00 per person (taxi ride). 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-163. - Weather conditions. 
(a)  An owner of an equine engaged in the equine drawn vehicle for hire industry shall be prohibited from operating on a public street in the city during the following conditions: 
(1)  During periods when the temperature exceeds 95 degrees Fahrenheit, as determined and announced by the National Weather Service. 
(2)  During periods when the temperature is below 26 degrees Fahrenheit, as determined and announced by the National Weather Service. 
(3)  During periods when the bureau has determined the weather is dangerous or unsuitable for the operation of equine-drawn vehicles for hire. 
(b)  An equine in use during the periods described in this section shall be immediately returned to its stable by the most direct and authorized route. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-164. - Use of open stands. 
(a)  The bureau shall maintain a list of all open equine-drawn carriage stands. Equine-drawn carriage stands shall be created by the bureau based on the criteria of traffic conditions, public necessity and convenience and effect on police functions. 
(b)  Open stands shall be used exclusively by equine-drawn carriages for which CPNC's have been issued by the city. No equine-drawn carriage shall be placed upon or occupy any carriage stand except for the purpose of being held for hire. Equine-drawn carriages shall be placed on stands only from the rear and shall be moved forward as to the front of the stand immediately, as space becomes available by the departing movement of preceding carriages. Violation of this rule constitutes line jumping and shall be grounds for suspension of a driver's permit. When an equine-drawn carriage stand is occupied to its full capacity, no carriage shall wait outside of a carriage stand in violation of any traffic laws of the city. The driver of any equine-drawn carriage occupying a stand shall not leave that carriage unattended. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-165. - Maintaining equine-drawn vehicle for hire company permit. 
(a)  An equine-drawn vehicle for hire company who has obtained a company permit from the bureau must meet the following criteria to maintain such permit: 
(1)  Continue to hold a current city business license. 
(2)  Maintain an office within the city limits that is staffed at least three hours per day and advise the bureau in writing which three hours the office is open. 
(3)  Submit to the bureau a copy of a current lease for the company premises or an affidavit as to ownership and occupancy. 
(4)  Maintain a publicly listed telephone number. 
(5)  Maintain the name and home address of each driver affiliated with the company, along with the name of the CPNC holder who owns or leases the vehicle operated by the driver. 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Sec. 162-166. - Table of fines. 

 
(Ord. No. 2002-30, § 1, 5-14-02) 
Secs. 162-167—162-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIGHTSEEING VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 162-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Operator means the driver of a sightseeing vehicle employed by the owner of a sightseeing service. 
Owner means any person owning or operating sightseeing cars in the rendering of sightseeing service. 
Sightseeing service means the service rendered to the public for a fee by furnishing transportation to the public in sightseeing vehicles, driven by operators, to points of historic, scenic, cultural or aesthetic interest, on the basis of telephone contract, written contract or other prearrangement. The term "sightseeing service" does not include regularly scheduled sightseeing tours. 
Sightseeing vehicle means a motor vehicle capable of normally transporting not less than six persons, including the driver. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8161) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 162-182. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly operate, offer to operate or permit another person to operate a sightseeing service in the city in violation of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold such person out to the public or advertise that such person renders a sightseeing service in the city unless the person shall have obtained and holds a permit under this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8166) 
Secs. 162-183—162-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 162-196. - Required. 
The permit for the rendering of sightseeing service shall be applied for in the same manner as the application for permits pursuant to article II, division 4 of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8162) 
Sec. 162-197. - Criteria for issuance. 
No permit for sightseeing service shall be issued to or retained by an owner unless the sightseeing service complies with the following: 
(1)  All operators shall obtain and maintain a driver's permit as provided in article II, division 3 of this chapter. 
(2)  All vehicles rendering sightseeing service shall be inspected by a police officer and found to be sightseeing cars and found to meet reasonable standards of comfort and safe operation, as prescribed by section 162-34. 
(3)  The owner shall designate and maintain an office in the city and shall garage the sightseeing cars in the city and make them available for inspection at all reasonable times by a police officer. 
(4)  The owner shall provide and maintain the bond or insurance required by section 162-58. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8163) 
Sec. 162-198. - Transferability. 
Any permit granted in accordance with this division may be transferred in the same manner as provided in section 162-103. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8164) 
Sec. 162-199. - Suspension or revocation. 
The mayor may suspend or revoke, after hearing, any permit issued in accordance with this division, where the holder has failed to comply with or has willfully or knowingly violated any of the sections of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-8165) 
Secs. 162-200—162-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WRECKERS AND TOWING SERVICES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Abandoned vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; restriction on municipal licensing of wreckers, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10.1. 

Sec. 162-221. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nonconsensual shall mean without the prior consent or authorization of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle being towed. 
Wrecker means an automotive vehicle with hoisting apparatus and equipment for towing wrecked or disabled automobiles or other vehicles. The term "wrecker" also includes any vehicle otherwise equipped and used for the purposes of towing wrecked or disabled automobiles or vehicles. 
(Code 1977, § 14-9001; Ord. No. 2001-21, § 2, 3-12-01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 162-222. - Compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to use or operate upon any of the streets of the city any wrecker or towing car without complying with this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-9002) 
Sec. 162-223. - Licensing and registration. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to use or operate upon any of the streets of the city a wrecker or to do any trespass towing (as defined in O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13) without having obtained a license granted by the mayor as provided in this section. 
(b)  Every person desiring to obtain a license required in this section shall make written application to the chief financial officer for that privilege upon forms to be prepared and approved by the police permits section. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant; place where the proposed business is to be located; nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the name of the officers; the charges to be imposed for various services; amounts and types of insurance held; such other information as may be required by the police or license review board; and shall be sworn by the applicant or agent thereof. All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the license review board or the department of police, and failure to furnish this data, information and records within 30 days from the date of the request shall automatically result in the dismissal, with prejudice, of the application. Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any persons requested by the license review board, the department of police or the city attorney and considered as being important in the ascertainment of facts relative to the license. The failure to produce a person within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in automatic dismissal of the application. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to use or to operate upon any of the streets of the city any wrecker without having first filed a registration of all these vehicles with the department of police upon forms to be furnished by the department. The information for registration shall contain the following: 
(1)  The make, model and manufacturer's serial number of the vehicle; 
(2)  Date the vehicle was put into service as a wrecker; 
(3)  The driver's license number of the owner, if an operator, and of all other operators of the wrecker; 
(4)  The name of the insurance company with which the owner and all operators have liability insurance coverage with respect to the operation of the vehicle, as required by law; 
(5)  The permit number of each person who shall drive or operate the vehicle on behalf of the owner; and 
(6)  Such other information as may be required by the mayor or the mayor's designee. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person hired by the owner of private property within the city to remove vehicles from any off-street parking facility or to do any trespass towing without having first obtained approval of the department of police for the signs required to be posted on the property as provided by section 16-28.014 and as provided by O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 
(1)  Signs shall be located at each designated entrance to a parking lot or parking area where parking prohibitions are to be effective. Where there is no designated entrance, such signs shall be erected so as to be clearly visible from each and every parking space. 
(2)  Such signs shall be 7.5 square feet in area (2.5 feet by three feet). 
(3)  Such signs located at a designated entrance to a parking lot shall be at least four feet above the site grade. Where there is no designated entrance, such signs shall be six feet above the grade if vehicles are to be parked between the sign and the maneuvering area for the parking space. 
(4)  Such signs shall state in letters at least three inches high that "unauthorized vehicles may be towed away at owner's expense to…." Such signs shall also include the following information in letters at least 2½ inches high: 
a.  Such vehicles may be removed at a maximum cost of $85.00 and stored at a maximum cost of $10.00 per day for each day thereafter, all of which shall be paid by the owner; 
b.  The address of the location to which such vehicles are towed; 
c.  Checks and credit cards shall be accepted in lieu of cash and for no additional fee; 
d.  No storage fee may be charged if the vehicle has been held less than 24 hours; 
e.  Shall state that these conditions are required by state law and city ordinances; and 
f.  Shall state that complaints may be made to the police at 658-6620. 
No abbreviations shall be used. The lettering on such signs shall be black on a white, reflective grade background, and shall be illuminated if out of headlight range. 
(Code 1977, § 14-9003; Ord. No. 2000-59, § 1, 11-14-00) 
Sec. 162-224. - Fees. 
The annual application fee shall be $120.00 for each truck operated by a wrecker service payable by the wrecker company and $50.00 for each wrecker driver. The annual registration fee shall be $25.00 for the operation of a wrecker service. All registrations shall expire on June 30 of each year and shall be renewed between June 1 and June 30 of each year. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-9004, 19-14.034) 
Sec. 162-225. - Revocation of license; appeals from order of revocation. 
(a)  The police chief or the chief's designee may revoke the license to operate a wrecker of any person on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  If the license to operate was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement of a material fact; 
(2)  If the licensee proceeds to the scene of an accident in violation of this article; 
(3)  If the licensee uses a police radio to obtain information as to the location of the scene of an accident; 
(4)  If the licensee shall pay in the form of a gratuity any person not interested in an accident for information as to the location of an accident; 
(5)  If the licensee makes any payment to the owner or one in possession of a parking lot or vacant lot in excess of the reasonable and customary fee ordinarily charged by the owner or person in possession of the parking lot or vacant lot for parking thereon, such payment shall be considered a kickback; 
(6)  If the licensee charges fees in excess of those set out in section 162-227 or violates section 162-233; or 
(7)  If the licensee violates O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13 or any section of this article. 
(b)  The violation of any three provisions of this article by any owner or by any employee of a wrecker service or company shall result in the automatic revocation of the wrecker service or company's license. 
(c)  This revocation shall terminate all authority and permission granted by the license to operate issued to the wrecker owner or any person. Any person whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible to again apply for a license for a period of one year from the date of the revocation. 
(d)  Any person whose license to operate has been revoked by the police chief or the chief's designee may file an appeal to the license review board within 20 days from the date of revocation. The license review board shall conduct the hearing at a regularly scheduled meeting and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, concur with or reverse the recommendation of the license review board. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-9005; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 27, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 162-226. - Fingerprints; permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, use or operate upon any of the streets of the city any wrecker without first having been fingerprinted by the department of police and having been issued a permit by the department of police indicating that this person is eligible to use, drive or operate a wrecker. 
(b)  The department of police shall conduct a complete search relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted. If there is a record of a violation of this article, no permit will be issued and the person shall be ineligible to use, drive or operate a wrecker upon any of the streets of the city; however, any person denied a permit under this section shall have the right of appeal to the license review board. 
(c)  Any permit issued under this article shall expire as set forth in this subsection unless earlier canceled or revoked by the mayor or the mayor's designee. The mayor or the mayor's designee may prescribe regulations for certifying the eligibility of this person to continue to use, drive or operate a wrecker without the necessity of this person being again fingerprinted. The annual permit fee shall be $5.00. This permit shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year for which it was effective and shall be renewed between December 1 and December 31 of each calendar year. 
(d)  The owner of the wrecker shall keep all permits issued under this section in a place so that they may be inspected by any member of the department of police at any time. If the employment of any person possessing this permit is terminated, the permit shall be returned to the person by the owner of the wrecker. 
(e)  No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted in this or any other country within three years immediately prior to the application for this permit of soliciting for prostitution, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses or any other crime involving moral turpitude. Further, this permit shall not be issued to any person who, within the three years immediately preceding the application for this permit, has been convicted of three or more moving traffic violations. To be eligible for this permit, the person applying must possess a current driver's license as provided by the laws of the state. Any person denied a permit under this section or any person whose permit may be revoked under this section shall have the right to appeal this denial or revocation to the license review board. 
(f)  Any basis set forth in subsection (e) of this section for the denial of a permit shall, if it occurs subsequent to issuance of permit, constitute the basis for a revocation of the permit. 
(Code 1977, § 14-9011) 
Sec. 162-227. - Fees charged for non- consensual motor vehicle towing. 
(a)  Any towing or storage firm engaged in the business of providing nonconsensual motor vehicle towing services shall not charge the owner or operator of any towed motor vehicle a towing and/or storage fee in excess of the maximum amount allowed by the State of Georgia, pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 44-1-13, Georgia Public Service Commission Transportation Rule 11-1 of $125.00, and as it may be changed from time to time; however, no storage fees shall be charged for the first 24-hour period from the time the motor vehicle is removed from the property. The fee for towing and/or storage shall be all inclusive; no additional fees may be charged for using dollies, trailers, lifts, slim jims or any other equipment or service. 
(b)  The fees referred to in paragraph (a) above shall be payable by cash, personal check, debit card, or major credit card, including but not limited to Visa, MasterCard, and American Express, at no additional charge. 
(c)  Nonconsensual motor vehicle towing fees and storage fees shall be established annually by the city council, after receiving recommendations from the department of finance based on financial information submitted by the nonconsensual motor vehicle towing firms, as to their current costs for the removal and storage of vehicles and personal property, and on other information. That information, as well as supporting and quantitative information, shall be submitted by nonconsensual motor vehicle towing firms by October 31 of each year to the chief financial officer. 
(Code 1977, § 14-9014; Ord. No. 2000-59, § 2, 11-14-00; Ord. No. 2001-21, § 1, 3-12-01; Ord. No. 2001-32, § 1, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2005-70, § 1, 11-14-05; Ord. No. 2009-07(08-O-2033), § 1, 2-11-09) 
Sec. 162-228. - Lettering on vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to use or operate upon any street of the city any wrecker unless the vehicle shall have lettered on each side in plain view the name of the person owning and causing the wrecker to operate on the streets of the city, the address from which the wrecker is operating and the telephone number. This lettering shall be in a contrasting color to the color of the wrecker and shall be at least 2½ inches in height. 
(Code 1977, § 14-9006) 
Sec. 162-229. - Service calls. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any wrecker or the owner's agent, representative or employee to go to any place where an accident has occurred unless called by the City of Atlanta Police Department, the driver or the owner of the disabled vehicle or by the owner's authorized representative or employee. It shall further be unlawful for the owner of any wrecker or the owner's agent, representative or employee to go to the place of a wreck because of information received by police radio. 
(b)  Prior to towing a vehicle from any site where an accident has occurred, the employee of a wrecker service, both public and private, shall clear the road surface of any broken glass and debris resulting from the accident. 
(Code 1977, § 14-9007; Ord. No. 2009-07(08-O-2033), § 1, 2-11-09) 
Sec. 162-230. - City employees soliciting business. 
It shall be unlawful for any city employee to solicit business for any wrecker owner or operator. 
(Code 1977, § 14-9008) 
Sec. 162-231. - Solicitation of towing work. 
It shall be unlawful to drive along any street or bridge and solicit towing work. Solicitation of towing work by the operator or the occupant of a wrecker while parked on any street or bridge is also prohibited. A wrecker operator shall not proceed to the scene of a disabled vehicle without having been requested or notified to do so, as provided in section 162-229. 
(Code 1977, § 14-9009) 
Sec. 162-232. - Notification upon removal of vehicle at request of other than police officer. 
The operator of any wrecker removing a private motor vehicle at the request of any person other than a police officer on duty for the department of police shall report by electronic notification to the department the fact that the vehicle was removed and its present storage place, together with a description of the vehicle, the vehicle identification number and the tag number. The report shall be made by the wrecker operator by electronic communication within one hour of the deposit of the vehicle at its storage point. 
(Code 1977, § 14-9010; Ord. No. 2009-07(08-O-2033), § 1, 2-11-09) 
Sec. 162-233. - Impound lot; attendant. 
(a)  Every person operating a wrecker service within the city shall maintain an impound lot within the city limits, and all vehicles impounded within the city limits shall be delivered to this lot. 
(b)  Any person operating a wrecker upon the streets of the city and maintaining an impound lot within the city as set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall maintain an attendant at the impound lot 24 hours of every day, and this attendant shall be clothed with the authority to release any impounded vehicle upon the owner meeting the legal requirements for release. 
(c)  There shall be posted at the entrance to the impound lot nearest the impound lot office a sign, the minimum size of which shall be 24 inches by 24 inches, painted white with red lettering, stating the towing charge, the storage rate per day, that checks and credit cards shall be accepted in lieu of cash and for no additional fee, that no storage fee may be charged if the vehicle has been held less than 24 hours, that these conditions are required by state law and city ordinance, and that complaints may be made to the police permits section. The location of such sign must be approved by the police permits section as provided by state law. 
(d)  Lighting shall be provided at a minimum average maintained foot-candle value of two on a horizontal plane at the finished surface or grade level. 
(e)  Upon impoundment of any vehicle by a wrecker service, the wrecker service shall maintain records which shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date and time the call was received by the wrecker service; 
(2)  The name of the caller; 
(3)  The date and time of initial towing; 
(4)  The place of initial towing; 
(5)  The date and time of arrival at the impound lot; 
(6)  The date and time of release to the owner; and 
(7)  The name of the wrecker driver and helper. 
(f)  The records required by subsection (e) of this section shall be maintained at a location where affected members of the public may obtain such information by telephone or in person, during regular business hours. Further, all wrecker services, public and private, which impound vehicles shall register with the department of police the current telephone number of the person responsible for releasing the vehicles. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any wrecker service to operate within the city without employing the services of a check approval agency and the major credit card services; and it shall be unlawful to refuse to accept, in lieu of cash, any check which can be insured by a check approval agency, any draft drawn on a credit union which can be insured by a check approval agency or any major credit card for the payment of any and all fees and costs resulting from the towing and storage of the impounded vehicle. For purposes of this subsection, the term "major credit card" means a Visa, MasterCard, American Express, Discover and Diner's Club card. The municipal clerk shall transmit a copy of this subsection to each wrecker service provider. 
(h)  The records required by subsection (e) of this section shall be maintained at the impound lot required by subsection (a) of this section and shall be made available for inspection 24 hours a day at the request of the department of police. 
(Code 1977, § 14-9012; Ord. No. 2009-07(08-O-2033), § 1, 2-11-09) 
Sec. 162-234. - Vehicle not towed upon operator returning. 
The operator of any wrecker service vehicle summoned to tow away any vehicle whether on a public street, public property or private property, shall not tow the vehicle away and shall not charge any fee if the operator of the vehicle returns prior to the wrecker vehicle having left the location to which summoned and moves the vehicle immediately and prior to the wrecker vehicle having left the location to which summoned. 
Exception to this provision is the requirement of section 150-88(c)(6) of the Atlanta City Code of Ordinances, which specifically authorizes and requires the towing, after a twenty-four-hour grace period, of vehicles immobilized in the public right-of-way in accordance with section 150-88(h) where such vehicles are immobilized for having three or more unsatisfied delinquent parking tickets, fees and fines. These immobilized vehicles will be towed irrespective of the presence of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the vehicle's removal by the wrecker service. 
(Code 1977, § 14-9013; Ord. No. 1995-35, 6-25-95; Ord. No. 2010-07(10-O-0281), §§ 1—3, 3-9-10) 
Secs. 162-235—162-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION SERVICES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— It should be noted by the user of this Code that Ord. No. 2001-48, § 18, approved Nov. 28, 2000, states "on-site users of vehicle immobilization devices shall be required to comply with the provisions contained in sections 162-252, 162-253, 162-254, 162-255, 162-257, 162-258, 162-259, 162-260, 162-261, 162-266, and 162-269." 

Sec. 162-251. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Impound shall mean any means to prohibit a motor vehicle's usual manner of movement or operation, either by the installation of vehicle immobilization device or by towing. 
On-site vehicle immobilization services shall mean entities that do not operate parking facilities as their primary purpose, including, but not limited to, educational institutions, houses of worship, restaurants, shopping centers and freestanding establishments with adjacent parking for patrons, customers, or invitees that use vehicle immobilization devices as a method of parking control. 
Operator shall mean any person, including a sole proprietor, independent contractor, partnership or similar business entity, operating vehicle immobilization devices for a vehicle immobilization service. 
Self-release vehicle immobilization device shall mean any device that is designed or adopted to be attached to a parked motor vehicle so as to prohibit the motor vehicle's usual manner of movement or operation, and which may be released upon electronic payment of the fee without assistance of an operator. 
Vehicle immobilization device, device or boot shall mean any mechanical device that is designed or adopted to be attached to a wheel, tire, or other part of a parked motor vehicle so as to prohibit the motor vehicle's usual manner of movement or operation. Unless otherwise specified, the term vehicle immobilization device shall include a self-release vehicle immobilization device. 
Vehicle immobilization service or service shall mean a person, including a sole proprietor, independent contractor, partnership or similar business entity, offering services anywhere in the territorial limits of the city whereby vehicles are immobilized by the installation of a vehicle immobilization device. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2018-60(18-O-1129), § 1, 12-12-18 ) 
Sec. 162-252. - Compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator or vehicle immobilization service to operate within the city without complying with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 3, 11-28-00) 
Sec. 162-253. - License to operate a vehicle immobilization service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle immobilization service to operate within the territorial limits of the city without having obtained a license granted by the chief of police, or his or her designee, as provided in this article. 
(b)  Every vehicle immobilization service desiring to obtain a license required by this article shall file an application with the Licenses and Permits Unit of the City of Atlanta Police Department on forms to be prepared and approved by the unit. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant; where the proposed business is to be located; nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers; the charges to be imposed for various services; amounts and types of insurance held; such other information as may be required by the police or license review board; and shall be sworn by the applicant or agent thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 4, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2018-60(18-O-1129), § 2, 12-12-18 ) 
Sec. 162-254. - Permit to operate as an operator of a vehicle immobilization service. 
(a)  Every operator desiring to obtain a permit required by this article shall file an application with the licenses and permits unit of the city's police department on forms to be prepared and approved by the unit. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the applicant's address and telephone number; driver's license number or state issued identification number; and such other information as may be required by the police or license review board; and shall be sworn by the applicant. 
(b)  Once issued, operators shall carry their permit at all times when they are in the process of installing or removing a vehicle immobilization device. Additionally, all operators shall wear something clearly designating their association with a licensed vehicle immobilization service when they are in the process or installing or removing a vehicle immobilization device. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be an operator without first having been fingerprinted by the Atlanta Police Department and having been issued a permit by the city's police department indicating that such person is eligible to be an operator of a vehicle immobilization service or device. 
(d)  The city police department shall conduct a complete search relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted. If there is a record of a violation of this article, no license will be issued, and the person shall be ineligible to be an operator of any vehicle immobilization service or device within the city; however any person denied a license under this section shall have the right of appeal to the license review board. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 5, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2018-60(18-O-1129), § 3, 12-12-18 ) 
Sec. 162-255. - General requirements for applicants of a license or permit. 
(a)  All applicants, whether they are a vehicle immobilization service or an operator, shall furnish all data, information and records relevant to their application requested of them by the license review board or the city's police department, and failure to furnish this data, information and records within 30 days from the date of the request shall automatically result in the dismissal, with prejudice, of the application. Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the license review board, the Atlanta Police Department or the city attorneys' office, who is under the applicants' control who possess or may possess knowledge of facts relevant to the application. The failure to produce a person within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in an automatic dismissal of the application. Persons under an applicant's control are the partners of the applicant if the applicant is a partnership, the officers of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, and/or employees, officers or agents of the applicant. 
(b)  No license or permit under this article shall be issued to any person who has been convicted in this or any other country within three years immediately prior to the application for a license or permit of any misdemeanor crime involving solicitation for prostitution, distribution of possession of illegal narcotics, sex offenses or any other crime involving moral turpitude. No license or permit under this article shall be issued to any person who has been convicted in this or any other county within five years immediately prior to the application for a license or permit of any felony. Further, to be eligible for a permit under this article, the person applying must possess a current driver's license or state issued identification as provided by the laws of the state. Any person denied a license or a permit under this section or any person whose license or permit may be revoked under this section shall have the right to appeal this denial or revocation to the license review board as provided in section 162-259 of this article. 
(c)  Should any person with a license or a permit obtained pursuant to this article be charged with committing any crime as described in subsection (b) above, then such charge shall constitute the basis for adverse action, including suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 6, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2018-60(18-O-1129), § 4, 12-12-18 ) 
Sec. 162-256. - Registration of vehicles used by a vehicle immobilization service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to use or to operate within the city any vehicle assisting in the operation of a vehicle immobilization service without first having filed a registration for such vehicle with the city's police department upon forms to be furnished by the department. All registrations for each vehicle utilized shall expire on December 31st of each year and shall be renewed between December 1st and December 31st of each year. The information for registration shall contain the following: 
(1)  The make, model and manufacturer's serial number of the vehicle; 
(2)  Date the vehicle was put into service to assist in the operation of a vehicle immobilization service; 
(3)  The driver's license number of operators of the vehicle; 
(4)  The name of the insurance company with which the owner of the vehicle and all operators have liability insurance coverage with respect to the operation of the vehicle, as required by law; 
(5)  The permit number of each operator who shall drive or operate the vehicle on behalf of the vehicle immobilization service; and 
(6)  Such other information related to the vehicle as may be required by the Atlanta Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 7, 11-28-00) 
Sec. 162-257. - Application, license and permit fees. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a completed application, the non-refundable application fee for all applicants seeking a vehicle immobilization service license shall be $100.00. This application fee shall be submitted with the application and be made payable to the licenses and permits unit of the city's police department. 
(b)  Upon approval of an application for a vehicle immobilization service license, the annual license fee shall be $500.00. 
(c)  Upon the filing of a completed application, the non-refundable application fee for all applicants seeking an operator's permit shall be $25.00. This application fee shall be submitted with the application and be made payable to the licenses and permits unit of the city's police department. 
(d)  Upon approval of an application for an operator's permit, the annual permit fee shall be $50.00. 
(e)  The annual fees set forth in this section shall be prorated starting with the date the license or permit is issued to December 31st of the first year of operation as needed. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 8, 11-28-00) 
Sec. 162-258. - General requirements for vehicle immobilization services and operators. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to procure a license or a permit by fraudulent conduct or a false statement of a material fact. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to pay in the form of a gratuity any person who does not own or operate a commercial parking lot for information as to illegally parked vehicles. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to make any payment to an owner, employee, agent or a person in possession of a commercial parking lot in excess of the reasonable and customary fee ordinarily charged by the owner or person in possession of the parking lot for parking thereon, such payment shall be considered a kickback. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to charge fees in excess of those set out in section 162-260 of this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to immobilize any vehicle located on any portion of a public street within the city, unless properly authorized in writing by the chief of police of the city or properly authorized to act as a parking management service on behalf of the city. 
(f)  A vehicle immobilization service must maintain, or provide access to, a 24-hour a day, 365 days per year phone number that is staffed by a live operator to communicate immediately with a driver of vehicle that has been immobilized by the vehicle immobilization service. This shall apply to vehicle immobilization services utilizing Self-release vehicle immobilization devices. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to immobilize vehicles at any off-street pay parking facility, vacant lot, or other private property whereon persons must pay to park their vehicles without having a valid written contract specifically for such services entered into with the private property owner or lawful lessee thereof. 
(h)  Between the hours of 5:01 am and 9:59 pm, it shall be unlawful for a vehicle immobilization service or operator to fail to arrive on the site where the vehicle was immobilized within one hour of being contacted by the owner, driver or person in charge of the vehicle. It shall also be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to fail to release vehicles from immobilization within one hour after receipt of payment from the owner, driver or person in charge of a vehicle that has been immobilized by a vehicle immobilization device. 
Between  the hours of 10:00 pm and 5:00 am, it shall be unlawful for a vehicle immobilization service or operator to fail to arrive on the site where the vehicle was immobilized and to fail to release vehicles from immobilization within forty-five minutes of being contacted by the owner, where the service or operator is in receipt of payment from the owner, driver or person in charge of a vehicle within that initial forty-five minutes. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for a vehicle immobilization service or operator to fail to provide a receipt of payment of the booting fee to the owner, driver or person in charge of a vehicle. The receipt shall have the following information: The name, address, and phone number of the vehicle immobilization service or company and the name and signature or the person who applied/removed the boot or vehicle immobilization device. Such receipts may be provided electronically. 
(j)  In the event that the application of a vehicle immobilization device damages a vehicle, then the service must pay the cost of repairs for that damage. 
(k)  In the event that the owner or operator of a vehicle, to which an immobilization device has been applied, attempts to operate said vehicle or remove the device, then the vehicle immobilization service is not liable for any damage to that vehicle. Additionally, the owner, driver or person in charge of the vehicle will be liable to the vehicle immobilization service for the cost of damage to the vehicle immobilization device. 
(l)  A vehicle immobilization service must procure reasonable insurance, as determined by the license and permits unit of the city's police department, to cover damage caused to vehicles by the use of a vehicle immobilization device. 
(m)  A vehicle immobilization service shall keep copies of permits issued to its operators under this article in their place of business so that they may be inspected by any member of the Atlanta Police Department at any time. 
(n)  A vehicle immobilization service utilizing Self-release vehicle immobilization devices shall ensure that there is a drop off location either located in or directly adjacent to the lot wherein the Self-release vehicle immobilization device was utilized. Such drop-off locations be in the form of secured receptacles or at attended locations and must be accessible 24 hours per day. 
(o)  All Self-release vehicle immobilization devices must have information thereon providing notice of where the device may be returned, along with the contact information for the vehicle immobilization service. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 9, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2009-42(09-O-0765), § 3, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 2018-60(18-O-1129), § 5, 12-12-18 ) 
Sec. 162-259. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The chief of police of the city's police department or the chief's designee may recommend the revocation, suspension, the imposition of a fine, or non-renewal of a license of a vehicle immobilization service or a permit of an operator for due cause. As used in this section, the term "due cause" includes the violation of any section of this article by a vehicle immobilization service or an operator. 
(b)  No adverse action shall be taken regarding any license or permit pursuant to this article until and after notice has been provided and a hearing has been held before the license review board to determine just cause for such action. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least five days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of such license or permit and shall designate the time and place where such hearing will be held. 
(c)  The notice shall be served upon the license or permit holder by delivering the notice personally or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of the license or permit holder in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. If the license or permit holder cannot be found and the service of notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner provided in this section, a copy of such notice shall be mailed registered postage, fully prepaid, addressed to the license or permit holder at the license or permit holder's place of business or residence at least eight days prior to the date of such hearing. 
(d)  The license review board shall conduct the hearings and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the report, may, within 60 days, deny applications for new licenses and may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license. In lieu of suspension, revocation or the failure to renew, the mayor may impose a fine upon any vehicle immobilization service or operator, such fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation of this article. The decision of the mayor may be appealed to the Fulton County Superior Court by filing a writ of certiorari. 
(e)  Any vehicle immobilization service whose license has been revoked or an operator whose permit has been revoked pursuant to this Code section shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a license or permit for 12 months immediately following the revocation. The violation of any provision of this article by any person with any ownership interest in a vehicle immobilization service may result in the revocation of the vehicle immobilization service's license. 
(f)  The actions of an operator working within the scope of his employment for a vehicle immobilization service can be attributed to the vehicle immobilization service for purposes of determining due cause under this section. 
(g)  The maximum fine for any violation of this article shall be $1,000.00. The maximum suspension for any one violation of this article shall be 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 10, 11-28-00) 
Sec. 162-260. - Fees charged by vehicle immobilization service. 
(a)  A vehicle immobilization service, engaged in the business of the immobilization of vehicles shall not charge the owner of any immobilized vehicle or personal property, in excess of $75.00 per day for the removal of the vehicle immobilization device or devices. The $75.00 fee shall be all-inclusive; no additional fees may be charged for using other equipment. Any vehicle immobilization services shall be authorized to charge a $50.00 per day late fee for the failure to properly return a Self-release vehicle immobilization device to a designated drop-off location. Late fees shall not exceed $600.00 per device. 
(b)  Fees may be paid by cash, check, credit card, or debit card at no additional charge. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 11, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2009-63(09-O-1069), § 1, 10-27-09; Ord. No. 2018-60(18-O-1129), § 6, 12-12-18 ) 
Sec. 162-261. - Signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person hired by an owner of any private property, or his agent or employee, located within the territorial limits of the city to install or attach to any vehicle a vehicle immobilization device(s), boot(s), or other instrument(s) that is/are designed to, or have the effect of, restricting the normal movement of such vehicle or by any other means whatsoever to restrict the normal movement of such vehicle, unless the owner of the property, or his agent or employee, has complied with all applicable city zoning ordinances regarding the posting of signs and the following requirements: 
(1)  Signs shall be located at each designated entrance to a parking lot or parking area where parking prohibitions are to be effective. Where there is no designated entrance, such signs shall be erected so as to be clearly visible from each and every parking space. 
(2)  Such signs shall be in accordance with specifications promulgated by the chief of police. 
(3)  Such signs located at a designated entrance to a parking lot shall be at least four feet above the site grade. Where there is no designated entrance, such signs shall be six feet above site grade. 
(4)  Such signs shall state in letters at least three inches high as follows "Unauthorized vehicles may be impounded (towed or booted) at owner's risk and expense." Such signs shall also include the following information in letters at least two and one-half inches high: 
Cost of boot removal ($75.00 per day); 
Cost of tow and daily storage fees; 
"Private Parking"; 
Fee payable by cash, check, and credit or debit card. 
Boot Removal—Call 000-000-0000. 
Tow information—Call 000-000-0000. 
Vehicle may not be impounded if owner/operator returns before boot or tow is attached. 
Booted vehicles may be towed after 24 hours. 
Complaints may be made to: Parking Company 000-000-0000 
Atlanta Police Department 000-000-0000 
This lot is owned and operated by (Name of legal entity owning parking lot/area) and can be reached at 000-000-0000 for resolution of any disputes. 
Where this Code section leaves placeholder phone numbers, the signs shall include the appropriate phone numbers. Where this Code section requires the posting of the tow and daily storage fees, the signs shall include the fees in accordance with state law and state regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 12, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2017-90(17-O-1817), § 1, 12-13-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-60(18-O-1129), § 7, 12-12-18 ) 
Sec. 162-262. - Lettering on vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to operate within the territorial limits of the city any vehicle to assist in the operation of a vehicle immobilization service unless the vehicle shall have displayed on each side in plain view the name of the vehicle immobilization service, the address from which the vehicle immobilization service is operating and the telephone number of the vehicle immobilization service. The lettering shall be in a contrasting color to the color of the vehicle and shall be at least two and one-half inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 13, 11-28-00) 
Sec. 162-263. - Service calls. 
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle immobilization service, or the vehicle immobilization service's agent, representative, employee or operator to go to any place and immobilize a vehicle unless called by the owner, owner's agent, representative or employee of a commercial parking lot, or where a vehicle immobilization service has a contract to immobilize illegally parked cars at a specific commercial parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 14, 11-28-00) 
Sec. 162-264. - City employees soliciting business. 
It shall be unlawful for any city employee to solicit business for any vehicle immobilization service owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 15, 11-28-00) 
Sec. 162-265. - Solicitation of vehicle immobilization work. 
It shall be unlawful to drive along any street within the city and solicit vehicle immobilization work. Solicitation work by the operator or the occupant of a vehicle used to carry on the business of a vehicle immobilization service is prohibited. An operator shall not proceed to a specific commercial lot without complying with section 162-260 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 16, 11-28-00) 
Sec. 162-266. - Vehicle not immobilized upon operator of vehicle returning. 
The operator of any vehicle immobilization service shall not immobilize a vehicle and shall not charge a fee if the driver of the vehicle returns before the installation of the vehicle immobilization device is complete. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 17, 11-28-00) 
Sec. 162-267. - License not in lieu of business license. 
The license issued under this article shall be cumulative and not in lieu of any business license issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-48, § 19, 11-28-00) 
Sec. 162-268. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-60, § 8, adopted Dec. 12, 2018, repealed § 162-268, which pertained to effective date of enforcement of article and derived from Ord. No. 2001-48, § 20, 11-28-00. 
APPENDIX A - EXECUTIVE ORDERS[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are various executive orders. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original order. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Order No. 77-6 
Employee Assistance Program 

Section 1. - Statement of policy; employee assistance program. 
(a)  The city recognizes that alcoholism and drug abuse are treatable diseases that can cause personal problems. The city also recognizes that employees may have other personal problems which impair their ability to perform satisfactorily in their jobs. Such problems may include emotional behavioral disorders, financial worries or marital and family conflicts. Any one of these problems can result in poor interpersonal relations, excessive absenteeism, deteriorating work performance and lowered productivity. 
(b)  The city shall assist in finding help for the employees. Since experience and studies indicate that employee assistance programs that are jointly administered by labor and management constitute an effective means of attacking alcoholism, drug abuse and other employee problems, it is desirable that city departments participate in a united program with AFSCME Local 1644 to provide employee assistance through a joint committee. 
(c)  It is expected that such a jointly administered program will enlighten employees and management to the fact that the social stigma of alcoholism and drug addiction is without foundation and that these conditions are treatable as are most other disorders. 
(d)  The city shall, whenever feasible, give employees an opportunity to use the employee assistance program before taking the disciplinary action of suspension or discharge. However, the final decision of whether to discipline such employees or to refer them to the program must be made by the department head. This decision should be based on the same factors that govern other decisions concerning disciplinary matters - gravity of the offense, previous record of disciplinary action and action taken in similar cases. 
(e)  For the purpose of this order, alcoholism and drug abuse are defined as illnesses in which an employee's consumption of alcoholic beverages or drugs definitely and repeatedly interferes with job performance, health and/or attendance. 
(f)  The bureau of personnel operations is responsible for working with the AFSCME Local 1644 to implement this order, and to follow procedures which ensure that no employee with an alcohol, drug or other personal problem will have his or her job security or promotional opportunities jeopardized by his or her referral or request for consultation or treatment. 
(g)  It is recognized that supervisors, directors and commissioners do not have the professional qualifications to judge whether or not an employee has an alcoholic or drug problem. Referral to the program for consultation and any subsequent offer of assistance will be based strictly upon unsatisfactory work performance that has been clearly documented by the supervisor. 
(h)  It will be the responsibility of the employee to seek and accept medical and professional help if advised to do so. If the employee refuses to follow the recommendations of the designated resource person, and job performance or attendance continues to be unsatisfactory, normal disciplinary measures will be taken. 
(i)  It is expected and hoped that employees who suspect that they have a medical, alcohol or drug related problem, even in its early stages, will be encouraged to seek consultation voluntarily and, when indicated, comply with the prescribed treatment. 
(j)  All records will be preserved in the highest degree of confidence. The confidential nature of medical records of employees with alcohol or drug related problems will be preserved to ensure privacy in the same manner as other medical records. Under no circumstances shall materials relating to the employee's participation in the employee assistance program be made a part of the employee's personnel file. 
Section 2. - Employee assistance program. 
Implementation of the program shall include: 
(1)  Training of supervisory personnel in documentation and referral procedures based on deteriorating work performance. 
(2)  Receiving and identifying the problems of employees who come voluntarily or are referred by supervisory personnel. 
(3)  Referring those employees who appear to have a need for outside treatment to the appropriate community service agency. 
(4)  Following the progress of referred individuals to ensure that proper assistance is being received. 
(5)  Issuing further directives and instructions as may be required consistent with the policies enunciated in this order. 
(6)  Educating employees and management to the fact that the social stigma of alcoholism and other drug addiction is without foundation and educating employees to the dangers of alcoholism and other drug addiction. 
(7)  Keeping sufficient records to permit the periodic evaluation of the program. 
(8)  Meeting regularly with the joint committee to evaluate the operation and effectiveness of the employee assistance program and the effectiveness of available sources of professional help and funds. 
Order No. 77-7 
Rehiring Policy for  Certain Dismissed Employees 

Section 1. - Vacancies offered to dismissed employees. 
All current vacancies within city government will be first offered to those employees who were dismissed on April 1, 1977 as follows: 
(1)  Those dismissed employees not rehired as of the date of this order will form a "pool" of prospective employees. The persons making up this pool will, in order of seniority and by job classification, be offered all vacancies within job classifications held by said employee as of the time of his discharge that exist as of this date. 
Section 2. - Twelve-month period. 
For a 12-month period beginning April 19, 1977, all vacancies within city government within any job classification held by a dismissed employee as of April 1, 1977 shall first be offered to dismissed employees eligible for reemployment in such job classifications who have not returned to work with the city and who have not rejected earlier offers of reemployment. 
Section 3. - Positions at lower classifications offered. 
If vacancies at the previous pay grades do not exist, former employees may be offered positions at lower classifications which they may accept with the understanding that they will be placed on the promotional register, with full seniority, for future vacancies at their former grade. Refusal of such opportunities will not jeopardize their chances for future vacancies. 
Section 4. - Pay; range and advancement. 
Rehired city employees will be paid at the same range and step that they received prior to dismissal unless they elect to accept a position at a lower grade because no other vacancies exist. The date for their next pay increment will be advanced only by the amount of lost time. However, these employees will be subject to the probationary period imposed on all new employees and rehires. 
Section 5. - Fringe benefits retained. 
Rehired employees will retain fringe benefits to the extent provided by law. Specifically: 
(1)  Sick leave. All accumulated sick leave in the drawing account up to a maximum of 30 days will be retained for persons reemployed within 90 days of their dismissal. 
(2)  Vacation. Unused accrued vacation days will be reinstated. 
(3)  Pension. Coverage under the current (1962) pension plan will be mandatory. Employees formerly participating in an earlier plan may be subject to increased deductions. Counseling will be available to explain options. 
Section 6. - Dismissed employees eligible for counseling. 
All former employees dismissed as a result of the labor dispute and not yet rehired are eligible for counseling, job referral and other services from the special reemployment task force created in April, 1977. All such employees, including those who have applied for rehiring, are encouraged to contact the employee services division at 658-6007. 
Order No. 77-9 
Funded Employee Salaries 

Section 1. - Salaries of certain employees. 
From this day forward, no person employed by the City of Atlanta in any position which is created as a result of any grant or allocation of funds, from any governmental entity or from any private source, shall receive a salary or other compensation in excess of that being received by any permanent employee of the city performing comparable duties, or holding a comparable position where the minimum qualifications for such position are substantially similar, unless personally approved by the mayor. 
Section 2. - Salary comparison required. 
It is further ordered that the director of the bureau of personnel services shall compare salaries or other compensation for any existing comparable position of employment in the government of the city and in the event it is determined that the salary or other compensation for any position created as a result of such grant or allocation of funds, is in excess of that for any existing comparable position, then said director shall notify the appropriate department head and the chief administrative officer of such discrepancies and the chief administrative officer shall take the appropriate action necessary to remedy such discrepancies. 
Order No. 77-13 
Law Department 

Section 1. - Police examination investigation. 
To continue and complete the investigation conducted by the law department into irregularities connected with the police promotional exams given in 1975, it is hereby ordered that all affected personnel of the City of Atlanta shall cooperate fully and in every legal way with the effort to complete said investigation, to appear when notified, to answer questions under oath, orally and in writing, and to produce whatever documents might be required by city law department personnel. 
Order No. 77-14 
Office of Consumer Affairs 

Section 1. - Solicitation ordinance enforcement. 
It hereby is ordered that the office of consumer affairs be delegated the responsibility for the enforcement of the door-to-door solicitation ordinance [section 30-546 et seq. of the Code of Ordinances]. 
APPENDIX B - FEES 
PART II. CODE OF ORDINANCES—GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Subject     Amount  
ADMINISTRATION 
Finance 
Bills and Collections 
Sec. 2-971. Costs and fees on execution. 
(1)  Issuing fi. fa. ..... $0.50 
(2)  Settling fi. fa., without levy ..... 10.00 
(3)  Levy service ..... 15.00 
(4)  Making and executing deed ..... 15.00 
(5)  Executing premade deed ..... 10.00 
(6)  Collecting fi. fa. by sheriff or other official: 
a.  Bill of $100.00 or less ..... 4.00 
b.  Bill over $100.00 ..... 7.50 
(7)  Collecting fines in municipal court ..... 2.00 
(8)  Notarizing document ..... 2.00 
(9)  Advertising ..... Actual cost 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
Dealers and Manufacturers 
Generally 
Sec. 10-32. Inspection of establishments (where alcoholic beverage licenses are requested) ..... 50.00 
License 
Sec. 10-58. Issuance to nonprofit performing arts theaters, museums and botanical gardens for sale for consumption on premises. 
Annual license fee ..... 1,000.00 
Sec. 10-60. Annual license fee; refunds. 
(1)  Wine. 
a.  Manufacturer of wine ..... 2,250.00 
b.  Wholesale dealer in wine ..... 2,000.00 
c.  Retail dealer in wine to be consumed on or off the premises of the dealer ..... 2,500.00 
d.  Retail dealer in wine to be consumed off the premises of the dealer only ..... 2,500.00 
e.  Tasting room for retail dealer in wine and wine to be consumed on the premises ..... 2,500.00 
f.  Tasting room for retail dealer in wine and wine to be consumed on the premises which sells wine by the package on Sunday ..... 3,750.00 
(2)  Malt beverages. 
a.  Brewer or manufacturer of beer ..... 5,000.00 
b.  Wholesaler dealer of beer ..... 2,000.00 
c.  Retail dealer of beer to be consumed on or off the premises of the dealer ..... 4,000.00 
d.  Retail dealer in beer to be consumed off the premises of the dealer only ..... 2,500.00 
(3)  Distilled spirits. 
a.  Manufacturer ..... 5,000.00 
b.  Manufacturer that manufactures, distills or blends liquors made whole from products raised in the state ..... 5,000.00 
c.  Wholesaler ..... 5,000.00 
d.  Retail sale in package form ..... 4,500.00 
1.  In determining the license fee to be paid by any dealer in distilled spirits, each individual store or retail outlet shall be considered singly. 
(4)  Consumption on the premises of distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages. 
a.  Initial license ..... 5,000.00 
b.  Additional facility licenses, each ..... 5,000.00 
1.  Additional licenses shall be required for all additional facilities such as lounges, restaurants, nightclubs, patios or other areas located within the same building. 
2.  All restaurant patios and outdoor or open air eating areas which are immediately adjacent to restaurants shall be exempt from the additional facility license fee. 
3.  The licensee shall not provide any electronically amplified music on any patio or on any outdoor or open eating area in which the licensed premises are within 500 feet of any area zoned for single-family residences. 
4.  All such licensees shall be required to comply with the requirements as to limitations on noise levels established by ordinance. 
c.  Bottle house ..... 2,000.00 
(5)  Retail of beer or wine off premise, initial license ..... 2,500.00 
Leased locations as additional facilities, each license ..... 2,250.00 
Additional licenses shall be required for each leased location located within a licensed premise, such as the Sweet Auburn Curb Market located at 209 Edgewood Avenue. In no event, however, shall there be no more than four (4) additional facilities licenses at any location licensed for off premises consumption. Provided further, however, that the entire licensed location shall derive less than five percent of its gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Special Permits 
Sec. 10-126. Temporary permit for (sale during) special events. 
Filing fee ..... 100.00 
Permit fee, per day ..... 500.00 
Not to exceed ..... 2,000.00 
Sec. 10-127. Temporary permit for nonprofit civic organizations ..... 25.00 
Sec. 10-128. Approved outdoor festivals. 
Per sales location for each calendar day of the festival: 
Malt beverages and wine, per day ..... 50.00 
Distilled spirits, per sales location, per day ..... 50.00 
Sec. 10-129. Wine tastings. 
Filing fee ..... 100.00 
Permit fee, per day ..... 250.00 
Operational Rules 
Sec. 10-206. Fingerprinting of employees at adult entertainment establishment selling alcoholic beverages. 
Application fee ..... 50.00 
Permit, annual, renewal ..... 200.00 
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
In General 
Sec. 14-7. Carnivals, sideshows, similar exhibitions. 
Permit ..... 25.00 
Wrestling Matches 
Sec. 14-38. Application. 
For promoter permit ..... 100.00 
Sec. 14-40. Licensing of promoters, referees, judges and others. 
Promoter's license ..... 2,000.00 
All others ..... 100.00 
Dancehalls 
License 
Sec. 14-146. Required; fee: As provided in ch. 30, art. III. 
Bungee Jumping 
License 
Sec. 14-190. Fee ..... 1,000.00 
Burlesque Theaters 
License 
Sec. 14-232. Annual renewal; fee. 
Per year ..... 500.00 
Lingerie Modeling 
License 
Sec. 14-322. Application. 
Fee ..... 100.00 
Sec. 14-323. License. 
Annual fee ..... 3,000.00 
Sec. 14-325. Renewal. 
Annual fee ..... 3,000.00 
Employee Permit 
Sec. 14-352. Fee. 
Application ..... 50.00 
License fee ..... 300.00 
ANIMALS 
In General 
Sec. 18-2. Removal of carcasses of small animals: To be determined annually by the commissioner of public works. 
Dogs 
Sec. 18-61. [Impoundment, permits within DeKalb County.] 
Impoundment, per day ..... 7.50 
Boarding, per day ..... 3.00 
Permit: 
Per dog, per year ..... 3.00 
Not to exceed ..... 10.00 
AVIATION 
Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International [Airport] 
Fees and Charges 
Sec. 22-86. Motor vehicle impound charges. 
Per vehicle ..... 25.00 
Plus, per day or portion of day after first day ..... 2.50 
Sec. 22-87. Landing fees. 
Base fee ..... 0.19 
Airfield improvements landing fee ..... 0.63 
Total, per 1,000 pounds, not less than ..... 0.93 
Ground Transportation Services 
General Provisions 
Sec. 22-202. Fees. 
(a) Permit application ..... 20.00 
(b) Taxicabs, each time entering taxi assembly area ..... 0.50 
(c) Commercial limousines permit, per vehicle ..... 100.00 
(d) Charter services, for each available seat in a vehicle transporting passengers away from airport: 
Per seat ..... 0.10 
Minimum charge ..... 2.00 
(e) Courtesy vehicles: 
(1) Rental cars, per calendar year: Eight percent of gross receipts. 
(2) Hotel and motel courtesy vehicles: 
Charge for vehicle used to transport patrons to and from airport, per vehicle per year ..... 360.00 
Charge based on number of rooms in each hotel or motel, per room per year ..... 10.00 
Maximum annual charges: 
For hotels and motels located within a radius of two miles or less ..... 3,600.00 
For hotels and motels located within a radius of more than two miles but less than five miles ..... 2,400.00 
For hotels and motels located a radius of five miles or more ..... 600.00 
(3) Parking lot courtesy vehicles: 
For each vehicle used to transport patrons to and from the airport, per year ..... 360.00 
Charge based on number of available parking spaces in the lot, per space per year ..... 10.00 
(4) Vehicle leasing company courtesy vehicles: 
For each vehicle used to transport patrons to and from the airport, per year ..... 360.00 
Charge based on number of trips through the courtesy vehicle loading area, per trip ..... 5.00 
(5) Other courtesy vehicles: 
Charge for use of designated loading area, per year ..... 120.00 
Charge for each vehicle used to transport residents, per vehicle per year ..... 60.00 
Maximum charge ..... 240.00 
(f) Metro area scheduled service, per month: Five percent of monthly gross receipts. 
In excess of ..... 400,000.00 
Plus, from transporting people to and from the airport: Seven percent of all monthly gross receipts. 
Not to exceed ..... 400,000.00 
(g) Non-metro area scheduled service: 
(1) Charge for use of designated loading area, per year ..... 600.00 
(2) Charge for each vehicle in company's fleet, per year ..... 100.00 
(h) Courier vehicles: 
(1) Permit ..... 100.00 
(2) Parking: Amount of applicable parking charge for public parking lot where loading area is located. 
(i) Commercial vans/minibus service: 
(1) Permit ..... 100.00 
(2) Parking: Amount of applicable parking charge for public parking lot where loading area is located. 
Sec. 22-205. Car rentals. 
Off-airport and on-airport rental car companies shall begin collecting the CFC at the new rate of $5.00 beginning on July 1, 2010. 
Local Airport Taxicabs 
Sec. 22-251. Permit required ..... 25.00 
Renewal ..... 15.00 
Duplicate ..... 5.00 
BUSINESSES 
Police Power Licenses and Permits Generally 
Sec. 30-28. Fees. 
All licenses not covered in this section, minimum ..... 30.00 
Initial application fee for license for sale of alcoholic beverages: 
Malt beverages/wine consumed ..... 300.00 
Malt beverages/wine packaged ..... 300.00 
Create a package store area ..... 300.00 
Distilled spirits package ..... 300.00 
Distilled spirits consumed ..... 300.00 
Application fee for renewal of license for sale of alcoholic beverages: 
Malt beverages/wine consumed ..... 150.00 
Malt beverages/wine packaged ..... 150.00 
Create a package store area ..... 150.00 
Distilled spirits package ..... 150.00 
Distilled spirits consumed ..... 150.00 
License/permit fees: 
Employees/independent contractors working at adult entertainment establishments which sell alcohol: 
Application fee ..... 50.00 
Permit fee ..... 200.00 
Aerobics/slimnastics ..... 500.00 
Alarms commercial permits ..... 50.00 
Alarms residential permits ..... 50.00 
Billiard/pool room ..... 150.00 
Bonding company ..... 500.00 
Bondsperson ..... 250.00 
Boxing promoter ..... 2,000.00 
Burglar alarm company ..... 500.00 
Burglar alarm installer ..... 75.00 
Door-to-door sales (company) ..... 500.00 
Door-to-door sales (employee) ..... 170.00 
Escort service (company) ..... 2,000.00 
Escort service (employee) ..... 300.00 
Firearm application ..... 120.00 
Fortuneteller or handwriting analysis annual fee ..... 500.00 
Fund solicitation annual fee ..... 200.00 
Game room ..... 150.00 
Gym/health spa ..... 500.00 
Hypnotherapy ..... 500.00 
Lingerie modeling studio (company) ..... 3,000.00 
Lingerie modeling studio (employee) ..... 300.00 
Massage salon annual fee ..... 2,000.00 
Massage technician annual fee ..... 200.00 
Motel/hotel ..... 120.00 
Moving ..... 60.00 
Parking lots/garages - per lot ..... 250.00 
Parking lots/garages - per space ..... 3.00 
Pawnshop annual fee ..... 750.00 
Precious metal dealer annual fee ..... 750.00 
Roominghouse/lodge ..... 150.00 
Scrap processor ..... 500.00 
Sightseeing company ..... 200.00 
Social/private club ..... 200.00 
Tattoo parlor ..... 150.00 
Teenage dancehall ..... 180.00 
Telephone solicitations ..... 150.00 
Theater annual fee ..... 500.00 
Vendor assistant permit ..... 30.00 
Vendor replacement permit ..... 30.00 
Wrecker company (each truck) ..... 300.00 
Wrecker company employees ..... 150.00 
Wrestling promoter license fee ..... 2,000.00 
Wrestling permit application fee ..... 100.00 
Wrestling referees, judges, timekeepers, managers, trainers, and seconds ..... 100.00 
Occupation Tax 
Sec. 30-60. Exceptions to article. 
*** 
(c) Performances held in a theater, stadium, room, open space, etc., per performance: 
Spectator capacity: 
0 to 500 ..... 35.00 
500 to 2,500 ..... 100.00 
2,500 to 7,500 ..... 200.00 
7,500 to 15,000 ..... 350.00 
Over 15,000 ..... 500.00 
Sec. 30-61. Determination of [tax] amount. 
Nonrefundable administrative fee ..... 75.00 
Sec. 30-62. Administrative fee amounts; tax rate structure. 
(a) A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $75.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts except for the businesses of those persons who are not required to pay the business or occupation tax for the initial startup, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
*** 
(c) 

 
(1)  The tax on gross receipts shall be calculated by the application of the flat rate to the first $10,000.00 of gross receipts and the application of the tax rate to all additional receipts above $10,000.00. 
(2)  No business is required to pay taxes on any gross receipts in excess of $200,000,000.00. 
For each additional employee in excess of one ..... 25.00 
Sec. 30-63. Professional occupation tax. 
Fee, per practitioner ..... 400.00 
Sec. 30-67. Fee for registration of business ..... 75.00 
Astrology 
License 
Sec. 30-503. Fees; term and renewal. 
Upon filing of application ..... 5.00 
Upon approval of application ..... 100.00 
Renewal, per year ..... 100.00 
Door to Door Sales 
Permit 
Sec. 30-615. Fees. 
Application for company permits ..... 100.00 
Application for employees permits ..... 50.00 
Annual license fee (company) ..... 500.00 
Annual license fee (employee) ..... 170.00 
Escort Services 
Permit 
Sec. 30-654. Company application fee ..... 100.00 
Investigation fee, each applicant ..... 25.00 
Sec. 30-655. License fee and renewal. 
Fee ..... 2,000.00 
Employees 
Sec. 30-668. Permits. 
Application fee for certification of eligibility ..... 50.00 
Permit and renewal fees ..... 300.00 
Insurance Companies 
Sec. 30-817. Insurer's license fees. 
Per year ..... 150.00 
For each separate business location ..... 150.00 
Sec. 30-818. License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
Per location per year ..... 52.50 
Sec. 30-819. License fees for independent insurance agencies, brokers not otherwise licensed. 
Per location per year ..... 150.00 
Labor Pools 
License 
Sec. 30-873. Fees. 
Initial application fee ..... 300.00 
Upon approval of application, per year ..... 1,500.00 
Sec. 30-877. Renewal. 
Fee ..... 1,500.00 
Massage Establishments 
License 
Sec. 30-956. Fees. 
To operate establishment: 
Application fee ..... 100.00 
License ..... 2,000.00 
Massage technicians: 
Application fee ..... 50.00 
License ..... 200.00 
Renewal: Same as original license fee. 
Sec. 30-958. Change of location ..... 50.00 
Parking Lots and Parking Garages 
Permits 
Sec. 30-1081. Violations ..... 1,000.00 
Plus, each and every day of a violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable with an additional fine, per day ..... 50.00 
Sec. 30-1083. Fee; required. 
(a)  Application fee, fixed charge ..... 100.00 
(c)  There shall be a base fee of $100.00 for annual renewal of off-street public parking facility permits on January 1. Applications received after January 1 will be prorated until January 1 of the following calendar year, in addition to: 
(1)  For parking facilities of up to 100 spaces, per parking space ..... $3.00 
Or a maximum fee ..... 300.00 
(2)  For parking facilities of between 101 spaces and 200 spaces ..... 300.00 
Plus, for all parking spaces that exceed 100 parking spaces ..... 1.50 
Or a maximum fee ..... 450.00 
(3)  For parking facilities of 201 spaces or more ..... 550.00 
Private Security Services and Private Investigators 
Permit 
Sec. 30-1246. Registration; issuance. 
Per company ..... 25.00 
For each employee ..... 5.00 
Sec. 30-1247. Application; issuance ..... 25.00 
Plus, per employee ..... 5.00 
Street Patrols 
Permit 
Sec. 30-1357. Application. 
Filing fee ..... 10.00 
Telephone Sales Campaigns 
Sec. 30-1381. Permit required. 
Renewal ..... 5.00 
Vending on Public Property 
Sec. 30-1428. Application for permit ..... 150.00 
Sec. 30-1431. Permit fees. 
Initial vendor permit application ..... 150.00 
Renewal of vendor permits ..... 100.00 
Vending site ..... 250.00 
Vending employee ..... 100.00 
Replacement vending permit photo identification card ..... 30.00 
Vending on Private Property 
Permits 
Sec. 30-1483. Annual application. 
Fee ..... 50.00 
Sec. 30-1485. Term and renewal of permits. 
*** 
(e) Fees for renewal. 
For merchandise, food and combination permits ..... 25.00 
For service permits ..... 20.00 
For assistant vendors ..... 15.00 
Sec. 30-1486. Fees. 
(a) Initial fees: 
Merchandise permit ..... 75.00 
Food permit ..... 75.00 
Combination permit ..... 125.00 
Service permit ..... 25.00 
Assistant vendors ..... 15.00 
(b) Replacement permit ..... 30.00 
(c) Renewal permit: Same as original fee. 
CEMETERIES 
Municipal Cemeteries 
Oakland Cemetery 
Sec. 38-44. Schedule of charges for cemetery services. 

 
Sec. 38-45. Schedule of charges for guided tours. 
(1)  Students (ages 7—22) ..... $5.00 
(2)  Senior citizens (ages 65 and above) ..... 3.00 
(3)  Adults (ages 23—54) ..... 10.00 
(4)  Adults (ages 55—64) ..... 3.00 
(5)  Group rates: 
Students (Age 7—22) ..... 3.00 
Adults (Age 23—64) ..... 8.00 
Senior Citizen (Age 65 and above) ..... 2.00 
(6)  Minimum charge for any adult group of less than ten ..... 30.00 
(7)  Family of four, two adults, two children ..... 26.00 
Each additional child ..... 5.00 
CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 
Permit 
Sec. 42-37. Application. 
Application fee ..... 100.00 
Annual permit ..... 200.00 
CIVIC AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
Civic Center 
Sec. 46-37. Lease agreements. 
Surcharge on tickets for each ticket sold ..... 1.00 
Entertainment Filming 
Sec. 46-110. Fee schedule 
Nonrefundable application fee ..... 100.00 
For students ..... 25.00 
Filming permit fee ..... 300.00 
Renewal ..... 300.00 
For students ..... 150.00 
Rush permit fee ..... 300.00 
For students ..... 150.00 
Material changes to filming permit ..... 300.00 
For students ..... 150.00 
Cancellation fee 
(i)  Except as set forth in subsections 46-110(2)d.(ii) and (2)d.(iii) below, a filming permit fee is nonrefundable. 
(ii)  Where the producer submits a change request to the CAOE and the change results in cancellation of a filming permit for a particular calendar month, the producer may utilize the filming permit fee for the cancelled month to purchase a new filming permit for the same project for a different calendar month. Regardless of whether a new filming permit fee is owed, the CAOE shall determine whether a rush fee is applicable based upon the timing of the change request and the standards set forth in subsection 46-110(2)c. above. 
(iii)  A filming permit fee is refundable if cancellation is required because of extraordinary circumstances for which the producer is not responsible and which are not within the producer's control. Inclement weather, except for declared states of emergency, and common illness shall not be deemed extraordinary circumstances. 
Standard on-site services fee 
(i)  $100.00 per location per day except for students, not to exceed $300.00 per day. 
(ii)  No Charge for students. 
Rush on-site service fee ..... 300.00 
For students ..... 150.00 
Cancellation fee 
(i)  Except as set forth in subsections 46-110(3)c.(ii) and (3)c.(iii) below, an on-site services fee is nonrefundable. 
(ii)  Where the producer submits a change request to the CAOE that results in cancellation of requested on-site services for a particular day, the producer may utilize the on-site services fee for the cancelled day to pay for on-site services for the same project for a day that is within three calendar days of the cancelled day. If the change request is submitted three or fewer business days prior to the filming day requested in the original application or the filming day requested in the change request, whichever is earlier, a rush on-site service fee shall be owed. 
(iii)  An on-site services fee is refundable if cancellation is required because of extraordinary circumstances for which the producer is not responsible and which are not within the producer's control. Inclement weather, except for declared states of emergency, and common illness shall not be deemed extraordinary circumstances. 
Traffic control plans 
(i)  For non-students: 
(A)  Traffic control plan for lane and/or sidewalk closure(s) only: ..... $150.00 
(B)  Traffic control plan for street closure(s) only: $250.00 
(C)  Traffic control plan for street closure(s) plus lane and/or sidewalk closure(s) (where the lane and/or sidewalk is not part of or abutting the street being closed): ..... $300.00 
(ii)  For students: Any type of traffic control plan: ..... $25.00 
CONSUMER PROTECTION 
Closeout and Similar Sales 
License 
Sec. 58-85. Fees. 
Upon submittal of application, for 30-day sale ..... 100.00 
Renewal, for an additional 30 days ..... 100.00 
COURTS 
Municipal Court 
Generally 
Sec. 62-39. Assessment of costs and jail fees against prosecutors in dismissal for want of probable cause. 
Not to exceed ..... 300.00 
Sec. 62-40. Assessment of additional costs for benefit of peace officers' annuity and benefit fund. 
(1)  For any fine or bond forfeiture of more than $4.00 but not more than $25.00 ..... 3.00 
(2)  For any fine or bond forfeiture of more than $25.00 but not more than $50.00 ..... 4.00 
(3)  For any fine or bond forfeiture of more than $50.00 but not more than $100.00 ..... 5.00 
(4)  For any fine or bond forfeiture of more than $100.00: Five percent of such fine or bond forfeiture. 
Court Procedures 
Sec. 62-61. Issuance of warrants upon complaint. 
If prosecution is abandoned before trial, the officer who issued the warrant shall enter a judgement against the prosecutor for costs in the amount of ..... 25.00 
City Court 
Generally 
Sec. 62-128. Payment for attendance at court during off hours. 
Witness fees, per day ..... 4.00 
ENTERPRISE ASSESTS MANAGEMENT 
Sec. 2-1548. Rentals of city-owned real property. 
The following fee schedule shall apply to the rental of certain City-owned properties and rooms located therein: 
(a)  Neighborhood service center room rental fees. 
(1)  Georgia Hill. 
Resident hourly multipurpose room/large meeting room ..... $30.00 
Non-resident hourly multipurpose room large meeting room ..... 50.00 
Fulton County Board of Elections daily multipurpose room/large meeting room janitorial fee (no rent shall be charged) ..... 156.06 
Resident hourly small meeting room ..... 25.00 
Non-resident hourly small meeting room ..... 35.00 
Fulton County Board of Elections daily mall meeting room janitorial fee (no rent shall be charged) ..... 156.06 
Current Georgia Hill Service Center tenant in good standing—Multipurpose room/large meeting room or small meeting room* ..... 0.00 
Councilmember Town Hall Meetings, Neighborhood Planning Units, Neighborhood Planning Unit Committees, and City of Atlanta recognized Neighborhood Associations-Multipurpose room/large meeting room or small meeting room ..... 0.00 
Refundable room deposit fee ..... 100.00 
*Use of meeting rooms by a current Georgia Hill Service Center tenant in good standing shall be based upon the written policies and rules for the center's tenants, as created by the Officer of the Office of Enterprise Assets Management, or her/his designee. The Officer of the Office of Enterprise Assets Management, or her/his designee, may require a renter of a room at the Georgia Hill Service Center to hire a security officer for the event, and such determination shall be based upon the size and time of the event. 
(2)  John C. Birdine. 
Resident hourly multipurpose room/large meeting room ..... $30.00 
Non-resident hourly multipurpose room/large meeting room ..... 50.00 
Fulton County Board of Elections daily multipurpose room/large meeting room janitorial fee (no rent shall be charged) ..... 156.06 
Resident hourly small meeting room ..... 25.00 
Non-resident hourly small meeting room ..... 35.00 
Fulton County Board of Elections daily small meeting room janitorial fee (no rent shall be charged) ..... 156.06 
Current Birdine Neighborhood Center tenant in good standing—Multipurpose room/large meeting room or small meeting room* ..... 0.00 
Councilmember Town Hall Meetings, Neighborhood Planning Units, Neighborhood Planning Unit Committees, and City of Atlanta recognized Neighborhood Associations— Multipurpose room/large meeting room or small meeting room ..... 0.00 
Refundable room deposit fee ..... 100.00 
*Use of meeting rooms by a current John C. Birdine Service Center tenant in good standing shall be based upon the written policies and rules for the center's tenants, as created by the Officer of the Office of Enterprise Assets Management, or her/his designee. 
(3)  Dunbar. 
Resident hourly multipurpose room/large meeting room ..... $30.00 
Non-resident hourly multipurpose room/large meeting room ..... 50.00 
Fulton County Board of Elections daily multipurpose room/large meeting room janitorial fee (no rent shall be charged) ..... 156.06 
Resident hourly small meeting room ..... 25.00 
Non-resident hourly small meeting room ..... 35.00 
Fulton County Board of Elections daily small meeting room janitorial fee (no rent shall be charged) ..... 156.06 
Current Dunbar Neighborhood Center tenant in good standing—Multipurpose room/large meeting room or small meeting room* ..... 0.00 
Councilmember Town Hall Meetings, Neighborhood Planning Units, Neighborhood Planning Unit Committees, and City of Atlanta recognized Neighborhood Associations-Multipurpose room/large meeting room or small meeting room ..... 0.00 
Refundable room deposit fee ..... 100.00 
*Use of meeting rooms by a current Dunbar Service Center tenant in good standing shall be based upon the written policies and rules for the center's tenants, as created by the Officer of the Office of Enterprise Assets Management, or her/his designee. 
(b)  Water Works Lodge rental fees. The following fees do not apply to city departments and agencies using the facility for city-sponsored purposes. The total number of city-sponsored events that are fee exempt shall not exceed 24 in any one calendar year. All city departments and agencies will comply with the scheduling guidelines of the Office of Enterprise Assets Management. 
City Residents 
Day rate (8:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m.), Monday—Friday ..... $80.00 
Evening rate (6:00 p.m.—11:00 p.m.), Monday—Friday ..... 150.00 
Saturday—Sunday & holidays (all day, 8:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m.) ..... 250.00 
Non-city Residents 
Day rate (8:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m.), Monday—Friday ..... 130.00 
Evening rate (6:00 p.m.—11:00 p.m., Monday—Friday ..... 200.00 
Saturday—Sunday & holidays (all day, 8:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m.) ..... 300.00 
EMERGENCY SERVICES 
Burglar or Robbery Alarm System 
Sec. 70-30. False Alarms of automatic response alarm systems; civil penalty. 
(d)  (1)  For the first false alarm in a calendar year, a warning shall be given, but no civil penalty shall be imposed. 
(2)  For the second false alarm in a calendar year, the person or entity shall be charged a $100.00 civil penalty. 
(3)  For the third false alarm in a calendar year, the person or entity shall be charged a $200.00 civil penalty. 
(4)  For the fourth false alarm in a calendar year, the person or entity shall be charged a $300.00 civil penalty. 
(5)  For the fifth and sixth false alarms in a calendar year, the person or entity shall be charged a $750.00 civil penalty. 
(6)  For all successive false alarms in a calendar year, the person or entity shall be charged a $1,000.00 civil penalty. 
ENVIRONMENT 
Land Disturbing Activities 
Permit 
Sec. 74-69. Review of past performance of applicant. 
If applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits within three years prior to the date of the filing of application under consideration, issuing authority may require posting of bond up to but not exceeding ..... 3,000.00 
Sec. 74-71. Performance bonds. 
Per acre ..... 1,000.00 
Minimum for less than one acre, unless greater amount required by section 74-69 ..... 1,000.00 
Noise Control 
Sec. 74-139. Temporary variance permits ..... 25.00 
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
Sec. 78-57. Fire prevention code adopted, incorporated by reference; amendments. 
Section 105.6.47 Fire Inspection and Operational Permit Fees 
In addition to the annual fees described in city ordinance § 105.6.47, a $25.00 processing fee shall be charged. 
(2)  FIRE SAFETY INSPECTION FEES: 
(A)  Existing Occupancies. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12(2) fire inspection shall be performed in order to issue permits or authorize occupancy as required. 
The annual fees therefore shall be as follows: 
i.  There shall be an inspection fee of $200.00 for a business having up to 3,000 square feet. 
ii.  There shall be an inspection fee of $250.00 for a business having 3,001 square feet to 5,000 square feet. 
iii.  There shall be an inspection fee of $250.00 for a business having 5,001 square feet to 10,000 square feet. 
iv.  There shall be an inspection fee of $350.00 for a business having more than 10,000 square feet. 
v.  There shall be an inspection fee of $450.00 for high-rise structures up to 70,000 square feet. 
vi.  There shall be an inspection fee of $650.00 for high-rise structures of more than 70,001 square feet. 
(B)  OPERATIONAL PERMITS: Operational permits are required to conduct certain operations or businesses. In addition to Fire inspection fees, operational fees may be required for certain activities as listed. Multiple operations performed at the same location shall be charged a single inspection fee pursuant to § 105.6.47(a)(1). However, each operation shall be individually accessed permit fees and may incur cumulative fees. 
These fees shall not apply to structures that are exempt pursuant to O.C.G.A. 25-2-12(2). 
Permit approvals subject to site inspection. The minimum fee for any activity not listed shall be $50.00. 

 
** (R)=Renewable (NR)=Non-Renewable 
(b)  A re-inspection fee of $200.00 shall be imposed for each re-inspection if a violation stated in the initial written notice has not been corrected. 
HUMAN RELATIONS 
Domestic Partnerships 
Sec. 94-134. Records, copies, filing fees. 
Filing of declaration of domestic partnership ..... 30.00 
Certified copies of declarations, amendments or notices of termination ..... 5.00 
Filing of amendments or notification of termination ..... No charge 
LAW ENFORCEMENT 
Department of Police 
Generally 
Sec. 98-44. Fees for copying records. 
Charges for copying records of the department of police are as established in chapter 2, article XIV of this Code. 
Sec. 98-45. Fees for furnishing information about criminal history record. 
Charges for furnishing information about criminal history records shall be as established in chapter 2, article XIV of this Code. 
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
Subject     Amount  
Weapon Control 
Registration, Sale and Disposition 
Sec. 106-268. Certificate of approval. 
Application fee ..... 5.00 
PARKS AND RECREATION 
Sec. 110-3. Fee schedule. 
The following fee schedule is adopted for the Department of Parks and Recreation for tax-exempt organizations and other organizations, for residents and non-residents. The Commissioner of the Department of Parks and Recreation shall have the authority not to charge a fee at any given location over a period of time designated by the Commissioner, but not less than one month, provided that the decision is in writing and is applied uniformly to anyone utilizing said location during that time period. 
(a)  Miscellaneous Rental Fees: 

 

 
No fee shall be charged for meetings with no food, nor for monthly meetings, being held by tax-exempt organizations with capital revenues of less than $25,000.00 per year. Though the organization shall be charged a cleaning deposit, the deposit shall be returned to the organization, and to any other organization, that leaves the premises as it found them, including removing all trash and debris and returning the premises to a broom swept condition. 
Salary surcharge and security requirements for the Gilbert House shall follow the same guidelines as stated in section 110-3(a)(4), subsection (d) entitled "salary surcharge and security requirements. 
(2)  Equipment rental. 
a.  Showmobiles, per eight-hour period: 
Tax exempt resident organizations ..... $350.00 
All other resident organizations ..... 450.00 
Tax exempt nonresident organizations ..... 600.00 
All other nonresident organizations ..... 800.00 

 

 
(4)  Recreation centers. The City of Atlanta owns three different types of recreation centers. A Class 4 recreation center has a full gymnasium and a natatorium. A Class 3 recreation center has a full gymnasium but no natatorium. A Class 2 recreation center does not have a full gymnasium or a natatorium. The fees for each of these types of recreation centers are set forth below. Recreation center fees for individuals that are City of Atlanta residents, and for organizations that are City of Atlanta resident organizations, shall be 30 percent lower than fees for non-resident individuals and organizations, except that there shall be no price difference based on residency for weddings and/or wedding receptions held at a Class 4 recreation center. In addition, reduced fees are provided for "tax-exempt organizations". For purposes of this section 110.3(a)(5), "tax-exempt organization" shall mean any organization described in the Internal Revenue Service's list of organizations that qualify for 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(4) status, regardless of whether the organization has actually applied for and/or received such 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(4) designation. Lastly, in addition to the Recreation Center fees set forth below, the Commissioner of the Department of Parks and Recreation, or her/his designee, may require a person making a Recreation Center rental for an event that has an expected attendance of 50 people or more, to hire a security officer for the event. Such determination shall be made based upon written criteria that are applied uniformly, including the criteria of size and time of the event. 
(a)  Class 2 recreation centers hourly rates, per room - These hourly rates apply to Class 2 recreation center room rentals. In addition each rental shall include a refundable security deposit of $100.00. Equipment rentals shall be $10.00 per table and $1.00 per chair. 
Hourly rates: 
City of Atlanta Resident—Individuals ..... $30.00/hr. 
Non-resident—Individuals ..... 43.00/hr. 
City of Atlanta tax-exempt organizations ..... 30.00/hr. 
Non-resident tax-exempt organizations ..... 43.00/hr. 
All other City of Atlanta resident organizations ..... 75.00/hr. 
All other non-resident organizations ..... 112.00/hr. 
(b)  Class 3 recreation centers hourly rates, per room. These hourly rates apply to Class 3 recreation center room rentals. In addition, each rental shall include a refundable security deposit of $100.00. Equipment rentals shall be $10.00 per table and $1.00 per chair. For Class 3 recreation center gymnasium rentals, see section (c)(1)d. below. 
Hourly rates: 
City of Atlanta Resident—Individuals ..... $30.00/hr. 
Non-resident—Individuals ..... 43.00/hr. 
City of Atlanta tax-exempt organizations ..... 30.00/hr. 
Non-resident tax-exempt organizations ..... 43.00/hr. 
All other City of Atlanta resident organizations ..... 75.00/hr. 
All other non-resident organizations ..... 112.00/hr. 
During regular facility operating hours, and pending availability, meeting rooms at all Class 2 and Class 3 recreation centers will be made available Monday through Sunday, free of charge, to Booster Clubs that are registered with the City's Office of Recreation, NPU and Neighborhood Planning Unit Neighborhood Associations that are registered with the City's Office of Recreation, and NPU and Neighborhood Planning Unit Neighborhood Associations Sub-Committees that are registered as such with the City's Department of Planning and Community Development, and that are conducting organizational and community business meetings and activities. Said organizations shall not be charged a security deposit. Additionally, pending availability, there shall be no charge for the use of facility amenities such as tables, chairs, microphones, and other accessories (excluding office supplies) used in connection with said meetings. The charge for such meetings that occur during non-regular facility operating hours, Monday through Sunday (pending availability) shall be the rate for City of Atlanta tax-exempt organizations, $30.00 per hour. The use of facility amenities (excluding office supplies) shall remain free of charge, and the security deposit requirement shall continue to be waived. 
(c)  Class 4 recreation centers hourly rates: 
1.  Rentals of specific rooms: 
a.  Auditorium #1. (Adamsville Recreation Center only). These fees apply to Auditorium #1 at the Adamsville Recreation Center only. Except as herein noted, all rentals of Auditorium #1 shall include a refundable security deposit of $100.00. In addition, rental of Auditorium #1 includes free rental of equipment such as floor tarps, microphones, podium, sound system, and kitchen equipment. Though use of this equipment is at no additional charge, the city will require a $100.00 refundable security deposit for use of any or all of these items, except as herein noted. Rental of chairs and tables is additional. Rental of chairs is $1.00 per chair. Rental of tables is $10.00 per table. 
City of Atlanta resident—Individuals ..... $105.00/hr. 
Non-resident—Individuals ..... 150.00/hr. 
City of Atlanta tax-exempt organizations ..... 52.00/hr. 
Non-resident tax-exempt organizations ..... 75.00/hr. 
All other City of Atlanta resident organizations ..... 122.00/hr. 
All other non-resident organizations ..... 175.00/hr. 
During regular facility operating hours, and pending availability, Auditorium #1 will be made available Monday through Thursday, free of charge, to Booster Clubs that are registered with the City's Office of Recreation, and NPU and Neighborhood Planning Unit Neighborhood Associations, and NPU and Neighborhood Planning Unit Neighborhood Associations SubCommittees that are registered as such with the City's Department of Planning and Community Development, and are conducting organizational and community business meetings and activities. Additionally, pending availability, there shall be no charge for the use of facility amenities such as tables, chairs, microphones, sound systems, and other accessories (excluding office supplies) used in connection with said meetings. Said organizations will not be charged a building or equipment security deposit. The charge for such meetings that occur Friday through Sunday (pending availability), or that occur during non-regular facility hours on Monday through Thursday (pending availability), shall be the rate for City of Atlanta tax-exempt organizations, $52.00 per hour. The use of facility amenities (excluding office supplies) shall remain free of charge, and the security deposit shall continue to be waived. 
b.  Rosel J. Fann Recreation Center Auditoriums #1 and #2; Adamsville Recreation Center Auditorium #2. These fees shall apply to the Rosel J. Fann Recreation Center Auditoriums #1 and #2, and the Adamsville Recreation Center Auditorium #2. Except as noted herein, all rentals of said Auditoriums #1 and #2 shall include a refundable security deposit of $100.00. In addition, rental of Auditoriums #1 and #2 includes free rental of equipment such as floor tarps, microphones, podium, sound system, and kitchen equipment. Though use of this equipment is at no additional charge, the city will require a $100.00 refundable security deposit for use of any or all of these items, except as noted herein. Rental of chairs and tables is additional. Rental of chairs is $1.00 per chair. Rental of tables is $10.00 per table. 
City of Atlanta resident—Individuals ..... $122.00/hr. 
Non-resident—Individuals ..... 175.00/hr. 
City of Atlanta tax-exempt organizations ..... 70.00/hr. 
Non-resident tax-exempt organizations ..... 100.00/hr. 
All other City of Atlanta resident organizations ..... 140.00/hr. 
All other non-resident organizations ..... 200.00/hr. 
During regular facility operating hours, and pending availability, the Rosel J. Fann Recreation Center Auditoriums #1 and #2, and the Adamsville Recreation Center Auditorium #2, will be made available Monday through Thursday, free of charge, to Booster Clubs that are registered with the City's Office of Recreation, to NPU and Neighborhood Planning Unit Neighborhood Associations, and NPU and Neighborhood Planning Unit Neighborhood Associations SubCommittees that are registered as such with the City's Department of Planning and Community Development, and that are conducting organizational and community business meetings and activities. Additionally, pending availability, there shall be no charge for the use of facility amenities such as tables, chairs, microphones, sound systems, and other accessories (excluding office supplies) used in connection with said meetings. Said organizations will not be charged a building or equipment security deposit. The charge for such meetings that occur Friday through Sunday (pending availability), or that occur during non-regular facility hours on Monday through Thursday (pending availability), shall be the rate for City of Atlanta tax-exempt organizations, $70.00 per hour. The use of facility amenities (excluding office supplies) shall remain free of charge, and the security deposit shall continue to be waived. 
c.  Conference room. These fees shall apply to the Rosel J. Fann Recreation Center and the Adamsville Recreation Center conference rooms. All rentals of a conference room shall include use of chairs and tables at no charge. Except as noted herein, use of city equipment shall not be permitted with conference room rentals. 
City of Atlanta resident—Individuals ..... $42.00/hr. 
Non-resident—Individuals ..... 60.00/hr. 
City of Atlanta tax-exempt organizations ..... 30.00/hr. 
Non-resident tax-exempt organizations ..... 43.00/hr. 
All other City of Atlanta resident organizations ..... 70.00/hr. 
All other non-resident organizations ..... 100.00/hr. 
During regular facility operating hours, and pending availability, the Rosel J. Fann Recreation Center and the Adamsville Recreation Center conference rooms will be made available Monday through Sunday, free of charge, to Booster Clubs that are registered with the City's Office of Recreation, to NPU and Neighborhood Planning Unit Neighborhood Associations, and NPU and Neighborhood Planning Unit Neighborhood Associations Sub-Committees that are registered as such with the City's Department of Planning and Community Development, and that are conducting organizational and community business meetings and activities. Additionally, pending availability, there shall be no charge for the use of facility amenities such as tables, chairs, microphones, sound equipment, and other accessories (excluding office supplies) used in connection with said meetings. The charge for such meetings that occur during non-regular facility operating hours, Monday through Sunday (pending availability) shall be the rate for City of Atlanta tax-exempt organizations, $30.00 per hour. The use of facility amenities (excluding office supplies) shall remain free of charge. 
d.  Gymnasium. These fees shall apply to the Rosel J. Fann Recreation Center gymnasium, the Adamsville Recreation Center gymnasium, and Class 3 Recreation Center gymnasium rentals. All rentals of a gymnasium must be for a minimum of four hours. Use of city equipment, chairs and/or tables shall not be permitted with gymnasium rentals. 
City of Atlanta resident—Individuals (4 hr. minimum) ..... $147.00/hr. 
Non-resident—Individuals (4 hr. minimum) ..... 210.00/hr. 
City of Atlanta tax-exempt organizations (4 hr. minimum) ..... 88.00/hr. 
Non-resident tax-exempt organizations (4 hr. minimum) ..... 125.00/hr. 
All other City of Atlanta resident organizations (4 hr. minimum) ..... 157.00/hr. 
All other non-resident organizations (4 hr. minimum) ..... 225.00/hr. 
2.  Weddings and wedding receptions. Any individual or organization wishing to hold a wedding or wedding reception at a Class 4 recreation center shall be charged $750.00 total for use of Auditoriums 1 and 2. This rental shall entitle the renter to seven hours of use, including a maximum of four hours for the event itself, two hours for set up, and one hour for break down. Any additional hours of use will be billed at $187.50 per hour. Weddings and wedding receptions may not be held in the conference room or the gymnasium. 
3.  Events with admission fees/vending. Any individual or organization holding an event at a Class 4 Recreation Center where attendants are charged an admission fee, and/or where vending occurs, must pay: (i) the applicable rental fees set forth above; and (ii) 20% of the gross revenue collected at the event or $500.00, whichever is greater. 
(d)  Salary surcharge and security requirements: 
1.  Salary surcharge. In addition to all of the fees set forth above in this subsection (a)(4), the renter of any recreation center or portion thereof shall be required to pay a salary surcharge for those times when the rental occurs during the non-regular operating hours of the recreation center being rented. The salary surcharge shall be applied to any and all renters using a facility during non-regular operating hours, including without limitation Booster Clubs, NPU's, and Neighborhood Planning Unit Neighborhood Association Sub-Committees. The salary surcharge shall be $25.00 per hour for each staff person required. One staff person shall be provided for every 100 persons whom the office of recreation reasonably expects to attend, such that 1—100 anticipated attendees shall require one staff person; 101—200 anticipated attendees shall require two staff people, etc. The number of expected attendees shall be based upon the number provided on the rental application, except that the office of recreation may apply a different number where it has reasonably reliable information that more attendees will be present, where it provides that information and the decision to the applicant in writing, and where it gives the applicant an opportunity to refute the information. The salary surcharge shall be paid at a time and in a manner designated by the office of recreation, but in no event later than seven days prior to the rental. 
2.  Security requirement. The renter of all or a portion of a recreation center must provide off-duty POST-certified law enforcement officers during the rental, regardless of whether the rental occurs during regular or non-regular operating hours if: a) the office of recreation reasonably expects that the number of attendees will be greater than 75; or b) the event is a party or other gathering for social purposes (i.e. not a meeting), where the office of recreation reasonably expects that the event will be attended primarily by persons under the age of 21 years; or c) the event involves the serving of alcohol; or d) the office of recreation and the Atlanta Police Department both reasonably determine that security is required because of the nature of the event to protect the safety of persons and/or property. The number of security personnel required shall be one officer for every 75 anticipated attendees or less (1—75 anticipated attendees shall require one officer; 76—150 anticipated attendees shall require two officers, etc.), unless the Atlanta Police Department decides that a greater ratio of security personnel is required to protect the safety of persons and/or property. The office of recreation shall establish in writing the procedure for ascertaining that the renter has met the security requirements established by the office of recreation and/or the Atlanta Police Department for the rental. To the extent that this subsection (d)(2) requires that a discretionary decision be made by the office of recreation and/or the Atlanta Police Department, the decision must be made based upon reasonably reliable information, that information and decision must be provided to the applicant in writing, and the applicant must be given an opportunity to refute the information. In no event shall the basis of the discretionary decision be the applicant's or attendees' race, color, creed, religion, gender, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, gender identity, or disability status. 
(5)  Cyclorama rental: 
a.  Cyclorama (3-hour minimum) ..... $1,200.00 
Plus for each additional hour ..... $150.00 
b.  Auditorium and lobby (3-hour minimum) ..... $600.00 
Plus for each additional hour ..... $150.00 
c.  Guided tour, per show ..... $150.00 
d.  Salary surcharge. In addition to the fees set forth above in this subsection (5), the renter shall be required to pay a salary surcharge for those times when the rental occurs during Cyclorama's non-regular operating hours. The salary surcharge shall be $25.00 per hour for each staff person required. One staff person shall be provided for every 100 persons whom the Cyclorama Director expects to attend, such that 1-100 anticipated attendees shall require one staff person; 101-200 anticipated attendees shall require two staff people, etc. The number of expected attendees shall be based upon the number provided on the rental application, except that the Cyclorama Director may apply a different number where s/he has reasonably reliable information that more attendees will be present, where s/he provides that information and the decision to the applicant in writing, and where s/he gives the applicant an opportunity to refute the information. The salary surcharge shall be paid at a time and in a manner designated by the Cyclorama Director, but in no event later than seven days prior to the rental. 
(b)  The following fees shall be charged for participants in certain Cultural Affairs programs and admission to certain Cultural Affairs venues: 
     Hourly Fee 
(1)  Chastain Arts Center and Gallery. 
Adult Classes: 
Drawing ..... $6.00 
Painting ..... $6.00 
Clay (wheel) ..... $8.00 
Clay (hand building) ..... $8.00 
Printmaking ..... $6.50 
Metalwork ..... $6.00 
Photography ..... $6.00 
Frame making ..... $6.50 
Stained glass ..... $6.50 
Jewelry ..... $6.50 
Performance/lectures/tours ..... $5.00 
Textiles ..... $6.00 
Movement arts ..... $11.00 
Open studio, per week ..... $15.00 
Children Fees: 
Summer camp (ages 2 & 3) ..... $15.00 
Summer camp (ages 4 & 5) ..... $10.00 
Summer camp (ages 6—12) ..... $8.00 
Summer camp (ages 12—17) ..... $9.00 
Regular classes (ages 2—4) ..... $14.00 
Regular classes (ages 5—17) ..... $13.00 
Room Rental: 
Fee-based workshops, and meetings—20% of revenue or minimum of $25.00 per hour (whichever is greater). 
Art organizations and individual artists ..... $7.00 
Social and special events—$75.00 per hour (4-hour minimum); $100.00 per hour per additional hour; Additional $50.00 per hour for all off hour rentals 
Refundable cleaning deposit ..... $150.00 
Gallery Fees: 
Entry Fees for juried exhibits—Not to exceed $25.00 per entry. 
Commissions on sales of art—Not to exceed 35% of total cost. 
Miscellaneous Fees: 
Non-resident fee—$10.00 per session (Age 65+ exempt, Summer Camp students exempt) 
Material Fee—Not to exceed $30.00 per class. 

 
Salary Surcharge and Security Requirements for the South Bend Cultural Center shall follow the same guidelines as stated in section 110-3(a)(4), subsection (d) entitled "salary surcharge and security requirements. 
(c)  Atlanta Cyclorama Admissions: 
Patron Category: 
Adults (ages 13—64) ..... $10.00 
Seniors (ages 65 and above) ..... $8.00 
Children (ages 4—12) ..... $8.00 
Children (under 4 yrs. old) ..... free 
Group rates (10 or more persons): 
Adult group (ages 13 and above), per person ..... $9.00 
Children's group (ages 4—12), per person ..... $7.00 
Seniors (ages 65 and above) ..... $7.00 
Promotional Events: 
The Director of the Office of Cultural Affairs or her/his designee shall be permitted to hold up to six Cyclorama promotional event days per calendar year during which s/he may reduce all or some of the Cyclorama admission fees set forth above by no more than $2.00. The Director or her/his designee shall have the discretion of applying the promotional event reduced fee structure to City of Atlanta residents only, on any or all of the promotional event days. The promotional event days and the discounts associated therewith shall be advertised in advance on the Cyclorama website. 
Discounts: 
The Director of the Office of Cultural Affairs or her/his designee shall be permitted to offer a discount admission price for Cyclorama patrons who present an admission ticket for entrance to another tourist attraction, provided that: 1) the ticket for the other attraction is dated within 48 hours of the requested entrance to Cyclorama; and 2) the discount associated with the other attraction is explained in writing at the Cyclorama ticket booth, is set forth on the Cyclorama website, and is applied uniformly to all Cyclorama patrons. In addition, the Director of the Office of Cultural Affairs or her/his designee shall be permitted to have written coupons issued for discounted Cyclorama admission fees, provided that said coupons are available to the public and are not distributed anywhere within Grant Park other than on Zoo Atlanta property. The Director of the Office of Cultural Affairs or her/his designee shall have the discretion to determine the amount of any discount offered pursuant to this paragraph, but in no event shall the discount exceed $2.00. Only one discount may be utilized per admission. 
(d)  The following fees shall be charged for participants in certain programs of the office of recreation: 
(1)  Athletic fees: 
a.  Adult athletic team registration fees: 
Basic registration (per season), per team ..... 600.00 
Single elimination tournament fee, per team ..... 150.00 
Double elimination tournament fee, per team ..... 200.00 
b.  Youth athletic team registration fees: 
City of Atlanta Team (per season, per sport, per person) 
For Atlanta residents ..... 75.00 
For non-residents ..... 150.00 
Non-City of Atlanta Team (per season), per team ..... 300.00 
Team Registration for City-hosted Tournaments, per team, per tournament ..... 150.00 
c.  Protest fee. Applied only to protests regarding eligibility of a team, coach and/or player. 

 
In the event that the protest is upheld, the protest fee will be returned. 
(2)  Camp Best Friends user fees, per child: 
a.  City residents, and children and grandchildren of city employees residing with the city employee—Per week, per child ..... 35.00 
b.  Non-city resident, per week, per child ..... 110.00 
c.  Late fee—Per child, per hour or fraction of hour for campers left on site after 6:00 p.m., for residents and non-residents ..... 20.00 
(3)  After-school tutorial fee: 
a.  City residents, and children and grandchildren of city employees residing with the city employee—Per week, per child ..... 35.00 
b.  Non-city resident, per week, per child ..... 110.00 
c.  Late fee—Per child, per hour or fraction of hour for child left on site after 6:00 p.m., for residents and non-residents ..... 20.00 
(4)  Teen Club Fee: per year, per person ..... 50.00 
(5)  Cultural Programming in Recreation Centers, per eight-class session ..... 30.00 
(6)  Athletic; One-Time Usage fee, per person, per visit ..... 5.00 
For use at City of Atlanta Natatorium or Recreation Center weight room during closed period only 
(7)  Non Athletic, City-sponsored Special Programs on City of Atlanta Recreation Center Property: 
a.  Adults and youth, per person, per program ..... 5.00 
b.  Seniors, per person, per program ..... 2.00 
(8)  Athletics Sports Camp Registration Fee, per person, per week ..... 65.00 
(9)  Youth Fee: per year, per child (Monthly Payment: plan is allowable) ..... 1,200.00 
Youth Fee provides a discounted rate for Afterschool, Camp Best Friends and all youth athletics registration 
(10)  Senior Program Fee: 
(a)  Resident, per person, per year ..... 45.00 
(b)  Non-Resident, per person, per year ..... 55.00 
(11)  Tennis Fees: For purposes of this section regarding tennis fees. Primetime shall mean after 6:00 pm on Weekdays and all times on Weekends and Nationally-observed holidays. All other times shall be deemed Non-Primetime. 

 
(12)  Golf Fees. 

 
Note: A $1.00 surcharge fee has been established from the non-resident regular, non-resident twilight, resident regular and resident twilight fees which shall be deposited into the established City of Atlanta Trust Fund Account number 7701 (TRUST FUND) 140201 (PRC PARKS ADMINISTRATION) 3472003 (FEES, GOLF) 6210000 (PARK ADMINISTRATION) 100247 (GROUND & SITE IMPROVEMENTS, CITY WIDE) 91494 (TRUST FUND 9999) and expended from 7701 (TRUST FUND) 140201 (PRC PARKS ADMINISTRATION) 5311001 (SUPPLIES; CONSUMABLE) 6210000 (PARK ADMINISTRATION)100247 (GROUND & SITE IMPROVEMENTS, CITY WIDE) 91494 (TRUST FUND 9999), and shall be eligible for use in funding support to the bureau of parks maintenance operations as determined by the commissioner of the department of parks and recreation and the chief financial officer, department of finance. 
Annual Memberships. (Not valid on weekends or holidays before 12:00 noon). 
Per Year: 
Regular resident ..... $600.00 
Regular resident additional family member ..... 250.00 
Senior resident ..... 300.00 
Senior resident additional family member ..... 200.00 
Junior (18 and under) additional family member ..... 175.00 
Junior (18 and under) ..... 300.00 
The operating entity at the golf courses from time to time may offer to the public special reduced promotional fees at variance with the fee schedule for promotions of limited duration with the written approval of the commissioner. Such written approval shall be limited as to duration, shall be specific in detail and a permanent log and file of such promotional approvals shall be kept as a public record in the commissioner's office. With regard to participants of visiting conventions, a special weekday tournament fee $1.00 higher than the regular fee and a special weekend tournament fee $2.00 higher than the regular fee may be charged. 
(13)  Candler Park Golf Course: 
Weekdays (Monday—Thursday): 
Residents ..... $7.00 
Students and senior residents ..... 6.50 
Nonresidents ..... 10.00 
Nonresident seniors and students ..... 7.50 
Weekends (Friday—Sunday): 
Residents ..... $9.00 
Students and senior residents ..... 7.00 
Nonresidents ..... 11.00 
Nonresident seniors and students ..... 8.00 
Annual Membership Fees (Not valid on weekends or holidays before 12:00 noon): 
Residents ..... $400.00 
Resident students and seniors ..... 325.00 
Nonresidents ..... 550.00 
Nonresident seniors and students ..... 475.00 
Tee time surcharge for a specific tee time ..... 3.00 
Putting green fee—Usage fee for patrons not playing golf but who are using the facility as a putting green; per half hour ..... 3.00 
Golf Equipment storage fee; short term and/or overnight storage, per day ..... 2.00 
(e)  Fees for use of city picnic pavilions are as follows: 
(1)  The following reservation fees: 

 
(2)  A refundable sanitation bond of $100.00 will be charged to reserve the referenced pavilions, payable two weeks prior to the date of the reservation date. The bond shall be forfeited to the city if reserving party fails to clean the pavilions and deposit trash in the trash receptacles provided by the city prior to leaving the site. 
(3)  City park users who reserve pavilions shall have the option of using park attendants at the rate of $10.50 per hour at all designated parks. The commissioner of the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs shall have the authority to provide this option and charge this fee at other city parks at her discretion. 
(4)  New pavilions that are constructed shall be subject to the fees specified in this subsection 
(5)  Wedding fee: Where an outdoor wedding occurs inside a city park, in a location other than in a picnic pavilion, and where the wedding includes set-up or requires city services, the organizer shall be required to pay a fee of $50.00. 
(6)  City park users requesting a permit to utilize specific areas of park greenspace shall be required to pay a fee of $50.00. Large gathering permit holders shall be exempt from this permit fee. 
(7)  City park users who reserve the amphitheater at Historic Fourth Ward Park shall be required to pay an additional fee of $50.00 per hour if an electrical source is required. The fee is charged during set-up, the duration of the event and break down. 
(8)  City park users requesting permission to use amplified sound, portable toilets, banners, tents 10′ × 10′ or larger, or generators shall pay a Special Use Fee of $50.00. 
(f)  The fees to be paid to the city for aquatics programs, pool use and pool rentals shall be as follows: 
(1)  Red Cross Aquatics Training Fees: 
a.  Lifeguard Training ..... $350.00 
b.  Lifeguard Training Review ..... 200.00 
c.  Water Safety Instructor ..... 350.00 
d.  Certified Pool Spa Operator ..... 350.00 
e.  CPR for Professional Rescuer ..... 110.00 
f.  CPRO Review ..... 90.00 
g.  Lay Responder ..... 95.00 

 
(g)  Outdoor and Environmental Education Activities and Lake Allatoona. The following fees shall be paid to the city for the indicated activity or use of the indicated facility: 
(1)  Cost of camp. 

 
(2)  Cabin rentals. 
Lake Allatoona Cabin Rental refundable deposit (small cabin), per night ..... $150.00 
Lake Allatoona Cabin Rental refundable deposit (large cabin), per night ..... 250.00 
Lake Allatoona Cabin Rental fee (small cabin), per night ..... 150.00 
Lake Allatoona Cabin Rental fee (large cabin), per night ..... 250.00 
Lake Allatoona Grounds Rental Fee, per hour, three-hour minimum ..... 50.00 
Use of kitchen is free with cabin rental 
(3)  Dining hall rentals. 
Conference Room 1, per day ..... $150.00 
Conference Room 2, per day ..... 150.00 
Combined conference rooms, per day ..... 300.00 
Kitchen only, per day ..... 150.00 
Kitchen cost with conference room rental, per day ..... 50.00 
Entire building, per day ..... 450.00 
Day = 8 hours 
(4)  Lake Allatoona Activity Fees, for Residents and Non-Residents. 
Canoe 101 ..... $15.00 
Canoe trips ..... 20.00 
Kayak 101 ..... 15.00 
Kayaking trips ..... 20.00 
Camping 101 ..... 10.00 
Camping trips ..... 20.00 
Mountain biking ..... 30.00 
Rock climbing ..... 45.00 
Bouldering ..... 45.00 
Nature walks ..... 5.00 
Hiking ..... 5.00 
Introduction to tree climbing ..... 30.00 
Introduction to backpacking ..... 15.00 
Backpacking ..... 15.00 
Fishing ..... 5.00 
Plant and wildlife identification ..... 5.00 
Bird watching ..... 5.00 
Orienteering ..... 15.00 
Geo-caching ..... 10.00 
Outdoor photography ..... 10.00 
Primitive skills ..... 15.00 
(h)  Fees for therapeutics, for residents and non-residents: 
TR Youth Club 
Membership fee (bi-annual) ..... $15.00 
Activity fee ..... $3.00 
(i)  Vending and concessions: 

 

 
(j)  Parking Fees. The following parking fee applies to the Southside Park Sports Complex (approximately 200 parking spaces) during adult softball tournaments only: $3.00 per vehicle. 
The following parking fee applies to Grant Park (approximately 770 parking spaces): 
$2.00 per vehicle. 
(k)  Individuals or organizations ("businesses") utilizing a city park or parks ("park") for business purposes, conducting all or portions of the business' services or activities in a park, except where such services or activities do not include vending and are free of charge, shall be required to obtain a permit ("park business permit") from the commissioner of the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs prior to providing such services or activities. The commissioner shall have the right to deny or revoke a permit, provided that such denial or revocation is based upon written criteria that are applied uniformly, and provided that such criteria do not include consideration of the speech content of the business, or the business owner's, employees' or patrons' race, color, creed, religion, gender, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, age, disability status, or gender identity. The commissioner shall also have the right to modify the requests of a permit applicant, for example as to location that the business may operate and/or times that the business may operate, as long as said modification is based upon uniformly-applied written criteria, and is not based on the considerations listed above. 
(1)  Details of park business permit: 
a.  The permit fee shall be $1,500.00 per year per business, per each park in which the business is operating. Should a business own more than one company that utilizes a park, the business will need to obtain a permit for each such company. 
b.  Permit requirements shall include: i) the business shall not exchange any money on city property, including inside of a park; ii) the business shall obtain general liability insurance in an amount determined by the city's office of risk management, but in no event less than $1,000,000.00, with the city listed as an additional insured; iii) the business shall agree to indemnify and defend the city for any damages arising from the operation of the services and/or activities on city property. 
c.  The commissioner may include any other non-financial requirements s/he deems appropriate, as long as those requirements are set forth in writing and applied consistently to all park business permit applicants. 
d.  The park business fee shall be paid in addition to any other fees owed pursuant to this section 110-3, including without limitation rental fees, and any other fees owed pursuant to the Atlanta Code of Ordinances or other applicable laws. 
(2)  Exemptions: 
a.  The park business permit requirement shall not apply to events for which an outdoor event permit has been issued pursuant to City Code of Ordinances Chapter 142. 
b.  The park business permit requirement shall not apply to 501(c)(3) organizations, but said organizations must pay all other fees owed pursuant to this section 110-3, including without limitation rental fees, and any other fees owed pursuant to the Atlanta Code of Ordinances or other applicable laws. 
c.  The park business permit requirement shall not apply to activities that are provided on recreation properties or amenities such as tennis centers, ball fields, or pools, even when those amenities are located inside of city parks. For businesses that conduct some activities on recreation property or amenities and some outside of recreation property but in a park, the business must obtain a park business permit for those activities that occur in the park. 
d.  The park business permit requirement shall not apply to organizations that are mandated to perform complete or partial maintenance and/or improvement of a park and/or recreation facility for one year or greater at no cost to the city, pursuant to a written agreement with the city that is fully executed. 
e.  The park business permit requirement shall not apply to businesses conducting photo or film shoots inside a city park. 
(3)  Penalties: Businesses in violation of this code provision shall be subject to the penalties set forth in City Code of Ordinances section 1-8. Each class or activity conducted without a permit may be deemed a separate violation. 
(l)  Individuals or organizations ("businesses") utilizing city recreation property, or a city recreation center, facility, or amenity, including without limitation ball fields, tennis courts, swimming pools ("recreation facility"), the Gilbert House, and South Bend Arts and Cultural Center for business purposes, conducting all or portions of the business services or activities in or on a recreation facility, except where such services or activities do not include vending and are free of charge, shall be required to pay a fee and enter a recreation business agreement with the city prior to providing such services or activities. The commissioner of the department of parks and recreation shall determine at what recreation facilities a business may be offered, and shall not permit businesses to be offered at other locations. This list shall be in writing and shall be applied uniformly. The commissioner of the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs or her/his designee may execute the recreation business agreement on behalf of the city without obtaining city council approval. S/he may allow a business to utilize a recreation facility only if the business is offering a recreation activity that is authorized by the department of parks and recreation. Additionally, the commissioner may determine which businesses to enter recreation business agreements with provided her/his criteria for such determination are established in writing and. applied uniformly, and provided that the criteria do not include any consideration of the business owner's, employees', or patrons' race, color, creed, religion, gender, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, age, disability status, or gender identity. 
(1)  Details of recreation business agreement: 
a.  The fee shall be 25 percent of the gross revenue obtained from all of the services, activities and/or programs performed by the business at the recreation facility. 
b.  Recreation business agreement requirements shall include: i) the business shall obtain general liability insurance in an amount determined by the city's office of risk management, but in no event less than $1,000,000.00, with the city listed as an additional insured; ii) the business shall agree to indemnify and defend the city for any damages arising from the operation of the services and/or activities at the city facility; iii) the term of the agreement shall be one year, and the city may terminate the agreement without cause with 60 days written notice. 
c.  Businesses who enter a recreation business agreement shall not be required to pay the other fees owed pursuant to this section 110-3 for the business operation, including without limitation rental fees, but shall be required to pay other applicable fees imposed by the city or other jurisdictions. 
d.  The commissioner may include any other non-financial requirements s/he deems appropriate. 
(2)  Exemptions: 
a.  Where a program or activity is being conducted in a portion of a recreation facility that is outdoors, and where the individual or organization has received an outdoor event permit pursuant to City Code of Ordinances Chapter 142 for the program or activity at issue, the requirements of this City Code section 110-3(1) shall not apply. 
b.  The recreation business fee requirement shall not apply to 501(c)(3) organizations, but said organizations must pay all other fees owed pursuant to this section 110-3, including without limitation rental fees, and any other fees owed pursuant to the Atlanta Code of Ordinances or other applicable laws. 
c.  The recreation business fee requirement shall not apply to organizations that are mandated to perform complete or partial maintenance and/or improvement of a park and/or recreation facility for one year or greater at no cost to the city, pursuant to a written agreement with the city that is fully executed. 
d.  The amount of the recreation business fee for for-profit leagues shall be $1,500.00 plus any other fees owed pursuant to this section 110-3, including without limitation rental fees, and any other fees owed pursuant to the Atlanta Code of Ordinances or other applicable laws. Accordingly, the requirements of subsection (1)a and (1)c of this section 110-3(1) shall not apply to for-profit leagues, but all other requirements of this section 110-3(1), including without limitation subsections (1)b and (1)d shall apply. 
e.  The requirements of this City Code section 110-3(1) shall not apply to individuals or organizations conducting photo or film shoots in a recreation facility. 
f.  The requirements of this City Code section 110-3(1) shall not apply to events with admission fees and/or vending that are held in class 4 recreation centers, as described earlier in this section 110-3. 
(3)  Penalties: Businesses in violation of this code provision shall be subject to the penalties set forth in City Code of Ordinances section 1-8. Each class or activity conducted without a permit may be deemed a separate violation. 
(m)  Park filming fees. 
(1)  For purposes of this subsection (m), a "filming event" means shooting a film or taking photographs, where such filming or photography occurs inside a city park, and results in an end product that will likely be submitted for copyright protection. Examples of filming events include without limitation movie shoots, video shoots, TV shoots, advertisement shoots. music video shoots, and still photography shoots. 
(2)  Where the mayor or her/his designee determines that one or more park rental coordinators and/or other city staff person(s) is required to attend all or a portion of a filming event, the organizer of the filming event must pay to the city an amount equivalent to the total of all hourly wages that the city will pay to each staff person present at the filming event. Said amount shall be provided to the organizer in writing, indicating a breakdown of each type of employee required to be in attendance, the number of hours that each employee will attend, and the city's standard hourly rate for each employee in attendance. 
(3)  In the event that the mayor or her/his designee requires police coverage and/or fire rescue coverage at a filming event, the mayor or her/his designee may require the organizer to hire off duty law enforcement officers, off duty fire inspectors, and/or off duty emergency medical services personnel, rather than paying the City for on-duty presence. 
(4)  A filming event may occur in a park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. And 6:00 a.m. provided that written authorization is received by the commissioner of the department of parks and recreation, the Chief of the Atlanta Police Department, and the Chief of the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department. Should said night filming be permitted, the organizer will be required to pay for one or more park rental coordinators, and to provide off-duty public safety coverage in the amounts determined by the commissioner and chiefs listed in this subsection. The commissioner's and chiefs' determinations shall be based solely upon public safety factors and factors potentially impacting the physical integrity of the park. 
(n)  Active Net Online Convenience Fee. Individuals or Organizations utilizing The Active Network, Inc. online portal to register for any classes, make reservations of facilities, and sign up for memberships, offered by the Department of Parks and Recreation shall be assessed a convenience fee of 2.99% of the total transaction amount + $0.25. Individuals or Organizations wishing to avoid this convenience fee may still register in person at any DPRCA facility. 
(o)  Promotional Fee. The Commissioner, or his/her designee, may offer an initial promotional fee on any DPRCA programming fees up to 25% of the total cost for a maximum of three months. 
( Ord. No. 2015-17(15-O-1099), § 1, 5-13-15 ) 
SECONDHAND GOODS 
Secondary Metal Recyclers 
License 
Sec. 122-171. Required; application. 
Fee ..... 100.00 
Sec. 122-172. Processing application; issuance of license. 
Fee for renewal application ..... 500.00 
SOLID WASTE 
Municipal Collection and Disposal Systems 
Generally 
Sec. 130-60. Privately operated sanitary landfills. 
(g)  Annual permitting fee ..... 6,500.00 
Sec. 130-61. Privately operated solid waste disposal facilities. 
*** 
(f)  Annual permit fee ..... 6,500.00 
Rates and Charges 
Sec. 130-77. Solid waste service fees: Determined annually by commissioner of public works. 
Sec. 130-78. Commercial and industrial surcharge: Determined annually by commissioner of public works. 
Sec. 130-79. Junked automobile removal charge: Determined annually by commissioner of public works. 
Sec. 130-80. Charges for disposal of solid waste at city facilities: Determined annually by commissioner of public works. 
Sec. 130-82. Fee for recycling. 
Per year ..... 88.00 
Sec. 130-84. Rates and charges. 
The following rates and charges are hereby established for solid waste collection and shall become effective April 1, 2019: 
(1)  Residential rate : $365.81 per year 
(2)  Duplex or triplex rate : $365.81 per year for each separate living unit in excess of one. 
(3)  Apartments, condominiums, townhouse, public housing or any other multi-family dwelling rates: A flat charge of $400.00 per year per parcel or one of the following charges, as appropriate. 
a.  $365.81 per year, for each dwelling unit where the garbage from apartments, condominiums, townhomes, public housing or any other multi-family dwellings (less than six units) is collected from individual containers, garbage cans or bags; 
b.  $281.53 per year for each dwelling unit where the garbage from apartments, condominiums, townhomes, public housing or any other multi-family dwellings (less than six units) is collected from industrial containers; 
c.  Where the multi-family dwelling units or apartments are located in building structures with incinerator[s], duly installed and operating therein in accordance with all laws and regulations applicable to incinerators, depositing only incinerator refuse, and if the collection is from industrial containers grouped together, as hereinafter defined, the amount shall be $53.82 per year for each dwelling unit; if such containers are not grouped together, then the amount shall be $122.79 per year for each dwelling unit; for the purpose of this section, industrial containers are grouped together when such containers are located physically adjacent with only sufficient space between such containers to permit access and pickup by the city collection equipment without the movement or shifting of any of said containers in order to gain access to any other of said containers; 
d.  $54.87 per year for each dwelling unit to which collection and removal services are made available to collect garbage from apartments, condominiums, townhomes, public housing or any other multi-family dwelling units. 
(4)  Residential backyard removal : $1,145.69 per year. 
(5)  Mobile home parks: 
a.  Individual garbage cans: $193.35 per year. 
b.  Installed industrial containers: $479.42 per year. See subsection (7). 
(6)  Commercial and industrial rates : 
a.  For commercial and industrial establishments located within high-density commercial, high-density mixed use, low-density commercial, low-density mixed use, medium-density mixed use, mixed-use, mixed use - high density, mixed use - low density, industrial, office/institutional and office/institutional/residential land use zones, the following Tier 1 rates shall apply: 
1.  Commercial parcels from 1-100 feet: $1,000.00 
2.  Commercial parcels from 101-200 feet: $2,000.00 
3.  Commercial parcels from 201-450 feet: $4,500.00 
4.  Commercial parcels from 451-700 feet: $7,000.00 
5.  Commercial parcels from 701-850 feet: $8,500.00 
6.  Commercial parcel greater than 850 feet: $12,000.00 
b.  For commercial and industrial establishments located outside of the above-listed land use zones, the following Tier 2 rates shall apply: 
1.  Commercial parcels from 1-100 feet: $500.00 
2.  Commercial parcels from 101-200 feet: $1,000.00 
3.  Commercial parcels from 201-450 feet: $2,250.00 
4.  Commercial parcels from 451-700 feet: $3,500.00 
5.  Commercial parcels from 701-850 feet: $4,250.00 
6.  Commercial parcel greater than 850 feet: $6,000.00 
(7)  Public property charge for services that have been contracted : A flat charge of $479.42 per year for each parcel. For public housing charges, see subsection (3)a.—d. For government buildings garbage collection, see surcharges, subsection (6). 
(8)  Residential vacant land : A flat charge of $500.00 per year per parcel. A vacant lot adjacent to a primary residence upon which an owner receive a homestead exemption shall be entitled to an annual charge of $150.00 per parcel in lieu of the $500.00 per parcel charge, provided the owner submits the proper documentation to the commissioner of public works. All vacant parcels with an outstanding housing code violation shall be charged a flat charge of $100.00 per year. 
(9)  Building of public worship rate : A flat charge of $400.00 per year per parcel. In addition to the levy listed above, there shall be a charge of $208.59 per year for solid waste collection from individual containers, garbage cans or bags, or a charge of $183.37 per year if the solid waste collection is from industrial containers. 
(10)  Minimum; private landfill site and transfer station operations : A minimum of $1.10 per ton payable to the city by all private landfill site operations and transfer station operations and transfer station operation located within the city for refuse disposed, collected, handled, processed or reclaimed within the jurisdiction of the city. Fees must correspond with tonnage handled and will be payable quarterly and prior to issuance of annual permits. 
As required by O.C.G.A § 12-8-39, all user fees collected in accordance with this subsection shall be deposited in a local restricted account and used solely for solid waste management purposes. 
(11)  Special collections : Any property otherwise addressed in subsections (1) through (9) of this section, either requesting or requiring special collection equipment or methods where normal curbside collection or backyard collection of solid waste or recyclables is not feasible, shall be subject to an additional fee of $200.00 annually. 
(12)  Excess bagged garbage, excess yard trimmings and/or overfilled bins : $12.00 per bag/occurrence, 
(13)  Bulky waste : $325.00 per address for a one (1) truck capacity load for all calls exceeding the established maximum scheduled calls per year. 
(Ord. No. 2010-36(10-O-0905), § 2, 6-29-10; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 18, 11-14-18 ) 
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
In General 
Sec. 138-60. Flags, banners, signs, displays. 
(a)  Permit required. 
*** 
(6)  Deposit ..... 1,000.00 
*** 
(8)  Fee ..... 100.00 
Encroachments, Construction and Excavations 
Sec. 138-20. Granting of permits, encroachments and easements. 
Vehicle, pedestrian or utility bridges: ..... $1,300.00 
Vehicle, pedestrian or utility tunnels: ..... $1,300.00 
Pipes, wires, conduits or similar facilities: ..... $1,300.00 
Basements, vaults, elevator shafts, stairs, stairwells, ventilation shafts, gratings or similar facilities: ..... $1,300.00 
Canopies, ledges, bay windows, balconies, decorative lighting, flagpoles, gargoyles. architectural embellishments, area walks or similar facilities: ..... $1,300.00 
Any building, parking garage, structure, or part thereof, including footings, foundations, tie-backs, supports, walls, eaves, or projections: ..... $1,300.00 
Yearly inspection fee: ..... $100.00 
Sec. 138-26. Erection of balconies over sidewalks. 
*** 
(c) Agreement. 
*** 
(7)  Monthly rental for air space occupied by balconies extending over a sidewalk, per square foot: Determined by the council. 
*** 
Sec. 138-25. Erection of bridges, tunnels or similar structures across streets or alleys. 
*** 
(b) Permit. 
*** 
(3)  Monthly rental rate for all air space or subsurface space: 
a.  The monthly rental rate for all bridges or tunnels used for pedestrian transportation or utility purposes only, per cubic foot basis: Determination by council. 
b.  Bridges or tunnels used for the sale of merchandise and mercantile display, per cubic foot: Fair market value, as determined by the council. 
c.  Bridges or tunnels used for the purpose of general advertising: Fair market value, as determined by council. 
Sec. 138-65. Construction or excavations. 
*** 
(a)  Permit required. 
*** 
(2)  Construction permits: 
a.  Persons desiring to conduct excavation work in the streets or public rights-of-way for the purpose of sewer installation, water line installation, and water meter installation shall apply for a construction permit. 
Per permit ..... 85.00 
b.  Persons desiring to conduct excavation work in the streets or public rights-of-way including, but not limited to, any street cuts boring activity and the placement or removal of conduits, manholes, cable, shall apply for a construction permit. 
Per permit ..... 200.00 
The permit fees set out above shall include one hour of inspection by a department of public work's inspector upon the completion construction activity. In addition, the city may charge an inspection fee of $50.00 per hour. However, where the Georgia Department of Transportation has primary permitting authority over a particular construction activity, the permittee may show a copy of the GDOT permit upon application for a city permit and the city permit fee and inspection fees shall be waived for that permit. With respect to subsection (2)b. immediately above, to the extent that a person pays or remits payment to the city pursuant to section 138-127(h)(1). Such payment shall be in lieu of permit fees and inspection fees. 
*** 
(c)  Working without a permit. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of the City Code to perform any regulated activity within the public right-of-way without complying with the permit requirements of the department of public works in this chapter. Any person deemed guilty of such violation, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished with a fine of $1,000.00. An additional fine of $100.00 per day will be assessed for each day of the violation. 
*** 
(j)  Performance bond ..... 500,000.00 
*** 
(l) Cash deposit and irrevocable letter of credit 
(1) Up to 500 feet in the public right-of-way ..... 10,000.00 
In excess of 500 feet in the public right-of-way ..... 25,000.00 
Improvements 
Generally 
Sec. 138-75. Fees charged for permits which allow blocking or closing sidewalks or streets; etc. 
(a)  The applicant for any permit issued by the department of public works for closing, occupying, blocking or otherwise using sidewalks or streets for building construction, building repairs, material or equipment storage, movement of oversize vehicles or loads and other special purposes shall pay to the city an application fee of $35.00 and, upon receipt of such permit, pay to the city a permit fee as provided in this section. 
(b)  Fixed fee for all permits issued as provided in this section, unless otherwise provided herein ..... $35.00 
(c)  A variable permit cost for use of up to 100 linear feet of sidewalk and any portion of the adjacent curb lane, per calendar day for the duration of the permit ..... 15.00 
(d)  A variable permit cost for use of 101 to 200 linear feet of a sidewalk and any portion of the adjacent curb lane, per calendar day for the duration of the permit ..... 30.00 
(e)  A variable permit cost for use of 201 to 300 linear feet of a sidewalk and any portion of the adjacent curb lane, per calendar day for the duration of the permit ..... 45.00 
(f)  A variable permit cost for use of over 300 linear feet of a sidewalk and any portion of the adjacent curb lane, per calendar day for the duration of the permit ..... 60.00 
(g)  The variable permit cost for use of sidewalk space only shall be 40 percent of the variable permit cost as determined for paragraphs (c), (d), (e) and (f) of this section, based on the linear feet of sidewalk used. 
(h)  The variable permit cost for use of multiple lanes or full street closure shall be the cost of a single lane permit as established in paragraphs (c), (d), (e) and (f), multiplied by the number of marked traffic lanes encroached upon by the permitted use. Where no lane markings are used, a lane width of ten feet shall be assumed for determining the permit cost. 
(i)  The variable permit cost for trenching or excavating within rights-of-way, per calendar day per lane for the duration of the permit ..... 25.00 
(j)  Each truck, trailer, crane, tractor, structure or similar device parked or placed within public rights-of-way contrary to established parking regulation and not within an area permitted, as provided by other portions of this section, shall be required to have from the department of public works a permit for such storage or parking. The cost of such permit, per day ..... 20.00 
However, the fixed fee of $20.00 shall not be applied. 
(k)  A single trip permit for moving vehicles over city streets which exceed the legal length, width, height, or weight, for exceeding one of the limitations ..... 20.00 
And, for exceeding more than one of the limitation ..... 30.00 
If the department of public works determines that such vehicles or load, because of its size, must be moved at night or will require a special police escort, the variable permit cost shall be $200.00. Permit charges required in this subsection may be waived if such oversized vehicle or load thereon is being used as part of or in preparation for a parade, festival or other such event. 
(l)  An annual multiple trip permit cost for moving vehicles which exceed the legal length, width, height or weight ..... 200.00 
(m)  Minor routine maintenance of buildings, walls, signs, fences, trees or similar facilities which requires use of a sidewalk, shall require a permit and permit fee. 
(n)  The commissioner of the department of public works shall make a determination on any question concerning conditions which require a permit and shall approve waivers of permit fees as provided for herein. 
(o)  The fee for a haul route permit ..... 80.00 
Sec. 138-76. Cost and fees of street paving by city assessed against abutting property owners. 
Fee for inspection and engineering services: Established by ordinance. 
Sec. 138-77. Engineering and inspection fees for improvements by owner or developer. 
Fee for inspection and engineering services: Established by ordinance. 
Sidewalks, Curbs, Curbs and Gutters and Driveways 
Sec. 138-96. Schedule of charges for construction or repair. Maintained by commissioner of public works. 
Sec. 138-98. Construction of sidewalks, driveways and curbs by private contractors. 
*** 
(6)  Charge for permit: Fixed by council. 
Outdoor Festivals 
Permit 
Sec. 138-205. Permit fees. 
Permit fees for an outdoor festival are determined according to the following schedule: 

 
(Ord. No. 2007-79(07-O-1953), §§ 2, 3, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 2010-29(10-O-0904), § 2, 6-30-10; Ord. No. 2015-32(15-O-1131), § 3, 6-24-15 ) 
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
Stopping, Standing and Parking 
Loading and Unloading 
Sec. 150-97. Restrictions for trucks, buses. 
*** 
(c) Fine ..... 500.00 
*** 
Sec. 150-111. Pass required for parking of certain commercial vehicles in truck loading zones and without charge at metered parking spaces. 
*** 
(c)  The pass, valid for 12 months, shall be issued upon payment of a yearly pass fee of $300.00. 
(d)  Every person desiring to obtain a pass required under this section shall make written application to the office of transportation upon forms to be prepared and approved by the office. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the nature of the vehicle, the nature and character of the business conducted by the applicant and the location of the commercial uses of the vehicle in the city. Such application shall be sworn to and subscribed to by the applicant before a notary public. Upon submission of the application and upon payment of a the yearly pass fee of $300.00, the pass shall be issued. Prior revocation of a pass under this section shall be grounds for not issuing a pass under this section. 
*** 
(k)  Any commercial vehicles other than commercial trucks found standing or parked in a truck loading zone, or in a space where a parking meter is located, that is not displaying a pass issued under this section, shall be issued a citation which shall impose a fine in the amount of $100.00. If the said fine is not paid within a period of 14 days, the fine will be doubled to $200.00. 
(l)  The fee to replace a lost, stolen or damaged pass, or to issue a new pass for the purpose of substituting one permitted vehicle in place of another, shall be $20.00, and such replacement or substituted pass shall carry the same expiration date of the initial pass. 
*** 
Parking Meters 
Sec. 150-132. Parking time limits; fees. 
Per half-hour of time allowed ..... 1.00 
Residential Permit Parking 
Sec. 150-151. Permit terms; fees. 
*** 
(b)  The permit fee, per year or for part of any year ..... 20.00 
*** 
Sec. 150-152. Permit terms; fees. 
Permit issued one year or more from expiration date ..... 12.00 
Permit issued less than one year from expiration date ..... 6.00 
Sec. 150-159. Penalty for parking without permit during permitted festivals. 
Parking without a permit in residential permit parking areas within a one-mile radius of Class "A" permitted festivals and special events ..... 75.00 
If mandatory $75.00 fine is not paid in full within 14 days, fine shall increase to $100.00. 
Inwood Circle Permit Parking 
Sec. 150-198. Permit term; fees. 
Permit issued one year or more from expiration date ..... 12.00 
Permit issued less than one year from expiration date ..... 6.00 
UTILITIES 
Water 
Sec. 154-67. Authority to design, install, extend and inspect water pipes and water mains and charge the cost to property owners, developers or contractors. 
*** 
(b) Charges. 
(1)  Application. 
*** 
b.  Prepayment charged to all developers, contractors or property owners who apply for water mains for subdivisions or developments: Amount established by city. 
c.  Prepayment charged to all developers, contractors or property owners who apply for fire hydrant installation or relocation if such installation or relocation is not associated with a water main application: Amount established by city. 
(2)  Design and installation. 
Fee charged to all developers, contractors or property owners to cover the expenses incurred for engineering design and construction inspection: Ten percent of the total calculated construction cost. 
*** 
(5)  Revision. 
*** 
b.  When a request for revision has been received, the engineering design shall be revised to reflect the new information. The construction cost shall be recalculated but shall include an additional fee of three percent of the revised construction cost to cover the expenses incurred in the revision process. 
Sec. 154-67.1. Rates associated with private water main and fire hydrant installation. 
RATES ASSOCIATED WITH PRIVATE WATER MAIN AND FIRE HYDRANT INSTALLATION  TABLE OF COSTS PER 500 FEET (MINIMUM) LENGTH OF PIPE TO BE INSTALLED  FROM MAIN COCK TO MAIN COCK: 

 
TABLE OF COSTS PER 500 FEET (MINIMUM) LENGTH OF PIPE TO BE INSTALLED FROM MAIN COCK TO FIRE HYDRANT: 

 
*** 
Sec. 154-68. Water meter charges; location and sizes of water meters in new construction. 
(a)  Schedule of water meter prices. 
WATER METER INSTALLATION FEES 

 

 

 

 
*** 
Sec. 154-70. Using water through unauthorized connection. 
*** 
(b)  Amount of charges. If unmetered water is used from an unauthorized connection or fire hydrant, there may be a charge fixed by the council. 
Sec. 154-69. Charges for turning off water, plugging service or removing meter. 
(1)  Termination of service, including locking device ..... 20.00 
(2)  Plugging and meter reset ..... 50.00 
(3)  Removing and meter reset ..... 50.00 
Sec. 154-79. Supplying water for swimming and other pools. 
*** 
(b)  Charges: Established by the city. 
*** 
(d)  Deposit: Established by the city. 
Fire Hydrants 
Sec. 154-91. Installation of detector meter or fire line meter on private unmetered fire service systems having fire hydrants. 
*** 
(b)    Work performed by city. 
(1)  Installation of detector meters or factory mutual fire line meters as required by this section will be handled by city personnel at the expense of the building owner or lessee. 
(2)  The charges for the installation shall be set by city council. 
(c)  Authority of commissioner or company. Water service to buildings whose owners refuse to comply with this section upon notification and hearing as required by this article may be terminated. 
[d]  Standby charge. The regular monthly fire service standby charge shall be continued for fire service installations having a detector meter. The commissioner of watershed or company may bill factory mutual fire line meters at metered rates. 
*** 
FIRE SERVICE DETECTOR CHECK METER CHARGES 

 
*** 
Sec. 154-92. Connections for fire service and water meters. 
(a)  Separate properties under one ownership. Whenever one or more connection from the city water main to the property line are used for the purpose of supplying more than one property under one ownership, a separate charge, according to the schedule of charges for fire service connection, shall be made and assessed against the owner and tenant. 
*** 
CHARGES FOR FIRE SERVICE TAP 

 
*** 
Sec. 154-94. Permit for use of fire hydrants. 
Charges for the unauthorized use of water: 
a.  For water used for first-time offenders, plus retail cost ..... 300.00 
b.  For water used for second-time offenders, plus retail cost ..... 500.00 
c.  For water used for third-time offenders, plus retail cost ..... 750.00 
d.  For water used for fourth-time offenders, plus retail cost ..... 1,000.00 
The retail cost for water used will be the rate in effect. 
Sec. 154-97. Charges for use. 
(a)  Deposit. 
(1)  For key ..... 500.00 
(2)  For temporary meter ..... 750.00 
(b)  Schedule of charges. Flat daily rate: As established by city. 
*** 
(d)  Minimum charge: As established by city. 
Rates, Charges and Related Matters 
Sec. 154-111. Authority to fix water rates. 
(b)  The authority granted in subsection (a) of this section shall apply to all charges made by the department of water including, without limitation: 
*** 
FIRE SERVICE HYDRAULIC TESTS 

 
*** 
Sec. 154-112. Established: As established by city. 
Sec. 154-113. Charges for water connections and setting meters: As established by city. 
Sec. 154-114. Deposits for water service. 
*** 
(b) Deposits for single-family residential, commercial and industrial meters: 

 
(c) Account establishment charge: As established by city. 
*** 
(h) Nonrefundable administrative charge ..... 15.00 
(i) Multiple dwelling unit accounts, per living unit ..... 25.00 
Sec. 154-115.1. Charge for notification of termination of service to residents of multiple dwelling units. 
Per unit ..... 1.00 
Sec. 154-117. Charges made to trailer parks. 
For amount of water used: Regular city water system rate on a one-unit basis. 
Sec. 154-119. Temporary use of water by contractors and others. 
(a)  Charges. Contractors and other persons may be supplied with water for temporary use according to the regular monthly rate of charges provided for water supply. They shall be required to deposit an amount equal to that charged for making water connections of various sizes as scheduled for these connections. 
Sec. 154-120. Nonpayment of bills. 
Charge for each turnoff: Established by council. 
Sewer Construction and Assessments 
Generally 
Sec. 154-149. Construction and connection of sewer outside city. 
*** 
(e)  Fee: Established by council. 
Assessments 
Sec. 154-167. Amount where sewer laid in street. 
CITY CONSTRUCTED SEWER CONNECTIONS 
The cost for construction of a connection to the city's sewer by city personnel shall be charged based upon the time and materials expended, plus costs for inspection. This cost is in addition to any cost for inspection of the structures and piping on private property. The minimum cost for construction of such connections is five thousand nine hundred thirty dollars (5,930.00). 
*** 
Sec. 154-173. Charges for sewers laid by developer for use of development. 
(a)  Established. Fees: Established by council. 
(b)  Inspection fees. 
SITE DEVELOPMENT FEES 

 
Note: LF = Lineal Foot  SY = Square Yard 
CAPACITY CERTIFICATION FEE 
FEE 
Flat rate for single family residential and commercial flows less than 2,500 gpd ..... 600.00 
Flat rate for commercial permit for flows of 2,500 gpd or greater ..... 1,500.00 
Additional fees for permits in capacity limited basins, requiring Capacity Certification analyses: 
a.  Flat rate for simple analysis of possible capacity options (upon request of applicant) ..... 2,245.00 
b.  Additional actual charges for modeling, site visits, and Alternative analysis  (actual fee will vary depending upon services required or requested) ..... TBD 
Note: gpd = gallons per day  TBD = To be determined 
Sec. 154-277. Sewer service charges. 
(a)  Established. Fees: Established by council. 
Discharge Restrictions 
Sec. 154-297.01. Food processing, sales and/or service establishment (grease trap) regulations/new installation. 
*** 
(a) Permit required. 
(1)  There will be an annual permit fee of 100.00 for a food service wastewater discharge permit. The commissioner of public works will evaluate this fee annually. 
Sec. 154-297.03. Inspection requirements for new and existing installations. 
*** 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  Violation of this division: ..... 1,000.00 
(2)  Additional penalties: 
a.  First offense. A fine of ..... 1,000.00 
b.  Second offense. A fine of ..... 1,000.00 
c.  Third offense. A fine of ..... 1,000.00 
VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
Animal-Drawn Vehicles, Limousines, Taxicabs and Similar 
Vehicles 
Generally 
Sec. 162-33. Schedule of fees. 
(1)  Each CPNC: 
a.  Taxicab ..... 6,000.00 
b.  Sedan ..... 6,000.00 
c.  Carriage ..... 600.00 
(2)  CPNC annual renewal: 
a.  1996 ..... 60.00 
b.  1997 ..... 100.00 
(3)  Each CPNC transfer ..... 100.00 
(4)  Initial driver's permit ..... 75.00 
(5)  Renewal of driver's permit ..... 75.00 
(6)  Late fee for renewal of driver's permit ..... 25.00 
(7)  Company permit ..... 250.00 
(8)  Renewal of company permit ..... 220.00 
(9)  Reissuance of name change of company ..... 50.00 
(10)  Issuance of duplicate of any of the items in subsections (1) through (7) of this section ..... 11.00 
(11)  Vehicle semiannual inspection ..... 25.00 
(12)  Transfer of driver to different company ..... 34.00 
(13)  New car vehicle inspection ..... 38.00 
(14)  Vehicle re-inspection ..... 23.00 
(15)  Insurance sticker monitor and issue ..... 5.00 
(16)  Horse-drawn carriage inspection ..... 34.00 
(17)  Lien holder fee ..... 39.00 
(18)  Reserved. 
(19)  Horse-drawn carriage company permit ..... 150.00 
(20)  Horse-drawn carriage company renewal ..... 150.00 
CPNC 
Sec. 162-60. Temporary CPNC for limousines. 
Fee for each ..... 150.00 
Driver Permits 
Sec. 162-81. Change in company affiliation ..... 15.00 
Sec. 162-82. Temporary permit for limousine drivers ..... 50.00 
Stickers 
Sec. 162-141.4. Fees. 
Investigation and processing of sticker application ..... 150.00 
Annual sticker fee ..... 375.00 
Sec. 162-141.5. Reciprocity with other municipalities in the state. 
Sticker fee shall be reduced by any vehicle permitting fee charged to that particular vehicle by such other municipality; but such sticker fee shall not be reduced to less than ..... 250.00 
Driver's Permits 
Sec. 162-142.3. Fees. 
Investigation and processing of permit application ..... 35.00 
Annual permit fee ..... 100.00 
Sec. 162-142.4. Reciprocity with other municipalities in the state. 
Permit fee shall be reduced by any driver's permit fee charged to that particular driver by such municipality; but such driver's permit fee shall not be reduced to less than ..... 50.00 
Wreckers and Towing Service 
Sec. 162-224. Fees. 
Annual application fee: 
For each truck operated by a wrecker service ..... 120.00 
For each wrecker driver ..... 50.00 
Annual application fee for operation of a wrecker service ..... 25.00 
Sec. 162-226. Fingerprints; permits. 
Fee for permit certifying eligibility of person to continue to use, drive or operate a wrecker, per year ..... 5.00 
Sec. 162-227. Fees charged for nonconsentual motor vehicle towing. 
For nonconsentual removal of any vehicle on personal property, not more than ..... 95.00 
Storage fees, per day, not more than ..... 10.00 
However, no storage fees shall be charged for the first 24-hour period from the time the motor vehicle is removed from the property. 
85.00 fee shall be all-inclusive; no additional fees may be charged for using dollies, trailers, lifts, slim jims, etc. However, the maximum fees in this section shall not apply to the nonconsentual towing of vehicles which weigh in excess of two tons. 
Sec. 162-260. Fees charged. 
Removal of vehicle immobilization device(s) ..... 50.00 
The 50.00 fee shall be all inclusive, no additional fees may be charged for using other equipment. 
PART III. CODE OF ORDINANCES—LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
BUDGET AND PLANNING 
Bureau of Planning 
Sec. 6-1007. Fees. 
The bureau of planning is hereby authorized to charge fees for the administration of the City of Atlanta's Zoning Ordinance as follows: 
(a)  Rezoning applications: Rezoning application fees shall be based on the zoning district for which an applicant applies and upon the size of the property for which the application is made, based on the following schedule: 
(1)  To R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-4A: (all): $500.00. 
(2)  To R-5, RG, PDH: (1 acre or less): $500.00; (1+ to 5 acres): $625.00; (5+ to 10 acres): $750.00; (10+ acres): $1,250.00. 
(3)  To R-LC, O-I, C-1, C-2, C-4, C-5, I-1, I-2: (1 acre or less): $1,000.00; (1+ to 5 acres): $1,500.00; (5+ to 10 acres): $2,000.00; (10+ acres): $3,000.00. 
(4)  To C-3, PD-OC, PD-MU, PD-BP: (1 acre or less): $3,000.00; (1+ to 5 acres): $4,500.00; (5+ acres): $6,000.00. 
(5)  To any SPI District: (all): $3,000.00. 
(6)  LW (Live Work), MRC (Mixed Residential Commercial), NC (Neighborhood Commercial): (One acre or less) $3,000.00; (One plus to five acres) $4,500.00; (Five plus acres) $6,000.00. 
(7)  MR (Multi-family residential): (One acre or less) $500.00; (One plus to five acres) $625.00; (Five plus to ten acres) $750.00; (Ten plus acres) $1,250.00. 
(b)  Special use permit applications: All special use permit applications, with regard to the zoning district in which the subject property is located, shall be $400.00. 
(c)  Site plan amendment applications: Site plan amendment fees shall be based on the zoning district in which the subject property is located and upon the size of the property for which the application for amendment is made, based on the following schedule: 
(1)  In R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-4A, R-4B: (all): $500.00. 
(2)  In R-5, RG, PDH: (1 acre or less): $500.00; (1+ to 5 acres): $625.00; (5+ to 10 acres): $750.00; (10+ acres): $1,250.00. 
(3)  In R-LC, O-I, C-1, C-2, C-4, C-5, I-1, I-2: (1 acre or less): $1,000.00; (1+ to 5 acres): $1,500.00; (5+ to 10 acres): $2,000.00; (10+ acres): $2,500.00. 
(4)  In C-3, PD-OC, PD-MU, PD-BP: (1 acre or less): $2,500.00; (1+ to 5 acres): $3,250.00; (5+ acres): $4,000.00. 
(5)  In any SPI District: (all): $3,250.00. 
(6)  LW (Live Work), MRC (Mixed Residential Commercial), NC (Neighborhood Commercial: (One acre or less) $3,000.00; (One plus to five acres) $4,500.00; (Five plus acres) $6,000.00. 
(7)  MR (Multi-family residential): (One acre or less) $500.00; (One plus to five acres) $625.00; (Five plus to ten acres) $750.00; (Ten plus acres) $1,250.00. 
(d)  Transfer of ownership applications: All transfer of ownership applications (special use permit, special administrative permit, special exception), without regard to the zoning district in which the subject property is located, shall be $200.00. 
(e)  Comprehensive development plan (CDP) amendments: All applications for rezoning or site plan amendment which are deemed by the bureau of planning to require consideration by the city council on an individual basis of a change in the adopted land use element of the comprehensive development plan (CDP) shall require, in addition to fees stated elsewhere in this section, an additional fee of $1,000.00. 
(f)  Special administrative permits: The special administrative permit application fee shall be based on the following schedule: 
(1)  Developments (new construction or any construction which results in increased lot coverage, modification of the building footprint, modification of building facades that alters the configuration of openings, and conversions or additions to existing buildings) less than 50,000 square feet of floor area: $500.00. 
(2)  Developments greater than or equal to 50,000 square feet of floor area but less than 250,000 square feet of floor area: $1,000.00. 
(3)  Developments greater than or equal to 250,000 square feet of floor area: $1,500.00 
(4)  Cell towers and co-location of antenna: $250.00 
(5)  Exterior demolition, expansions of outdoor dining and all others not listed above: $250.00 
(g)  Applications to sever, transfer or receive development rights or to amend or renew such previously approved applications: $400.00. 
(h)  Subdivision applications: Subdivision application fees shall be based on the size of the property for which the application is made and the complexity of the application, based on the following schedule: 
(1)  Subdivision with all lot frontages facing an existing City of Atlanta right-of-way: $250.00 application fee paid at the time of submission of the application with a fee of $10.00 per lot paid at the time that the final subdivision plat is approved. 
(2)  Subdivision of up to ten acres requiring the installation of any right-of-way which is to be dedicated to the City of Atlanta or the connection of private streets to City of Atlanta right-of-way: $250.00 application fee paid at the time of submission of the application with a fee of $10.00 per lot paid at the time that the final subdivision plat is approved. 
(3)  Subdivision of more than ten acres requiring the installation of any right-of-way which is to be dedicated to the City of Atlanta or the connection of private streets to City of Atlanta right-of-way: $1,000.00 application fee paid at the time of submission of the application with a fee of $10.00 per lot paid at the time that the final subdivision plat is approved. 
(4)  Replat of residential property: $40.00 for first two lots with $20.00 per lot for any additional lot. 
(5)  Replat of non-residential property: $20.00 for first two lots with $10.00 per lot for any additional lot. 
(i)  Sidewalk cafe permits: $200.00 regardless of zoning district. 
Fees collected under the provisions of this section shall be paid to the department of finance and credited to the General Revenue Fund of the City of Atlanta. 
Department of Planning, Development and Neighborhood Conservation; additional fees 
Comprehensive Development Plan (CDP) ..... 60.00 
Capital Improvements Program (CIP) ..... 30.00 
Redevelopment Plans and Area Studies ..... 25.00 
Zoning map CD in PDF format ..... 50.00 
GIS data compilation on CD in ESRI shapefile format ..... 75.00 
B/W copies of cadastral maps ..... 5.00 
Printed maps from Map Catalog—Based on size: 
12 sq. ft. (e.g. 36″ × 48″): 35.00 
9 sq. ft. (e.g. 36″ × 36″): 30.00 
6 sq. ft. (e.g. 36″ × 24″): 20.00 
4 sq. ft. (e.g. 24″ × 24″): 15.00 
3 sq. ft. (e.g. 24″ × 18″) (including Zoning Map Sheets): 10.00 
11″ × 17″ (including NPU Land Use Maps) 7.00 
8.5″ × 11″: 5.00 
The payment of such fees shall not include any rights to reproduce the document for any commercial purpose. The City makes no representation about accuracy of any data or the suitability of any data for any particular use. Any document may include additional terms of use which are intended to supplement these terms of use. 
Boards and Commissions 
Board of Zoning Adjustment 
Sec. 6-4028. Appeals to the board. 
(1)  For appeals which allege that a decision of an administrative officer is in error, each appeal, without regard to the zoning district in which the subject property lies, shall be 250.00. 
(2)  For applications for variance or special exception for property which lies in an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 district, each application shall be 100.00. 
(3)  For applications for variance or special exception for property which lies in the RG district, each application shall be 500.00. 
(4)  For applications for variance or special exception for property which lies in an R-LC, O-I, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, I-I, or I-2 district, each application shall be 625.00. 
Sec. 6-4044. Executive director. 
(14)  To develop a fee schedule for the services performed by the commission staff and for the hearing of applications by the commission and to present such schedule to the commission for review. The fees proposed by the director shall also be approved by the city council which shall have the final authority to set such fees. 
PART 8. COMMUNITY AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 
Building Regulation 
Electricity 
Sec. 8-2103 Elevator Code Amendments 
104.2. Fees. 
(a)  No elevator permit shall be valid until the fees prescribed in this section have been paid to the City of Atlanta. Schedule of permit fees are as follows: 
1.  Passenger or freight base price, per unit ..... 400.00 
Plus, each opening ..... 15.00 
2.  Dumbwaiter and material lift, per unit ..... 150.00 
3.  Escalator, per unit ..... 150.00 
4.  Workmen's hoist, initial inspection per unit ..... 250.00 
5.  Workmen's hoist, tower rise, per jump ..... 100.00 
6.  Private residence inclined lifts and elevators ..... 250.00 
7.  Belt manlift ..... 250.00 
8.  Special purpose personnel elevators and wheelchair lifts, per unit ..... 250.00 
9.  Two acceptance inspections and the operating permit fees are included in the installation permit fee. All additional inspections shell be (per hour) ..... 75.00 
10.  Major alteration permits: 
(a)  Each alteration per unit ..... 250.00 
(b)  Each additional alteration per unit ..... 20.00 
(c)  Maximum alteration fee, per unit ..... 200.00 
11.  The acceptance inspection fee is included in the major alteration permit fee. The alterations acceptance inspections will not change the normal inspection or the operating permit due date. 
Additional inspections per hour ..... 75.00 
12.  Operating permit: 
(a)  Operating permit-one year price per unit ..... 70.00 
(b)  Temporary operating permit, per unit ..... 70.00 
13.  Inspection for temporary elevator, per unit ..... 200.00 
14.  Others: 
(a)  Operating equipment without an operating certificate.  (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-103) 
First offense ..... 250.00 
Second offense ..... 500.00 
(b)  Operating equipment in an unsafe condition.  (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-101) 
First offense ..... 500.00 
Second offense ..... 1,000.00 
(c)  Failing to notify the elevator division of any accidents involving structural damage or injury as defined in the definition section. (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-106) 
First offense ..... 500.00 
Second offense ..... 1,000.00 
(d)  Failing to notify the elevator division of an accident, which involves death. (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-106) ..... 5,000.00 
(e)  Placing unit back in service which has been red tagged and placed out of service without first having been inspected. (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-102) 
First offense ..... 1,000.00 
Second offense ..... 2,500.00 
(f)  Turning equipment over for use without a final acceptance inspection. (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-101) 
First offense ..... 500.00 
Second offense ..... 1,000.00 
15.  Reinspection fee, per unit each inspection ..... 75.00 
If any part of a permitted job is found not to have been included in the permit, the cost of including said work in the permit shall be double the usual cost, however in no event shall the penalty exceed 1,000.00. 
16.  In the event that any work is found to have started without a permit first being obtained, the above permit fees will be doubled for the permit, however, in no event shall the penalty exceed 1,000.00. 
PART 16. ZONING 
Signs 
Sec. 16-28A.014. Signs 
Initial registration fee ..... 50.00 
Renewal registration ..... 25.00 
APPENDIX A. BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS 
Sec. 104. Permits. 
104.2 Fees. 
Any persons obtaining a building permit shall pay, to the City of Atlanta, fees in accordance with the value of the proposed work per square foot of building in addition to any application fee charged in Section 104.1. For purposes of this section, the minimum value of proposed new work (including new work to existing structures) shall be based on Table 100, Building Valuation Data provided by the International Code Council as updated February 2009 and as set forth herein. Valuation of alteration projects shall be based upon the estimated construction costs for new work. Minimum value for interior alterations without engineered structural work shall be 20% of the valuation of new building construction. For interior alterations involving structural engineering, the minimum valuation shall be 40% of the value of new building construction. The factor shall apply only the square footage being altered in the application and not the entire structure. 
(a)  No permit or permit fee is required for any repair work with a total valuation of less than $2,500.00 provided that such work is otherwise lawful. 
(b)  The amount of $7.00 per $1,000.00 of valuation based on Table 100 is the fee for the plan review of the building permit. The final payment shall be the total of the valuation cost calculation less the plan review cost previously paid. The fact that the valuation cost calculation does not include the amount of development impact fees imposed pursuant to Chapter 19 or other fees imposed elsewhere in the Code does not relieve any applicant from the payment of any fees. No permit is valid until all fees imposed by the City have been paid and the payment validated by the Office of Revenue. 
(c)  A reinspection fee of $50.00 shall be imposed for each reinspection after the initial inspection when a written notice has been issued requiring the correction of inferior work. 
(d)  A fee of double the usual permit fee will be charged for all building begun without a permit. However, in no case shall the penalty portion of said fee exceed $1,000.00. In the event that work is stopped for failure to obtain a permit and citations are issued for violation of the stop work order, any court imposed fines shall be for violation of the stop work order and every violation may constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  The fee for changing the contractor of record on a permit or permit application shall be $50.00. 
(f)  The fees for sign permits set forth in this section shall impose an additional amount to fees charged elsewhere in the City Code for sign permits where such fees are lower than the fees charged in this section such that the fee amount in this section shall be the actual amount of the fee. 
(g)  A fee of double the usual permit fee shall be charged for signs erected without a permit. However, in no case shall the penalty portion of said fee exceed $1,000.00. 
(h)  Fees for the issuance of certificates of occupancy (whether temporary or permanent which are each a separate fee) shall be as follows: 
a.  New one- and two-family residences shall be $100.00. 
b.  Additions to one- and two-family residence shall be $50.00. 
c.  Tenant build-out for residential condominium units shall be $100.00 per unit. 
d.  New commercial building of one story shall be $200.00. 
e.  New commercial building exceeding one story but less than eight stories in height shall be $200.00 plus $200.00 per additional floor or portion thereof. 
f.  Any building eight stories or higher shall be $300.00 per floor. 
g.  Tenant build-out for interior commercial spaces shall be $100 per story or portion thereof. 
h.  Condominium development (residential or commercial) common area and major systems (HVAC, gas, electrical, sprinklers, parking decks, and like components) shall be charged fees in the same manner as new commercial buildings. 
i.  The fee for the reprinting of duplicate certificate permits or certificates of occupancy shall be $50.00. 
j.  The fee for a certificate of completion shall be $100.00. 
k.  Emergency call-out inspection shall be $300.00. 
l.  Life Safety inspection shall be $200.00 per floor. 
m.  Fire or water damage preliminary inspection shall be $200.00 per inspection. 
(i)  A non-profit entity applying for a permit for the development of not for profit housing for the homeless may request an exemption from building permit fees. In such cases, the director shall investigate the application and decide whether the application meets the criteria set forth in this subsection. For purposes of this sub-section a non-profit development is that constructed by an entity recognized as non-profit under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or an entity meeting the requirements of § 501(c)(3). 
(j)  Development impact fees shall be imposed in accordance with Section 19-1001 et seq. of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances. 
(k)  The fee for the registration of contractors pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26 shall be $100.00 per year. 
(l)  Fees for Additional Plan Review Services Requested by Applicant. By written request to the director, an applicant may receive additional services at a cost above the normal permit fees and which shall be performed by appointment outside of normal business hours at the discretion of the director, subject to availability of personnel and a written fee agreement concerning the following rates: 
a.  Initial consultation and preliminary plan review (maximum of two hours) 

 
b.  Expedited plan review. Requires initial consultation and payment at the listed hourly rate: 

 
(m)  Miscellaneous permits—Where a minimum permit fee is set forth, the rate of $7.00 per thousand dollars of the value of work shall be used to determine if the permit fee is to be above the minimum. 
a.  Construction of new cellular communication tower or commercial telecommunication satellite dish: ..... $1,825.00 
b.  Co-location on existing towers 
(for each new antenna/dish/radio head): ..... $100.00 
(for each new equipment box/cabinet/ice bridge) ..... $100.00 
c.  Awnings/Canopies—Per linear foot ..... $35.00 
d.  Single residential carport—Per sq. ft. ..... $0.25 
e.  Single family residential garage or accessory building—Per sq. ft. ..... $0.38 
f.  Single family residential basement or Attic 
Unfinished—Per sq. ft. ..... $0.38 
Build-out—Per sq. ft. ..... $0.33 
g.  Decks/Balconies/Porches SF residential—Minimum fee ..... $350.00 
h.  Re-roofing of existing structures—Minimum fee ..... $360.00 
i.  Demolition of residential buildings—Minimum per bldg. ..... $650.00 
j.  Demolition of commercial buildings—Minimum per bldg. ..... $1,860.00 
k.  Retaining walls—Minimum fee: ..... $220.00 
l.  Fences 6 ft. or less in height—Minimum fee: ..... $75.00 
m.  Fences greater than 6 ft. in height—Minimum fee: ..... $120.00 
n.  Paving or resurfacing—Minimum fee: ..... $200.00 
o.  SF Residential swimming pools or spas—Minimum fee ..... $240.00 
p.  Commercial swimming pools or spas—Minimum fee ..... $1,750.00 
q.  Sprinkler (up to 50 heads) ..... $150.00 
(more than 50 heads add $1.00 per head) 
r.  MEP permits—Minimum fee ..... $150.00 
Each additional trade ..... $150.00 
More than two plan reviews—Per review ..... $150.00 
s.  SF and Duplex Online "Remove & Replace" ..... $50.00 
Limited to: hot water tanks, dishwashers and similar appliances; kitchen cabinets; toilets, tubs, sinks & showers; interior or exterior painting only. 
(n)  Fees for services provided by the Zoning Enforcement Division—Where a minimum permit fee is set forth, the rate of $150.00 per hour shall be used to determine if the permit fee is to be above the minimum. 
a.  Verification of non-conformity where necessary for determination of application for building permit—Minimum fee of $300.00. 
b.  Letters requesting verification of non-conformity—Minimum fee of $300.00. 
c.  Letters requesting zoning verification without investigation of non-conformity—Minimum fee of $100.00. 
d.  Verification of zoning for business license without investigation of non-conformity—Minimum fee of $50.00. 
(o)  Fee for sign permits—Where a minimum permit fee is set forth and the cost above the minimum is not rated per square foot, the rate of $150.00 per hour shall be used to determine if the permit fee is to be assessed shall be above the minimum. The rating of fees in square feet is for the purpose of determining the charge for the installation of signs and does not determine whether a sign of a particular size will be allowed under the City of Atlanta Sign Ordinance. All permit fees are payable upon application and are nonrefundable. 
a.  General advertising signs—New applications and conversions involving changing signs—Minimum fee $1050.00. 
b.  Wall signs—New applications and conversions involving changing signs—Minimum fee of $150.00 plus $1.00 per square foot of sign area. Where a second wall sign is reviewed as a part of the same application, only the $1.00 per square foot of sign area shall be charged for the second sign. 
c.  Freestanding signs—New applications and conversions involving changing signs—Minimum fee of $450.00 plus $1.00 per square foot of sign area. Where a second freestanding sign is reviewed as a part of the same application, only the $1.00 per square foot of sign area shall be charged for the second sign. 
d.  Shopping center signs shall be charged at the same rate as freestanding signs. 
e.  Portable signs—$75.00. 
(p)  Fee for sign permits—Where a minimum permit fee is set forth in Chapter 28A of the Zoning Code forth and the cost set for the herein would rise above that fee, the fees charged herein shall be in the nature of an additional fee. 
TABLE 100 cost per sq. ft. 

 
Sec. 107. Building code advisory board. 
107.5. Fee for board hearing ..... 50.00 
APPENDIX B. ELECTRICAL CODE AMENDMENTS 
Sec. 104. Permit. 
104.3. Fee 
* * * 
(b)  Any person obtaining a permit shall pay to the City of Atlanta fees as follows: 
1.  Temporary Pole, each ..... 50.00 
2.  Disconnect or Reconnect of Service ..... 50.00 
3.  Public Utility ..... 50.00 
4.  Change of Contractor ..... 50.00 
5.  Service/Disconnects: 
1—200 amps, each ..... 10.00 
201—800 amps, each ..... 20.00 
801—1,200 amps, each ..... 60.00 
1,201—2,000 amps, each ..... 100.00 
2,001—4,000 amps, each ..... 200.00 
Over 4,000 amps, each ..... 300.00 
6.  Feeders: 
1—30 amps, each ..... 3.00 
31—100 amps, each ..... 5.00 
101—200 amps, each ..... 10.00 
201—800 amps, each ..... 20.00 
801—1,200 amps, each ..... 60.00 
1,201—2,000 amps, each ..... 100.00 
2,001—4,000 amps, each ..... 200.00 
Over 4,000 amps, each ..... 300.00 
7.  Branch Circuits: 
1—30 amps, each ..... 3.00 
31—100 amps, each ..... 5.00 
101—200 amps, each ..... 10.00 
201—800 amps, each ..... 20.00 
801—1,200 amps, each ..... 60.00 
1,201—2,000 amps, each ..... 100.00 
2,001—4,000 amps, each ..... 200.00 
Over 4,000 amps, each ..... 300.00 
8.  Low Voltage, per 1,000 sq. ft. ..... 15.00 
(c)  A reinspection fee of 50.00 shall be imposed for each reinspection after the initial inspection when a written notice has been issued requiring a correction of inferior work. 
(d)  In the event that any work under this code for which a permit is required is started without a permit first being obtained, the permit fee will be doubled for that permit. However, in no event shall the penalty portion of said fee exceed 1,000.00. In addition, if any work is found to have been performed which is not listed on an existing permit, the cost of adding that work to the permit shall be double the usual fee. However, in no instance shall the penalty portion of that fee exceed 1,000.00. 
Sec. 107.5 Electrical advisory board. 
Fee for board hearing ..... 50.00 
APPENDIX C. PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENTS 
Sec. 104. Permit. 
104.3. Permits required under this code and fee schedules. The following equipment or systems are required to be permitted in accordance with this Code, and Table I Fee Schedules. 
(a)  Any person obtaining a permit shall pay to the City of Atlanta fees in accordance with Table I, City of Atlanta Plumbing Division/Schedule of Permit Fees. 
(b)  Table I. City of Atlanta Plumbing Division. 
Schedule of Permit Fees 
No plumbing permit shall be valid until the fees prescribed in this section have been paid to the City of Atlanta. Schedule of permit fees is as follows: 
Permit Inspection Fees 
Minimum Permit Fee ..... 50.00 
Each Plumbing Fixture ..... 10.00 
Each Plugged or Future Opening ..... 10.00 
Residential House Sewer - 
New or Replaced ..... 10.00 
Roof Drain or Area Drain ..... 10.00 
Water Heater ..... 20.00 
Any Repairs, Alterations or Replacement of Fixture ..... 20.00 
Residential Disposal Unit ..... 10.00 
Commercial Disposal Unit  (not to exceed 1½ H.P.) ..... 20.00 
Commercial, Industrial and Multi-family Sewers, per foot ..... 0.50 
Commercial Industrial and Multi-family Water Service Mains, per foot ..... 0.50 
Residential Water Service Lines ..... 10.00 
Mobile Homes—Each Unit  (Same rate per fixture as residential) 
Lawn Sprinkler System—Each ..... 30.00 
Autopsy Table with Drain ..... 15.00 
Repair or Alteration of Drainage or Vent Piping ..... 10.00 
Vacuum Breakers or Backflow Preventers or Protection Devices ..... 10.00 
Fire Protection Sprinkler Systems—Per head ..... 0.40 
Oil or Grease Interceptors ..... 10.00 
Manhole under Jurisdiction of Plumbing Division ..... 10.00 
Inspection of Sewer Plug, Standpipes, per Outlet ..... 10.00 
Public Utility Inspections ..... 50.00 
Change of Contractor/Company ..... 50.00 
Miscellaneous Plumbing Fixture ..... 10.00 
Where additional trips are required to inspect inferior work or installations which have been rejected by the Plumbing Division, a reinspection fee of 50.00 shall be imposed for each reinspection after the initial inspection when a written notice has been issued requiring the correction of inferior work. 
(c)  At the discretion of the director, a fee of double the usual permit shall be charged for any installation to which work has begun without a permit in lieu of serving citations to Municipal Court. Such permit fee penalty shall not exceed 1,000.00. 
Sec. 107. Plumbing advisory board. 
107.5. Fee for hearing ..... 50.00 
APPENDIX D. HEATING AND AIR CONDITIONING CODE AMENDMENTS 
Sec. 104. Permits. 
104.3—Permits required under this code and fee schedules 
The following equipment or systems are required to be permitted in accordance with this code, and Table I Fee Schedules. 
(a)  Table I. City of Atlanta Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Division 
Schedule of Permit Fees 
No Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning permit shall be valid until the fees prescribed in this section have been paid to the City of Atlanta. 
Schedule of permit fees is as follows: 
1.  In all cases the minimum fee shall be 50.00 per permit. 
2.  Heating Systems/Separate Vents, Stacks, and Chimneys. 
a.  Up to 125,000 BTU Input ..... 35.00 
b.  125,001—199,999 BTU Input ..... 40.00 
c.  200,000—299,999 BTU Input ..... 50.00 
d.  300,000—599,999 BTU Input ..... 70.00 
e.  600,000—999,999 BTU Input ..... 80.00 
f.  1,000,000—1,999,999 BTU Input ..... 90.00 
g.  2,000,000—3,999,999 BTU Input ..... 130.00 
h.  4,000,000—7,999,999 BTU Input ..... 160.00 
i.  8,000,000—11,999,999 BTU Input ..... 190.00 
j.  12,000,000—15,999,999 BTU Input ..... 220.00 
k.  Plus 1.00 per 1,000 over 16,000,000 
3.  Cooling Systems. 
a.  Up to 35,999 BTU/HR or 2 TONS ..... 25.00 
b.  36,000—47,999 BTU/HR or 3 TONS ..... 30.00 
c.  48,000—59,999 BTU/HR or 4 TONS ..... 40.00 
d.  60,000—119,999 BTU/HR or 5 TONS ..... 50.00 
e.  120,000—179,999 BTU/HR or 10 TONS ..... 70.00 
f.  180,000—239,999 BTU/HR or 15 TONS ..... 90.00 
g.  240,000—599,999 BTU/HR or 20 TONS ..... 105.00 
h.  600,000—1,199,999 BTU/HR or 50 TONS ..... 160.00 
i.  1,200,000 BTU/HR or 100 TONS ..... 190.00 
j.  Plus 1.50 per ton over 100 tons. 
4.  Duct Alterations ..... 50.00 
5.  Public Safety Inspections ..... 50.00 
6.  Change of Contractor/Company ..... 50.00 
7.  Grease Hoods (Face Area of Hood in Sq. Ft.) 
a.  Up to 10 ..... 25.00 
b.  10.1—15 ..... 30.00 
c.  15.1—20 ..... 40.00 
d.  20.1—25 ..... 50.00 
e.  25.1—45 ..... 60.00 
f.  45.1—80 ..... 70.00 
g.  80.1—100 ..... 80.00 
h.  over 100 ..... 90.00 
Use equivalent Sq. Ft. of hood overhanging cooking appliances six inches on open sides. 
8.  Gas Piping - Capacity - ..... CU FT/HR 
a.  Up to 1,000 ..... 40.00 
b.  1,001—100,000 ..... 100.00 
c.  Over 100,000 ..... 150.00 
9.  Cooking Outlets ..... 20.00 
10.  Fans. 
a.  Up to ½ ..... 15.00 
b.  1—2 ..... 20.00 
c.  5—20 ..... 80.00 
d.  30—60 ..... 170.00 
e.  75 and over ..... 200.00 
11.  Domestic Range Hoods ..... 10.00 
12.  Dryer Vent ..... 10.00 
(b)  In all cases the minimum fee shall be 50.00 per permit. 
Where additional trips are required to inspect inferior work or installations rejected by the Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Division, a reinspection fee of 50.00 will be imposed for each subsequent inspection. Payment of the reinspection fee shall be made to the City of Atlanta before additional inspections are made. 
(c)  A reinspection fee of 50.00 shall be imposed for each reinspection after the initial inspection when a written notice has been issued requiring the correction of inferior work. 
(d)  For combination air conditioning and heating systems, fees shall be cumulative. 
(e)  In the event that any work under this code for which a permit is required is started without a permit first being obtained, the permit fee will be doubled for that permit. However, in no event shall the penalty portion of said fee exceed 1,000.00. In addition, if any work is found to have been performed which is not listed on an existing permit, the cost of adding that work to the permit shall be double the usual fee. However, in no instance shall the penalty portion of that fee exceed 1,000.00. 
Sec. 107. Heating and air conditioning advisory board. 
107.4. Fee for hearing ..... 50.00 
APPENDIX E. HOUSING CODE 
Sec. 8. Inspections. 
(e) An inspection made under this Code upon the request of the owner shall be made only after the appropriate fee hereinafter has been paid to the City, to wit: 
(1)  $50.00 for a structure containing one through 12 units located on no more than two floors. 
(2)  $100.00 for a structure containing more than 12 units located on no more than two floors. 
(3)  $50.00 per floor for structures containing units located on more than two floors. 
APPENDIX F. GAS CODE AMENDMENTS 
Sec. 104.3. Permits. 
(c) Reinspection fee ..... 50.00 
(d) Minimum permit fee ..... 50.00 
TABLE 1  CITY OF ATLANTA HVAC DIVISION  SCHEDULE OF PERMIT FEES 

 
Sec. 107. Heating and air conditioning advisory board. 
107.5. Fee for hearing ..... 50.00 
(Ord. No. 1998-94, § 1, 11-20-98; Ord. No. 1998-95, §§ 2—8, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 1999-12, §§ 8, 9, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-14, §§ 2, 3, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-35, §§ 8, 9, 3-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-48, § 4, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 1999-49, § 2, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 2000-3, § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 2002-11, §§ 1—5, 3-5-02; Ord. No. 2002-12, § 1, 3-5-02; Ord. No. 2002-14, 3-5-02; Ord. No. 2002-15, § 1, 3-12-02; Ord. No. 2002-35, §§ 1—6, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 2002-84, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 2002-87, §§ 1, 2, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 2002-89, § 2, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 2003-107, § 1, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 2004-33, §§ 1, 2, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 2004-34, §§ 1, 2, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2004-86, §§ 1—3, 11-19-04; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 4(Att. B), 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 5(Att. C), 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 12(Att. D), 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 13(Att. E), 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2005-01, §§ 17—19(Att. G), 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 20(Att. H), 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2005-26, § 1, 5-9-05; Ord. No. 2005-27, § 1, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 2008-33(06-O-1908), §§ 1—4, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 2008-42(08-O-0880), § 2, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2008-43(08-O-0881), § 2, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2008-44(08-O-0874), § 2, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2008-45(08-O-1001), § 2, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2008-46(08-O-0872), § 3, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2008-47(08-O-0882), § 2, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2008-48(08-O-1002), § 3, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2008-50(08-O-0875), § 2, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2008-51(08-O-0876), § 1, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2008-72(08-O-0877), §§ 10, 12, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 2008-74(08-O-1220), § 3, 9-8-08; Ord. No. 2009-32(09-O-0802), § 5, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2009-62(09-O-1807), § 1, 10-28-09; Res. No. 2010-22(10-R-0869), 5-25-10; Ord. No. 2010-29(10-O-0904), § 2, 6-30-10; Ord. No. 2010-36(10-O-0905), § 2, 6-29-10; Ord. No. 2010-39(10-O-1063), 7-15-10; Ord. No. 2010-40(10-O-0936), 7-15-10; Ord. No. 2010-31(10-O-0900), 6-30-10; Ord. No. 2010-33(10-O-0875), 6-30-10; Ord. No. 2010-51(10-O-1450), § 3, 9-16-10; Ord. No. 2011-08(11-O-0260), §§ 1, 2, 3-30-11; Ord. No. 2011-20(11-O-0793), §§ 1, 2, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 2011-24(11-O-0826), § 1(Exhs. A, B), 6-29-11; Ord. No. 2012-25(12-O-0779), § 1, 6-13-12; Ord. No. 2012-36(12-O-0713), §§ 1—10, 7-25-12; Ord. No. 2012-38(12-O-0999), 8-29-12; Ord. No. 2012-42(12-O-1068), §§ 1, 2, 9-26-12; Ord. No. 2013-01(12-O-1653), § 1, 1-16-13; Ord. No. 2013-02(12-O-0397), § 1, 1-16-13; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13; Ord. No. 2013-30(13-O-1043), § 2(Att. C), 7-10-13; Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13; Ord. No. 2015-23(15-O-1132), § 2, 5-27-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-60(15-O-1134), § 8, 11-25-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-03(15-O-1197), § 4, 2-24-16 ; Ord. No. 2016-07(15-O-1528), § 4(Exh. A), 3-30-16 ; Ord. No. 2016-11(16-O-1150), § 3, 5-11-16 ; Ord. No. 2016-36(15-O-1170) , § 2, 6-24-15; Ord. No. 2018-52(18-O-1300), § 18, 11-14-18 ) 