Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Atlanta, Georgia," or "Atlanta City Code" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1) 
Charter reference— Ordinance codification, § 2-405. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(a), (b). 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Illustrations and summaries. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between text and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
As soon as possible. "As soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(5). 
Charter. "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Atlanta, Georgia. 
City. "City" means the City of Atlanta, Georgia. 
Code. "Code" means Code of Ordinances of the City of Atlanta, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. The Code consists of two parts designated with Roman numerals. Part II is the General Ordinances (in which this section is located). Part III is the Land Development Code and consists of provisions that bear the same section numbers as the section numbers assigned to them in the city's 1977 code. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(3). 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  And indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  Or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  Either… or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
Council, city council. "Council" or "city council" means the city council of the City of Atlanta, Georgia. 
County. "County" means Fulton County, Georgia, DeKalb County, Georgia and such other counties in which the city may be located or any combination of such counties. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Following. "Following" means next after. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(8). 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(4). 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(5). 
Joint city-county board of tax assessors. All references to a joint city-county board of tax assessors are references to the Fulton County tax assessor or to such other officer or agency as performs the functions of such joint board. 
Keeper and proprietor. "Keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, whether acting by themselves or acting as a servant, agent or employee. 
May. "May" is to be construed as being permissive. 
State Law reference— Definition of "may," O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(10). 
Month. "Month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(11). 
Must. "Must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular and plural number include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(6). 
Oath. "Oath" includes an affirmation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(12). 
O.C.G.A. "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city. 
Owner. "Owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. "Person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
State Law reference— Definition of "person," O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(14). 
Personal property. "Personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
Preceding. "Preceding" means next before. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(15). 
Property. "Property" includes real and personal property. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(16). 
Public place. "Public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. "Real property" include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Sexual orientation. "Sexual orientation" means the state of being heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual. 
Shall. "Shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. "Sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. "Signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(19). 
State. "State" means the State of Georgia. 
Street or road. "Street" or "road" includes any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the city, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
Tenant or occupant. "Tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
State Law reference— Tense of words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(7). 
Week. "Week" means seven days. 
Will. "Will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. "Writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(23). 
Year. "Year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1977, § 5-6001) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(24). 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references, Charter references, related law references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. References to parts bearing Roman numerals are references to part II, General Ordinances. References to parts bearing Arabic numbers are to parts found in part III, Land Development Code. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1977, § 18-1003) 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. Repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: 
"Section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Atlanta, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: 
"The Code of Ordinances, City of Atlanta, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be, or by setting them out at length in the repealing ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 18-1006) 
Charter reference— Ordinances generally, § 2-401 et seq. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Supplementation of Code, § 2-405. 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner, except by ordinance, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented. 
(Code 1977, § 18-1007) 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, work on the public streets or on public works of the city for not more than six months, supervised home confinement for a term not to exceed six months, or any combination thereof. With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the provisions in subsection (1), in lieu of suspension, revocation or the failure to renew, the mayor may impose a fine upon any licensee holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption, such fine not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation of the alcoholic beverages licensing ordinances. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Code 1977, § 18-1008; Ord. No. 2006-45, § 1, 7-25-06; Ord. No. 2009-19(09-O-0798), § 1, 5-26-09) 
Authority of municipal judge to order persons convicted of offenses to perform work on public property, § 62-41; municipal court sentences for persons convicted of multiple offenses, § 62-42. 
Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Sec. 1-9. - Time limits on prosecutions. 
All prosecutions for violations of this Code or other city ordinances shall be commenced within two years after the violation. Any offense against this Code or those ordinances for which no prosecution begins within two years after its commission shall be barred, unless the accused shall have been beyond the limits of the city, in which case the time of absence from the city shall not be embraced or computed as within the two years. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1078) 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1977, § 18-1004) 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of the Code of the city, as amended, and ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1977, § 18-1005) 
Sec. 1-12. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - Matters not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect an ordinance: 
(1)  Amending the Charter or published in the Charter. 
(2)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Granting a right or franchise to any person. 
(4)  Dedicating, naming, defining, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(5)  Providing for an appropriation or authorizing appropriations or gifts. 
(6)  Making a special assessment. 
(7)  Dedicating or accepting a plat or subdivision. 
(8)  Rezoning property. 
(9)  Establishing salaries, compensation or benefits of city officers or city employees not in this Code. 
(10)  Approving the budget. 
(11)  Adopted for purposes that have been consummated. 
(12)  That is temporary, although general in nature. 
(13)  That is special, although permanent in nature. 
(14)  Establishing urban enterprise zones. 
(15)  Amending any act enacted by the General Assembly of the state or published in the related laws portion of this publication. 
(16)  Never codified or published in the 1977 edition of the city Code. 
(b)  As this Code consists of two parts (Part II, General Ordinances and Part III, Land Development Code) that are being adopted by separate ordinances, the adoption of part II does not repeal any provisions found in part III and the adoption of part III does not repeal any provisions found in part II. Both parts are units of this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency management agency, § 50-28. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Names of mayor and council required on publications relative to city-financed events. 
The names of the mayor, president of the council and councilmembers shall be listed on all publications and advertisements relative to affairs, events, programs or activities financed in whole or in part by city funds. 
(Code 1977, § 18-4008) 
Sec. 2-2. - Naming of public facilities and streets in honor of persons. 
No public building, park, park facility, public street, right-of-way, bridge or similar public facility shall be named after or in honor of any person, unless such person has attained the age of 75 years or has been deceased at least 30 days or such naming is a condition of a gift or grant accepted by the city. 
The city council shall not adopt any ordinance or resolution for the purpose of such naming unless it is placed on one agenda of the affected neighborhood planning unit(s), for informational purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 18-4007; Ord. No. 2001-87, §§ (1), (2), 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2002-20, § 1, 3-26-02) 
Cross reference— Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, § 22-56 et seq.; municipal cemeteries, § 38-26 et seq.; Civic Center, § 46-36 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 110; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 138. 
Land development code reference— Planning, § 6-3001 et seq. 
Sec. 2-3. - Vending machines on city property and in city facilities. 
(a)  Authority. Each department or agency head shall be authorized to install or approve the installation of machines which vend food items, beverages or other items of convenience to the city employees or members of the general public in buildings, facilities or other city property under the purview of the department or agency head. 
(b)  Disposition of proceeds from vending machines. Any net profits generated by the operation of vending machines on city property shall be distributed in the following manner: 
(1)  Net profits generated by the operation of vending machines utilized predominantly by members of the general public or equally by members of the general public and city employees shall be revenues due to the city treasury and shall be deposited into the appropriate city fund at the direction of the chief financial officer. 
(2)  Net profits generated by the operation of vending machines utilized predominantly by city employees may, at the discretion of the appropriate department or agency head, be used to fund activities which collectively benefit the employees working at the location where the machine is installed. It shall be the duty of the appropriate department or agency head to determine and ensure that any use of funds in this manner fully complies with this section. 
(3)  Net profits generated by the operation of vending machines utilized predominantly by participants in recreational programs conducted in facilities operated by the department of parks and recreation shall be used for fund activities which collectively benefit the recreation program participants. It shall be the duty of the department of parks and recreation to ensure that any use of funds in this manner fully complies with this section. 
(c)  Reports. Each department or agency head shall annually submit to the chief financial officer a report on the receipts from any vending machine from which revenue is not deposited into the city treasury, showing the gross receipts and the disposition and use of the net receipts. The chief financial officer shall annually report to the committee on finance or the council on the receipt and disposition of vending machine proceeds. 
(d)  Personal gain prohibited. The use of any funds generated by any vending machine located on city property by any city employee for personal purposes or any other personal gain by any city employee from funds generated from vending machines is prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 18-4009; Ord. No. 1997-44, § 1, 8-25-97; Ord. No. 2013-27(12-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) 
Cross reference— Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, § 22-56 et seq.; businesses, ch. 30; municipal cemeteries, § 38-26 et seq.; Civic Center, § 46-36 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 110; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 138. 
Sec. 2-4. - Self insurance and waiver of governmental immunity. 
Pursuant to the authority of 1970 Ga. Laws, pages 3207, 3208, the city elects to become a self insurer under O.C.G.A. § 33-24-51 and waives governmental immunity to the extent and in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Payments for damages because of bodily injury or death resulting therefrom to any one person or for damage to property to any one person or for both shall not exceed the total amount of $25,000.00 in any one incident or collision arising because of the ownership, maintenance, operation or use of any motor vehicle by the city under its management, control or supervision in a governmental undertaking. 
(2)  There shall be no additional or excess insurance coverage or self insurance, other than the total payment of $25,000.00 to any one person arising out of any one incident or collision, as set forth in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  The waiver of governmental immunity as to the use of motor vehicles, as set forth in subsection (1) of this section, shall not constitute in any way whatsoever the waiver of any other governmental immunity which the city may possess under the law of the state. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3017(a); Ord. No. 2000-37, § 1, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 2002-6, § 1, 3-5-02) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2002-6, approved March 5, 2002 states that the provisions of subsections 2-4(1) and (2) shall not become effective until January 1, 2003. 
Cross reference— City-owned or city-leased motorized equipment, § 2-1701 et seq. 
State Law reference— Sovereign immunity of municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-5. - Telephone services for departments. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide central coordination of telephone services for city departments. 
(b)  Duties of chief information officer, department of Atlanta Information Management. It shall be the duty of the chief information officer, department of Atlanta Information Management to: 
(1)  Ensure the provision of efficient and effective telephone services for all city departments. 
(2)  Issue rules and procedures and proscribe forms for use of departments in requesting any changes in telephone service. 
(3)  Review, approve, disapprove or modify the requests of any department for changes in telephone services. 
(4)  Submit approved requests for changes in telephone services to the chief financial officer, together with cost estimates for installation, ongoing monthly service charges and other costs as appropriate on a timely basis for efficient payment of authorized changes in telephone services. 
(5)  Coordinate with the chief financial officer to ensure that the cost of telephone services can be accounted for by the department, bureau, responsibility center and otherwise, consistent with the city's accounting systems. 
(c)  Duties of department heads. It shall be the duty of each department head to: 
(1)  Submit all requests for changes in telephone services to the chief information officer, department of Atlanta Information Management for approval. 
(2)  Cooperate with the chief information officer, department of Atlanta Information Management in complying with this section. 
(Code 1977, §§ 5-4051—5-4053; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 9, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 2, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 2-6. - Lease of city-owned houses to certain public officers and other employees; demolition or moving city-owned houses. 
(a)  Employees who are designated public officers and other employees who occupy city-owned houses shall execute a lease agreement which provides for the payment of rent in a sum approved by the council, which rent may be determined to be less than the fair market rental of the city-owned houses, under the terms and conditions of a lease agreement approved by the council. The lease agreement shall not be terminated except by approval of the council, and the lease agreement shall be renewed automatically except when the council provides otherwise. 
(b)  The director, bureau of purchasing and real estate shall determine the fair market rental value of each city-owned house which is to be leased to a public officer or other employee for consideration by the council in its determination of the amount of rent to be charged for the city-owned house. 
(c)  Upon approval by council, department heads shall be authorized to assign city-owned houses located on the premises of city plants or facilities on a rent-free or a reduced-rent basis to public officers or other employees of their departments who are charged with the responsibility for the complete operation and maintenance of such plants or facilities. Any such public officer or other employee shall be required to execute a lease of such premises, the terms of which have been approved by the council. 
(d)  All leases of city-owned houses shall require the lessee to pay for all utilities furnished to the lessee. 
(e)  Each city-owned house which is leased shall have an area of land designated as the lot on which such house is located, and the lease shall set forth the description of the lot by metes and bounds. The lessee of the house and lot shall be required by the terms of the lease to maintain the premises of the lot in a reasonably attractive condition. 
(f)  The director, bureau of purchasing and real estate shall be responsible for collecting the rentals due on city-owned property, which rentals shall be delivered to the chief financial officer for deposit in the general fund of the city. 
(g)  No city-owned house may be demolished or moved elsewhere unless approved by the council. 
(Code 1977, § 5-2019) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-781 et seq. 
Sec. 2-7. - Architectural services for construction, repair and maintenance of city buildings. 
(a)  When the head of a department desires to construct a new building, the department head may request that the city architect have prepared a set of plans and specifications with cost estimates for the building or the department head may request that help be given to the department head and the department head's staff in working with a private architect on the design of the building. 
(b)  When any building owned by the city needs an addition, alteration, repair, roofing, reroofing or painting, it shall be the duty of the head of the department having supervision of this building to notify the city architect, who shall thereupon inspect the building and prepare appropriate plans and specifications with cost estimates for the addition, alterations, repairs, roofing, reroofing or painting. 
(c)  The city architect shall furnish the director, bureau of purchasing and real estate with a complete set of plans and specifications, as needed, for the work. The city architect shall provide general supervision of the project in progress to verify contract compliance and quality control. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to school buildings. 
(Code 1977, § 8-2201) 
Sec. 2-8. - Official Town Hall meetings. 
(a)  Official Town Hall meeting means a meeting which is called by the Mayor, Council President or any member of the Atlanta City Council, other than a regular meeting of the executive or legislative branch. 
(b)  The City of Atlanta may provide city resources (funds, personnel, equipment or supplies) for official Town Hall meetings, as defined in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-08, § 1, 3-1-06) 
Sec. 2-9. - Annual training regarding state law requirements of lobbyists. 
All elected officials and employees, currently required to file disclosures of income and financial interests in accordance with section 2-814 of this chapter, shall receive annual training regarding the requirements of lobbyists under Georgia Ethics in Government Act. 
( Ord. No. 2018-51(18-O-1522), § 1, 9-25-18 ) 
Secs. 2-10—2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Legislative branch of government, art. 2. 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 66; city employees required to resign prior to filing candidacy for office of mayor, president of city council, or office of councilperson, § 114-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-36. - Council president. 
(a)  At all meetings of the full city council, the council president shall have all the powers and shall perform all the duties normally incumbent upon a presiding officer, it being the council president's primary responsibility to ensure the expeditious discharge of public responsibilities and obligations imposed upon the council by law. 
(1)  The council president shall, upon taking the chair, call the members of the council to order and, on the presence of a quorum, cause the journal of the proceedings of the last council meeting to be read for approval by the council. 
(2)  The council president shall preserve order and decorum and shall have general control of the council chamber and its appurtenances. 
(3)  The council president shall sign all ordinances, resolutions, subpoenas and other documents issued by order of the council and shall rule upon all questions of order, subject to appeal by any councilmember. 
(4)  The council president shall propound all questions to the council and shall declare the vote thereof. Whether the vote is conducted electronically, by show of hands, or any other format, in every instance the council president shall call the vote in a manner that permits the municipal clerk to record the yeas, nays, abstentions, and absences of each council member with respect to that vote. The council president shall vote only if a tie vote of the council occurs. 
(b)  The council president shall make all appointments to committees for a period of one year. 
(c)  The council president shall be authorized to compel the attendance of council members by subpoena, in such circumstances as the council president shall deem to warrant the issuance of a subpoena. The subpoena shall, when issued, be executed immediately and without delay by any officer of the council so designated in accordance with its rules or by the council president. The council president shall have the authority to levy a fine of up to $50.00 upon any councilmember who willfully fails to respond to a subpoena. 
(d)  The council president's expense accounts and appropriations shall be structured as follows: 
(1)  The chief financial officer is authorized and directed to establish within the city's standard chart of accounts, within the category of other current operating expenses, an expense account entitled "President's expense." The account shall be charged for expenses relating to official city business of the council president, to include but not be limited to business travel; convention and training; newsletter and other publication or correspondence production and distribution; office and operating supplies; service, equipment, maintenance or repair contracts; subscriptions to publications; and postage. Should the council president desire to utilize a portion of the expense account to fund projects for the public good, or to donate funds for charitable purposes, they may transfer funds within the other operating expense category from the president's expense account to the distribution account from which to fund such projects and charitable donations, which are outside the scope of regular office expenses. 
(2)  For appropriations to the council president's accounts, the council president shall be deemed to be the equivalent of a department head within the context of authority over the funds appropriated to the center designated and shall have authority to draw against and transfer among accounts within such center in conformity with this Code and administrative provisions, with the exception of the salaries permanent part-time and benefits accounts. Appropriations for salaries permanent part-time and benefits shall only be expended as compensation and benefits for council assistants and are restricted from transfer to any other account. All other expenditures within the center shall be charged against the appropriate expense account in the city's chart of accounts. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the prohibition against transferring allocations from the council president's cost center shall not apply to transfers from any line item in the council president's cost center to an operating department. 
(3)  Subsections (1) and (2) of this section notwithstanding, the chief financial officer is authorized to ensure that funds required for salary and benefit costs shall be encumbered in such accounts and that no encumbered funds so required shall be spent for any other purpose. 
(4)  If the council president incurs expenses or obligations in excess of the sums appropriated for use in any calendar year, the appropriations for the succeeding year shall be reduced by the amount of any such overage. If the council president shall not be serving in office in the succeeding year, such excess expenses or obligations shall be immediately reimbursable to the city. 
(5)  The mayor and the chief financial officer are authorized to carry forward, as appropriations payable, from one fiscal year to the next, within a four-year term of office, and from one term to the next term; unexpended funds in appropriations to the cost center established for the council president, provided said person shall serve continuous uninterrupted terms. If such person shall not be serving in office from one term to the next, any unexpended funds shall be returned to the general fund. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1001; Ord. No. 2002-42, § 2, 5-29-02; Ord. No. 2005-16, § 2, 3-2-05; Ord. No. 2006-28, § 1, 5-24-06; Ord. No. 2009-73(09-O-2033), § 1, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2014-30(14-O-1322), § 1, 7-16-14 ; Ord. No. 2018-07(18-O-1150), § 1, 3-28-18 ) 
Charter reference— Council president, § 2-201 et seq. 
Cross reference— Contingency fund for council president, § 2-924. 
Sec. 2-37. - Selection of council president pro tempore. 
The council shall select a council president pro tempore on an annual basis who shall preside in the absence of the council president. The councilmember selected to serve as council president pro tempore shall be chosen on a rotational basis based on seniority as has been the tradition. If two or more councilmembers are of equal seniority, the selection shall be made on the basis of the numerical order of the respective posts first and then districts. No councilmember shall serve a second year as council president pro tempore until all members have served at least one year. During the absence of the council president, the council president pro tempore shall discharge the duties and exercise the powers and authority of the council president. In the absence of the council president pro tempore, the council president shall appoint any member of the council to preside in the council president's absence. The councilmember so chosen shall discharge the duties and exercise the powers and authority of the council president. The member of the council presiding, whether the council president pro tempore or a member of the council appointed by the council president, shall vote on all questions before the council during the time such member is presiding. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1047; Ord. No. 1996-27, § 1, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 1999-85, § 1, 11-24-99; Ord. No. 2009-73(09-O-2033), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-37.1. - Method of filling temporary council vacancy. 
(a)  Upon it becoming necessary to fill a temporary vacancy in the office of councilmember created by the operation of state law or, as otherwise provided by law, upon it becoming necessary to appoint by majority vote a member of the council to fill a vacancy in the office of councilmember, the municipal clerk shall have advertised in a paper of general circulation an announcement of the vacancy, together with the qualifications of the office and the geographical boundaries of the district to be represented, instructions of how to apply for the vacancy and the deadline therefor. These applications shall be forwarded by the municipal clerk to the committee on the council. 
(b)  The committee on the council shall present the applications to the council at the next regular meeting after the deadline or at a specially called meeting for that purpose. Nominations may also be taken from the floor at this time from any member of council. The president or presiding officer shall then refer all such nominations to the committee on the council for review and comment for the purpose of reporting on the qualifications of such nominees, any nominee not possessing the required qualifications being automatically disqualified. 
(c)  Upon the report of the committee on the council, a vote upon the nominees shall be taken, with no further nominations being allowed from the floor. Should no nominee receive a majority, a second vote shall be conducted between the two nominees receiving the highest number of votes. The nominee receiving a majority vote shall thereby be appointed to fill the vacancy. 
(d)  The qualifications necessary to qualify for election as a councilmember, as set forth in section 2-102(a) of the Charter, shall also apply to an application for the office of councilmember under this section; however, an applicant for appointment under this section shall possess all the required residency qualifications in section 2-102(a)(2) of the Charter as of the date of filing the application for the vacancy. The oath of office shall also be the same, and the replacement official shall receive the same compensation as provided by law for such office. 
(e)  All applicants/nominees for a vacancy on the council, which position is to be filled through appointment by the council, shall file an affidavit with the municipal clerk by 12:00 noon on the date that the appointment is to take place. Said affidavit shall disclose a listing of the sources of funds the applicant has received or expended. However, if the applicant/nominee has neither received or expended more than $100.00, the applicant/nominee may file an affidavit to that effect in lieu of a listing of contributions and expenditures that are reasonably related to the applicant's application to the appointment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-73(09-O-2033), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-37.2. - Succession to the office of mayor, office of council president and position of council president pro tempore. 
(a)  Vacancy in the office of mayor. 
(1)  In the event the office of mayor shall become vacant by reason of death, resignation, or any other cause, the council president shall immediately exercise all powers and discharge all duties of the mayor as provided in section 2-203(a)(4) of the Charter for the duration of the term of office or until a special election can be conducted pursuant to the terms of section 5-103 of the Charter. 
(2)  Upon the council president exercising all powers and discharging all duties of the mayor, the council president pro tempore shall immediately exercise all powers and discharge all duties of the council president for the duration of the term of office or until a special election can be conducted pursuant to the terms of section 5-103 of the Charter. Upon the council president pro tempore exercising all powers and discharging all duties of the council president he/she shall not be entitled to also vote as a member of council. 
(3)  Upon the council president pro tempore exercising all powers and discharging all duties of the council president, the council member possessing the highest number of years seniority in terms of successive years of service on the council, shall act as the council president pro tempore. If two or more council members are of equal seniority, upon the declaration of a quorum at the next held regular or special called meeting of the council after the vacancy occurs, the names of the members with equal seniority will be placed in a lottery with a single name to be drawn by the municipal clerk or deputy municipal clerk, who will then announce the name of the acting council president pro tempore who shall serve for the remainder of the then calendar year; at which time the election of a new council president pro tempore occurs based on the natural rotation as provided in Code section 2-36(e), or for the duration of the term of office, or until a special election can be conducted pursuant to the terms of section 5-103 of the Charter, whichever occurs first. 
(4)  In the event that the council president pro tempore exercises all powers and discharges all duties of the council president, a temporary council vacancy shall occur in his/her seat which shall be filled pursuant to Code section 2-37. 
(5)  If a special election shall occur, once such special election has been conducted to fill the office of mayor and a new mayor has been elected and sworn into office, the council president shall immediately resume his/her duties as council president, the council president pro tempore shall immediately return to his/her council seat and shall resume his/her duties as council member and council president pro tempore or a new council president pro tempore shall be elected based on the natural rotation as provided in Code section 2-36(e) depending upon which point in the calendar year the special election occurs, the council member acting in the capacity of council president pro tempore shall no longer act in that capacity; and the person appointed by council to fill the temporary council vacancy caused by this succession shall no longer serve in the capacity of council member. 
(b)  Vacancy in the office of council president. 
(1)  In the event the office of council president shall become vacant by reason of death, resignation, or any other cause, the council president pro tempore shall immediately exercise all powers and discharge all duties of the council president for the duration of the term of office or until a special election can be conducted pursuant to the terms of section 5-103 of the Charter. 
(2)  Upon the council president pro tempore exercising all powers and discharging all duties of the council president, the council member possessing the highest number of years seniority in terms of successive years of service on the council, shall act as the council president pro tempore. If two or more council members are of equal seniority, upon the declaration of a quorum at the next held regular or special called meeting of the council after the vacancy occurs, the names of the members with equal seniority will be placed in a lottery with a single name to be drawn by the municipal clerk or deputy municipal clerk, who will then announce the name of the acting council president pro tempore who shall serve for the remainder of the then calendar year; at which time the election of a new council president pro tempore occurs based on the natural rotation as provided in Code section 2-36(e), or for the duration of the term of office, or until a special election can be conducted pursuant to the terms of section 5-103 of the Charter, whichever occurs first. 
(3)  In the event that the council president pro tempore exercises all powers and discharges all duties of the council president, a temporary council vacancy shall occur in his/her seat which shall be filled pursuant to Code section 2-37. 
(4)  If a special election shall occur, once such special election has been conducted to fill the office of council president and a new council president has been elected and sworn into office, the council president pro tempore exercising all powers and discharging all duties of the council president shall immediately return to his/her council seat and shall resume his/her duties as council member and as council president pro tempore or a new council president pro tempore shall be elected based on the natural rotation as provided in Code section 2-36(e) depending upon which point in the calendar year the special election occurs; the council member acting in the capacity of council president pro tempore shall no longer act in that capacity; and the person appointed by council to fill the temporary council vacancy caused by this succession shall no longer serve in the capacity of council member. 
(c)  Vacancy in the position of council president pro tempore. 
(1)  In the event that the position of council president pro tempore shall become vacant by reason of death, resignation, or any other cause, the council member possessing the highest number of years seniority in terms of successive years of service on the council, shall act as the council president pro tempore. If two or more council members are of equal seniority, upon the declaration of a quorum at the next held regular or special called meeting of the council after the vacancy occurs, the names of the members with equal seniority will be placed in a lottery with a single name to be drawn by the municipal clerk or deputy municipal clerk, who will then announce the name of the acting council president pro tempore who shall serve for the remainder of the then calendar year, at which time the election of a new council president pro tempore occurs based on the natural rotation. 
(d)  Vacancy in both the office of mayor and council president. 
(1)  In the event the office of both mayor and council president shall become vacant by reason of death, resignation, or any other cause, the council president pro tempore shall immediately exercise all powers and discharge all duties of the mayor for the duration of the term of office or until a special election can be conducted pursuant to the terms of section 5-103 of the Charter. 
(2)  Upon the council president pro tempore exercising all powers and discharging all duties of the mayor, the council member possessing the highest number of years seniority in terms of successive years of service on the council, shall exercise the powers and discharge all duties of the council president. If two or more council members are of equal seniority, upon the declaration of a quorum at the next held regular or special called meeting of the Council after the vacancy occurs, the names of the members with equal seniority will be placed in a lottery with a single name to be drawn by the municipal clerk or deputy municipal clerk, who will then announce the name of the council member who shall exercise all powers and discharge all duties of the council president and who shall serve for the duration of the term of office or until a special election can be conducted pursuant to the terms of section 5-103 of the Charter. 
(3)  The council member possessing the second highest number of years seniority in terms of successive years of service on the council, shall act as council president pro tempore. If two or more council members are of equal seniority, upon the declaration of a quorum at the next held regular or special called meeting of the council after the vacancy occurs, the names of the members with equal seniority will be placed in a lottery with a single name to be drawn by the municipal clerk or deputy municipal clerk, who will then announce the name of the acting council president pro tempore who shall serve for the remainder of the then calendar year, at which time the election of a new council president pro tempore occurs based on the natural rotation, as provided in Code section 2-36(e), or for the duration of the term of office or until a special election can be conducted pursuant to the terms of section 5-103 of the Charter, whichever occurs first. 
(4)  In the event that the council president pro tempore exercises all powers and discharges all duties of the mayor, and a council person exercises all powers and discharges all duties of the council president, temporary council vacancies shall occur in their seats which shall be filled pursuant to Code section 2-37. 
(5)  If a special election shall occur, once such special election has been conducted to fill the office of mayor and council president and a new mayor and council president have been elected and sworn into office, the council president pro tempore exercising all powers and discharging all duties of the mayor shall immediately return to his/her council seat and shall resume his/her duties as council member and council president pro tempore or a new council president pro tempore shall be elected based on the natural rotation as provided in Code section 2-36(e) depending upon which point in the calendar year the special election occurs; the council member exercising all powers and discharging all duties of the council president shall immediately return to his/her council seat and shall resume his/her duties as council member; the council member acting in the capacity of council president pro tempore shall no longer act in that capacity; and the persons appointed by council to fill the temporary council vacancy caused by this succession shall no longer serve in the capacity of council member. 
(e)  Vacancy in the office of mayor, office of council president and position of council president pro tempore. 
(1)  In the event the office of mayor, office of council president and the position of council president pro tempore shall become vacant by reason of death, resignation, or any other cause; 
a.  The council member possessing the highest number of years seniority in terms of successive years of service on the council, shall immediately exercise all powers and discharge all duties of the mayor. If two or more council members are of equal seniority, upon the declaration of a quorum at the next held regular or special called meeting of the council after the vacancy occurs, the names of the members with equal seniority will be placed in a lottery with a single name to be drawn by the municipal clerk or deputy municipal clerk, who will then announce the name of the council member to exercise all powers and discharge all duties of the mayor who will then announce the name of the mayor and who shall serve for the duration of the term of office or until a special election can be conducted pursuant to the terms of section 5-103 of the Charter. 
b.  The council member possessing the second highest number of years seniority in terms of successive years of service on the council, shall immediately exercise all powers and discharge all duties of the council president. If two or more council members are of equal seniority, upon the declaration of a quorum at the next held regular or special called meeting of the council after the vacancy occurs, the names of the members with equal seniority will be placed in a lottery with a single name to be drawn by the municipal clerk or deputy municipal clerk, who will then announce the name of the council member who shall exercise all powers and discharge all duties of the council president and who shall serve for the duration of the term of office or until a special election can be conducted pursuant to the terms of section 5-103 of the Charter. 
c.  The councilmember possessing the third highest number of years of seniority in terms of successive years of service on the council, shall act as the council president pro tempore. If two or more council members are of equal seniority, upon the declaration of a quorum at the next held regular or special called meeting of the council after the vacancy occurs, the names of the members with equal seniority will be placed in a lottery with a single name to be drawn by the municipal clerk or deputy municipal clerk, who will then announce the name of the acting council president pro tempore who shall serve for the remainder of the then calendar year, at which time the election of a new council president pro tempore occurs based on the natural rotation, as provided in Code section 2-36(e), or for the duration of the term of office or until a special election can be conducted pursuant to the terms of section 5-103 of the Charter, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  In the event that a council member exercises all powers and discharges all duties of the mayor and a council member exercises all powers and discharge all duties of the council president, temporary council vacancies shall occur in their seats which shall be filled pursuant to Code section 2-37. 
(3)  If a special election shall occur, once such special election has been conducted to fill the office of mayor and council president and a new mayor and council president have been elected and sworn into office, the council member exercising the powers and discharging the duties of the mayor shall immediately return to his/her council seat and shall resume his/her duties as council member; the council member exercising the powers and discharging the duties of the council president shall immediately return to his/her council seat and shall resume his/her duties as council member; the council member acting in the capacity of council president pro tempore shall either continue to act in that capacity or a new council president pro tempore shall be elected based on the natural rotation as provided in Code section 2-36(e) depending upon which point in the calendar year the special election occurs; and the persons appointed by council to fill the temporary council vacancies caused by this succession shall no longer serve in the capacity of council member. 
(Ord. No. 2008-89(08-O-2270), § 1, 12-9-08; Ord. No. 2009-73(09-O-2033), § 2, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-38. - Confirmation of appointments by mayor. 
All appointments made by the mayor which by law must be confirmed by the council shall be referred both to the committee on the council and to the other appropriate standing committee of the council for review and report at the next regular council meeting. However, by two-thirds vote of the councilmembers, the council may vote to consider the appointment at the same meeting at which it is introduced. Action on the appointment shall only require a simple majority vote. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1044; Ord. No. 1999-85, § 2, 11-24-99; Ord. No. 2006-31, § 1, 5-18-06) 
Sec. 2-39. - Councilmember expense accounts; council district appropriations; funding. 
(a)  The chief financial officer is authorized and directed to establish within the city's standard chart of accounts, within the category of other current operating expenses, an expense account entitled "councilmember expense." The account shall be charged for expenses relating to official city business of the councilmember, to include but not be limited to business travel; convention and training; newsletter and other publication or correspondence production and distribution; office and operating supplies; service, maintenance or repair contracts; and subscriptions to publications. Should councilmembers desire to utilize a portion of their expense accounts to fund projects for the public good within their districts or city wide or to donate funds for charitable purposes, they may transfer funds within the other operating expense category from the councilmember expense account to the distribution account from which to fund such projects and charitable donations, which are outside the scope of regular office expenses. At-large councilmembers may utilize funds from said account for projects and donations in any district within the city. 
(b)  For appropriations to each council district and post, the respective councilmember representing the district or post shall be deemed to be the equivalent of a department head within the context of authority over the funds appropriated to the center designated for the district or post and shall have authority to draw against and transfer among accounts within such center in conformity with this Code and administrative provisions, with the exception of the salaries permanent part-time and benefits accounts. During any fiscal year appropriations for salaries permanent part-time and benefits shall only be expended as compensation and benefits for council assistants and are restricted from transfer to any other account. All other expenditures within the center shall be charged against the appropriate expense account in the city's chart of accounts. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the prohibition against transferring allocations from a councilmember's cost center shall not apply to transfers from any line item in that councilmember's cost center to an operating department. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) of this section notwithstanding, the chief financial officer is authorized to ensure that funds required for salary and benefit costs shall be encumbered in such accounts and that no encumbered funds so required shall be spent for any other purpose, except that at the end of the fiscal year at which time any salary and benefit surplus or any other unexpended budget category shall be transferred to the councilmember's budget carry-forward account. 
(d)  If any councilmember incurs expenses or obligations in excess of the sums appropriated for the member's use in any calendar year, the overage will be covered by amounts held in that councilmember's carry-forward balance. The overage in the expense account will be covered by ordinance with a transfer of appropriations from the carry-forward to the council member expense account. In the event the carry-forward balance is not sufficient to cover the overage, the appropriations for such councilmember for the succeeding year shall be reduced by the amount of any such overage. If such councilmember shall not be serving in office in the succeeding year, such excess expenses or obligations shall be immediately reimbursable to the city. 
(e)  During election year council members shall not incur expenses and obligations for the first half of the fiscal year in excess of the sum of 50 percent of the budget appropriations. Councilmembers shall be authorized the use of 100 percent of funds in the individual council member carry forward account during this period. The restriction shall not apply to returning council members after election date or run-off date. 
(f)  The mayor and chief financial officer are authorized to carry forward, as appropriations payable, from one fiscal year to the next, and from one term to the next term, unexpended funds in appropriations to the cost centers established for individual councilmembers who serve continuous uninterrupted terms. If such councilmember shall not be serving in office from one term to the next, any unexpended funds shall be returned to the general fund. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1061(f)—(j); Ord. No. 2000-38, 6-28-00; Ord. No. 2001-54, § 1, 7-25-01; Ord. No. 2005-16, § 1, 3-2-05; Ord. No. 2013-21(13-O-1027), § 2, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2014-30(14-O-1322), § 1, 7-16-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-41(14-O-1446), §§ 1, 2, 9-24-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-42(15-O-1316), § 1, 8-26-15 ; Ord. No. 2017-49(17-O-1452), § 1, 8-30-17 ) 
Sec. 2-40. - Petitions to initiate legislation. 
When petitions for initiating legislation are prepared, they shall be filed in the office of the municipal clerk. Any person desiring to sign this petition shall sign it in that office, in the presence of the clerk or the clerk's deputy, and shall take the oath of a voter, in the form prescribed by law, and shall present a tax receipt showing such person's taxes to be paid for the previous year or make a showing that such person is not subject to taxation. Petitions otherwise prepared shall not be considered as complying with this section or with the Charter and related state laws. 
(Code 1977, § 1-2010) 
Charter reference— Initiative and referendum, § 2-501. 
Cross reference— Initiative, referendum and recall, § 66-36 et seq. 
Sec. 2-41. - Proclamations and citations. 
The council or any committee of the council shall be authorized to issue proclamations, declare special days and present citations on behalf of the council and any committees of the council. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1048) 
Sec. 2-42. - Reimbursement of convention, training, and travel and other expenses for councilmembers and staff. 
(a)  Members of the council, employees of the council staff and municipal clerk who attend conferences or conventions, or general business meetings representing the city in an official capacity shall be reimbursed for all or a portion of the expenses incurred in connection therewith in an amount not to exceed the costs as follows: 
(1)  Cost of hotel or lodging accommodation expenses incurred per person for each day of the conference or convention being attended or for each day of the business trip being attended in an amount not to exceed the lodging rate for the primary destination as noted on the General Services Administration (GSA) website (www.gsa.gov/perdiem) or designated convention, conference or training hotel rate for the city being visited; 
(2)  All registration fees; 
(3)  Cost of coach air fare, or at the discretion of the councilmember business class, or other common public transportation by the most direct route from the city to the city where the convention, conference, training or the business is being transacted. 
(4)  Meals and incidental expenses for the primary destination as noted on the GSA website (www.gsa.gov/perdiem) to be applied for each full day of the convention, conference, training or the business being transacted; and 
(5)  Meals and incidental expenses for the first and last day of travel will be reimbursed at 75 percent of the rate noted above (Subpart B Section 301-11.101 of the GSA code). 
(6)  Taxi or commuter bus fares between the airport or station and your hotel and between the hotel and your business meeting place are reimbursable if a printed receipt is provided in accordance to the City of Atlanta's Travel & Expense Reimbursement Policy. 
(7)  If a privately owned vehicle (POV) is utilized in lieu of travel by air or other common carrier, the reimbursement mileage rate for privately owned vehicles shall be consistent with the rate set by GSA (www.gsa.gov POV Mileage Reimbursement Rates) . This reimbursement must be supported by odometer readings, printed digital driving maps or other mileage tracking system reports in accordance to the City of Atlanta's Reimbursement Policy. 
(8)  If a POV is not available and it is more economical than travel by air or other common carrier, a compact or smaller rental car may be utilized for travel. Requests for a rental car must be approved by the councilmember, council staff director or municipal clerk in the case of requests by council staff or employees of the municipal clerk. 
(b)  Requests for convention, training or travel expenses shall be pre-approved by the councilmember, council staff director or by the municipal clerk, in the case of requests by council staff or employees of the municipal clerk, and travel bookings must be completed using the City of Atlanta's Travel Portal in accordance to the City of Atlanta's Travel and Expense Reimbursement Policy. 
(c)  An itemized expense account (I-Expense) shall be prepared by the councilmember or staff employee attending the meeting or convention, within seven days of the return of the councilmember or staff member from the meeting or convention or business trip in accordance to the City of Atlanta's Travel and Expense Reimbursement Policy. 
(d)  It is specifically declared that the reimbursement of expenses, to the amount set forth in this section, incurred by councilmembers or staff when attending various meetings and conventions outside the city in an official capacity is in no way intended to be any form of compensation to that councilmember or staff employee, as long as the reimbursement does not exceed the amount authorized by GSA. 
(e)  Members of the council, employees of the council staff and municipal clerk will be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenditures incurred while performing official business of the city. Official business shall be defined as when a city official or employee acts in an official capacity to perform official duties on behalf of the city. The city's official business does not include an activity or event done solely for the personal benefit of an individual official or employee, such as a political campaign activity, a private business transaction, or an event sponsored by a private, social or non-city group. 
Allowable expenses include: 
Communicating with representatives of local, regional, state and national governments on City of Atlanta adopted policy positions 
Participating in local, regional, state and national organizations whose activities affect the City of Atlanta interest 
Recognizing service to the City of Atlanta 
Membership dues are not an authorized expenditure except for memberships in those governmental associations, professional organizations and/or certifications in which the City's memberships extends to its officials such as the National League of Cities, the Georgia Municipal Association and committees, caucuses and constituent groups of those associations. 
(f)  Acceptable receipts include: 1) Original receipts, which include vendor name, location, date and dollar amount, 2) copy of credit card itemized receipt or credit/debit card billing statement, 3) electronic ticket receipt. 
Unacceptable receipts include those from a "receipt or guest book" or handmade receipts. 
(g)  Charitable contributions are not a reimbursable expense. If donations need to be made to a qualified organization for a valid business purpose, they must be processed as a payment directly to the third party through Accounts Payable. Donations made on behalf of position with the City of Atlanta must be requested through Accounts Payable as a disbursement request for donation to be paid on COA check stock. The public purpose must be documented on the disbursement request. At no time should charitable contributions be made directly to a third party nonprofit organization. 
The Internal Revenue Service defines qualified organizations as nonprofit groups that are religious, charitable, educational, scientific, or literary in purpose, or that work to prevent cruelty to children or animals. 
(h)  The chief financial officer is responsible for establishing policies and procedures regarding City of Atlanta Travel and Expense Reimbursements in accordance with IRS Publication 463. These Policies and Procedures (P&P) will be posted online on the city website along with links to appropriate GSA websites. This P&P will be the primary guide for members of the council, employees of the council staff and municipal clerk to adhere to regarding travel, training and expenses reimbursements. The chief financial officer will ensure that the document is up to date with the latest policy or regulation changes per IRS regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 1-2034; Ord. No. 2007-10 (07-O-0273), § 1, 3-14-07) 
Sec. 2-43. - Display of flags. 
The flags of the United States, the State of Georgia and the city shall be prominently displayed in the council chambers. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1015; Ord. No. 02001-15, § 1, 2-14-01; Ord. No. 2017-66(17-O-1642), § 1, 11-6-17 ) 
Sec. 2-44. - Authorization to employ legal counsel or auditors; selection process. 
The council may employ, by contract, either outside legal counsel, or outside financial auditors, or both, for the purpose of fulfilling its obligation of legislative oversight. The process of choosing either legal counsel or auditors shall be as follows: The president of the council, the city attorney and the chair of the committee on finance shall recommend to the council outside legal counsel or financial auditors or the specific assignment, which shall select such legal counsel or financial auditors by majority vote. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1071) 
Sec. 2-45. - Establishment or change in fees; notice to public. 
(a)  The city council shall not adopt any ordinance or resolution, the purpose of which is to establish a new fee, or charge, or to increase the amount of any existing fee, or charge unless and until all of the following procedures have been performed: 
(1)  A notice of pending legislation establishing any such fee or fee change has been published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation not less than 30 days prior to final council action pertaining to any such fee or fee change. 
(2)  The public shall have a period of not less than 45 days after the introduction of any legislation proposing any such new fee or fee change, to submit written comments to the council c/o the municipal clerk. 
(3)  The appropriate standing committee of the council shall hold at least one public hearing regarding legislation proposing any such new fee or fee change. 
(4)  Written notice of legislation proposing any such new fee, or charge or to increase the amount of any existing fee, or charge may be provided, for information purposes only, to the Atlanta Planning Advisory Board (APAB) and each neighborhood planning unit (NPU) neighborhood organizations within 45 days after the introduction of any such legislation. Written notice of any such proposed new fee, or charge or increase in any such fee, or charge, may be placed on each NPU agenda for information purposes only. 
(b)  Any legislation establishing or changing a fee in violation of subsection (a) above shall be void. 
(c)  This section shall not be applicable to any service fees related to the operation of the airport. 
(Ord. No. 2000-22, § 1, 4-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-19, §§ 1, 2, 3-12-02; Ord. No. 2009-45(09-O-1201), § 2, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 2013-34(13-O-1185), §§ 1, 2, 7-24-13) 
Note— Formerly § 2-105. 
Sec. 2-46. - Council notification of transportation endorsement requests. 
(a)  Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  "Formal endorsement" is defined as the provision by the city of a verbal/written endorsement of a project and/or the undertaking of the solicitation of funding for a project. 
(2)  "Project endorsement" is defined as any request made by a governmental, quasi-governmental agency, or organization with taxing authority that asks for a formal endorsement of a transportation project or initiative. 
(3)  "Transportation project" is defined as a project, relating to both road and transit, which impacts the City of Atlanta either directly by being located in the city or indirectly by being outside the borders of the city. 
(b)  The council shall be notified in writing of all transportation Projects which seek the City of Atlanta's formal endorsement, as well as any funding requests relating to such transportation projects. 
(c)  Within 30 days of notification of any request for endorsement of transportation projects in excess of $1,000,000.00 the council shall consider the request for endorsement and issue its written recommendation to the mayor. 
(d)  The mayor may consider the council's written recommendation and retains the right to issue an endorsement on behalf of the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2005-18, § 1, 3-30-05) 
Sec. 2-47. - Director of council staff; municipal clerk. 
The director of council staff and the municipal clerk shall be responsible to the council. Each councilmember shall have equal access and equal authority with respect to the duties and responsibilities of the director of council staff and the municipal clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2006-32, § 1, 5-24-06) 
Sec. 2-48. - Use and assignment of the city council chamber and the council committee rooms. 
(a)  Any group or organization must receive permission from the office of the president of council to use the council chamber. No use of the council chamber shall be allowed at the time scheduled for regular or special council meetings. 
(b)  The priority of the use and assignment of the council chamber and the committee rooms shall be as follows: 
(1)  All standing committees of council; 
(2)  Individual council members; 
(3)  All city boards and commissions; 
(4)  City departments or community organizations; and 
(5)  Any general city staff for meetings or events. 
(Ord. No. 2010-64(10-O-1910), § 1, 11-24-10) 
Sec. 2-49. - Assignment of council member offices. 
(a)  Assignment of space. In the event that a general election, run-off election, special election or required appointment by council result in council member office space to become available: 
The director of council staff shall deliver to each council member, a notice of office availability. The notice shall request each council member to respond within one week whether they wish to be considered for assignment to newly available office space. Those seeking reassignment shall indicate her/his office space priorities depending on the number of offices available. 
Assignment to newly available office space shall be determined by seniority based upon continuous years of service, without interruption. In the event council members have equal years of uninterrupted service, the director shall have council members draw lots to break the tie. 
(b)  Vacating council member offices. All city property including but not limited to, office machines, equipment, communication devices, office supplies, decorations, keys, parking and garage cards and badges, digital and paper files, books, reports and other records, shall remain and continue to be assigned to the district or post regardless of office assignment. Vacating council members shall be personally liable for any missing items and shall return the items or reimburse the city for the replacement costs. 
Furniture, flat screen televisions, and other items shall remain in the office in which the councilmember is vacating. Furniture, flat screen televisions, and other items paid from a councilmember's district expense and/or carry-forward accounts or personal funds may be moved to the newly assigned office space. 
(Ord. No. 2010-63(10-O-1909), § 1, 11-24-10; Ord. No. 2014-42(14-O-1447), § 1, 9-24-14 ; Ord. No. 2016-13(16-O-1210), § 1, 5-25-16 ) 
Sec. 2-50. - Report of lobbying violations. 
During any public meeting provided for in this article, a member of council who believes that a violation of state law applicable to persons required to register as a lobbyist has occurred during such person's activity to promote or oppose the passage of any ordinance or resolution by the Atlanta City Council, may direct the municipal clerk to prepare a written complaint with the Georgia Government Transparency and Campaign Finance Commission, or the appropriate successor agency of the state, to be executed by the member to be verified under oath in accordance with state law. Failure to file a report as described in this section shall not be a violation of this ordinance or the city's Code of Ethics. 
( Ord. No. 2018-42(18-O-1457), § 1, 9-26-18 ) 
Secs. 2-51—2-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Council meetings generally, §§ 2-302, 2-303. 
State Law reference— Open meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 

Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 2-66. - Regular meetings. 
The council shall hold regular meetings at 1:00 p.m. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1011; Ord. No. 1998-3, § 1, 2-10-98) 
Charter reference— Meeting dates, § 2-303. 
Sec. 2-67. - Special meetings. 
Special meetings of the council may be called by the president at such times and upon such notice as the president shall deem sufficient. In addition, upon receipt by the president of a written demand signed by not less than seven members of the council requesting a special meeting, the president shall set the time for holding such a special meeting, and the meeting shall be held within five days from the date of receipt by the president of such written demand. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1012) 
Charter reference— Council rules to provide for calling of special meetings, § 2-303(a). 
Sec. 2-68. - Places where meetings held. 
(a)  All meetings of the council shall be in the council chamber at city hall, unless otherwise provided by written resolution of the council specifying the time and place. Such resolution shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least 48 hours prior to the time of convening such meeting. 
(b)  All meetings of the committees of the council shall be held in the council chamber or in one of the committee rooms provided to the council at city hall. However, any committee may hold committee meetings or hearings at locations outside city hall, provided notice of the meetings is given in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1013) 
Sec. 2-69. - Quorum; vote required for passage of legislation. 
A majority of councilmembers then constituting the membership of the Atlanta City Council, not including the president, shall constitute a quorum. The vote of a majority of the councilmembers then constituting the membership of the Atlanta City Council shall be required for passage of ordinances, resolutions and matters of parliamentary procedure; the abstention of any member shall not be counted as a vote for either side of the matter at issue. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1014; Ord. No. 1999-85, § 3, 11-24-99) 
Charter reference— Designation of meeting place required, § 2-303(a). 
State Law reference— Designation of place of meeting required, O.C.G.A. § 5-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-70. - Use of cell phones or other electronic communication devices at meetings. 
Cellular telephones or other electronic communication devices used in council committee rooms or the council chamber during meetings, public hearings, work sessions or other gatherings where council business is being conducted shall be set to vibrating signals or signals that-are not audible or turned off. The presiding officer of each committee and council meeting, shall, at the beginning of said meeting, make the appropriate announcement. Signs indicating such requirement shall be posted outside the meeting rooms. 
(Ord. No. 2010-65(10-O-1911), § 1, 11-24-10) 
Secs. 2-71—2-90. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Rules of Procedure[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Council rules, § 2-302. 

Sec. 2-91. - Conflicts of interest. 
It is the intent and purpose of this section that every effort be made by the council and by each of its members to avoid any conflict of interest, either real or apparent. No member shall knowingly cast a vote upon any measure before the council wherein the outcome of such measure would affect, either directly or indirectly, any financial interest on the member's part or on the part of any of the member's immediate family. For the purposes of this section, the term "immediate family" shall include the spouse, domestic partner registered under section 94-133, mother, father, sister, brother, and natural or adopted children of an official or employee. It is incumbent upon every member to resolve all questions of conflict in favor of the avoidance of that conflict or apparent conflict. Accordingly, whenever a member shall be in doubt as to whether participation in any measure would constitute a conflict of interest, it shall be incumbent upon the member to first advise the council as to the entire circumstances thereof and to abide by the determination of the council by majority vote as to whether or not the member, under this subdivision, shall participate in this measure. Any member who violates this section shall be subject to censure by the members of the council. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1031; Ord. No. 2006-50, § 1, 7-25-06; Ord. No. 2009-22(09-O-0923), § 1, 6-9-09) 
State Law reference— Voting upon questions by interested councilmembers, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-6; sale of city property to city officer or employee, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6. 
Sec. 2-92. - Legislative power. 
All power of the legislative branch is vested in the council, except only those powers conferred upon the president by law or by rule of the council. Any act or determination of the president not otherwise conferred by law or rule of the council upon the president shall be subject to the will of the council. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1032) 
Sec. 2-93. - Suspension of rules. 
No rule of procedure of the council shall be suspended except by the vote of two-thirds of the councilmembers then constituting the membership of the Atlanta City Council. Upon a motion to suspend the rules, the question shall immediately and without debate be put to the council for vote. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1038(a); Ord. No. 1999-85, § 4, 11-24-99) 
Sec. 2-94. - Use of Robert's Rules of Order. 
Except as otherwise provided by this division, the proceedings of the council shall be governed by parliamentary proceedings, as set forth in the most current revised edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1042; Ord. No. 2006-27, § 1, 5-24-06) 
Sec. 2-95. - Voting by chair of standing committee. 
The chair of every standing committee of the council shall have the right to vote on all issues before the committee, except as otherwise prohibited by this subdivision. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1043) 
Sec. 2-96. - Presence at meetings; voting on questions. 
(a)  Each member of the council shall be present within the chambers of the council during the entirety of each meeting of the council, unless excused or necessarily prevented from being in attendance. Should a member of the council arrive at the meeting after the roll call has been tallied and reported, it is incumbent upon that member to officially declare, for the record, the member's presence at the meeting to the president of council. 
(b)  Each member shall vote on each question put before the council unless prevented from doing so by the member's compliance with section 2-813 of this Code. The abstention of any member shall not count as a vote for either side of any issue. No member may fulfill the member's obligation to cast a vote on each question put before the council by stating "present." 
(c)  The affirmative vote of a quorum of the councilmembers then constituting the membership of the Atlanta City Council shall be required for the passage of any ordinance, resolution or other city council legislation. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1033; Ord. No. 1999-85, § 5, 11-24-99) 
Sec. 2-97. - Order of business. 
The order of business for each meeting of the council shall be as follows in the order presented: 
(1)  The call to order; 
(2)  The determination of a quorum by roll call; 
(3)  The adoption of the agenda of the day; 
(4)  The invocation; 
(5)  Pledge [of] allegiance; 
(6)  Proclamations, commendations and other special awards; 
(7)  Remarks by the public; 
(8)  The reading and approval of the journal; 
(9)  The reading of communications; 
(10)  The consideration of any legislation vetoed by the mayor; 
(11)  Unfinished business; 
(12)  Consideration of the consent agenda; 
(13)  Reports of standing committees; 
(14)  Personal papers/resolutions for immediate consideration; 
(15)  Personal papers and general remarks. During the period reserved for general remarks, any councilmember may introduce before the council any resolution or ordinance, regardless of whether the resolution or ordinance was included on the agenda for the meeting or not; and 
(16)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1034; Ord. No. 1996-34, § 1, 6-12-96; Ord. No. 1996-56, § 1, 8-12-96; Ord. No. 2000-46, 7-26-00; Ord. No. 2006-37, § 1, 6-14-06; Ord. No. 2019-16(19-O-1037), § 2, 2-13-19 ) 
Sec. 2-98. - Consent agenda. 
(a)  There shall be developed before each regular meeting of the city council, by the committee chairperson in conjunction with the municipal clerk and the appropriate staff person of the various committees, a consent agenda. The consent agenda shall be made a part of the regular agenda and shall be considered a part thereof. 
(b)  The consent agenda shall include all routine items from the standing committees. These items must have a unanimous vote without abstention from any and all committees to which they were referred and the committee of its origin. The consideration of legislation on the consent agenda may be adopted with one motion, which shall be a roll call vote. 
(c)  Any member wishing to vote no or to abstain on a certain item should ask for the member's vote to be recorded as such during the roll call vote. 
(d)  The consent agenda portion of the printed agenda shall be preceded by an explanatory note which shall read as follows: 
"All matters listed on the consent agenda are considered to be routine by the city council and will be enacted by one motion. There will be no separate discussion of these items. If discussion of any item is desired, the item will be removed from the consent agenda and will be considered separately." 
(e)  Items listed on the consent agenda shall be grouped first in accordance to the committee acting last on the legislation. Items shall be grouped secondly according to their designation as a resolution or an ordinance. 
(f)  Also included as a part of the consent agenda shall be legislation on first reading emanating from committees. This section of the consent agenda shall be grouped according to the committee from which it came and a notation on the consent agenda as to which committee the legislation should be referred. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1034.1; Ord. No. 2006-39, § 1, 6-14-06) 
Sec. 2-99. - Motion to reconsider. 
Any one member of the council may give notice of a motion to reconsider any vote, resolution or ordinance having for its object the increase of the indebtedness of the city, the expenditure of the city moneys, authorizing the sale of any part of the public property of the city or the granting of any franchise where the streets or public alleys are to be used for any purpose in the prosecution of the business of the applicant seeking the franchise. The notice shall operate to delay the question until this motion can be acted upon at the next regular or special meeting. In all other cases, a motion to reconsider any of the proceedings of the council shall not be entertained unless made by a member who previously voted with the prevailing side. A motion to reconsider at the same meeting matters other than those specified in this section shall have precedence over a motion to reconsider and to delay until a subsequent meeting. After the vote count has been announced on any issue by the president of the council, members of the council are prohibited from changing their votes unless proper procedures for reconsideration of a vote are followed. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1035) 
Sec. 2-99.1 - Motion to hold in the breast of council. 
A motion to hold in the breast of council (referred to in Robert's Rules of Order as a motion to lay on the table) is not debatable and shall act to postpone consideration of a measure at the council meeting at which the motion is made. Such a measure may be removed from the table by proper motion at any time during said same council meeting, and if not so removed, such measure shall be removed from the table and acted upon by the council through a motion to adopt, adverse, file, confirm or refer back to the appropriate committee prior to the adjournment of the next regular or special council meeting; provided however, by two-thirds vote of the total membership of the council, the measure may continue to be held in the breast of council until removed from the table by proper motion and acted upon by the council through a motion to adopt, adverse, file, confirm or refer back to the appropriate committee, at a subsequent regular or special meeting of the council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-74(09-O-2032), § 1, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2010-12(10-O-0498), § 1, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 2-100. - Precedence of questions of privilege. 
Questions of privilege shall have precedence over all other questions before the council, except motions to adjourn, and shall include questions affecting the rights of the council collectively and the rights and conduct of members individually in their representative capacity only. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1036) 
Sec. 2-101. - Debate. 
(a)  No councilmember shall speak more than ten minutes on the question under debate, except by a majority vote of the members of the council present and voting, nor shall a councilmember speak more than once on the same question until all who wish to speak have had the opportunity to do so. 
(b)  A motion to refer to committee shall take precedence over all other motions. 
(c)  Any member shall be granted two minutes in which to explain any vote which he/she may cast during the meeting of council. 
(d)  In all meetings of the council, each member before speaking shall raise his or her hand to address the chair and state the reason for seeking recognition. When recognized by the chair, the speaker shall confine remarks to the question under debate and shall avoid all personal or indecorous language. No member shall interrupt another while speaking, except to call for a point of order, the point to be briefly stated to the presiding officer, or to ask a question for information only. 
(e)  No person not a member of the council shall speak on any matter pending before the council without a 2/3 majority vote of the members. 
(f)  The municipal clerk shall be the timekeeper for the enforcement of the time limit set on each member in subsection (a) of this section. If any member is interrupted during the member's presentation, the time of such interruption shall be deducted from the total time allotted to the member in this section. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1037; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1, 5-24-06; Ord. No. 2006-38, §§ 1, 2, 6-14-06; Ord. No. 2009-23(09-O-0924), § 1, 6-10-09) 
Sec. 2-102. - Vote taken viva voce in all elections. 
In all elections by the council the vote may be taken viva voce on the call of the roll by the municipal clerk and shall be entered on the minutes of the council. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1039; Ord. No. 2006-29, § 1, 5-18-06) 
Sec. 2-103. - Hearings and investigations. 
The council or any committee composed entirely of councilmembers to which the power of subpoena is specifically granted by the council shall be authorized to conduct hearings and investigations into the operations and affairs of the city or of any office, department or agency of the city. For such purposes the council or that committee shall have the power by subpoena to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents or other evidence at any meeting of the council or committee. The subpoena, if issued by the president on the president's own motion or by the council as a whole, shall be signed by the president. If the subpoena is issued by any committee having the power of subpoena, the subpoena shall be signed by the chair of the committee. The failure to obey the lawful command of a subpoena issued under this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1041) 
Sec. 2-104. - Remarks from public. 
(a)  The council shall only hear remarks from those individuals who sign up to speak prior to the convening of each regularly scheduled council meeting. The sign-up sheets or speaker cards will be made available to the public, by the municipal clerk, at the entrance of the council chambers or other authorized meeting location 30 minutes prior to the scheduled council meeting time; and sign up will terminate upon the convening of each meeting with the lists or cards delivered to the presiding officer at that time. Members of the public shall be allowed to speak for a maximum of two minutes. Currently serving elected officials shall be allowed to speak for a maximum of ten minutes. Former elected officials shall be allowed to speak for a maximum of six minutes. 
Any individual may speak to the council on matters of public concern, including matters of general policy, efficiency and the conduct of city government, provided that the president may rule out of order personal, abusive or indecorous language, or matters that the city has no purview over. No person shall cede his/her time to another person who has not previously signed up to speak. However, a speaker may yield his/her time to another speaker on the list; provided that the person to whom time has been yielded may be placed at the end of the speakers' list; and provided that no speaker to whom time has been yielded shall speak for more than ten minutes. 
(b)  The presiding officer of the city council is hereby authorized to disallow members of the public from attendance at two future meetings of the city council under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where the person has previously engaged in inappropriate, unseemly, obstructive behavior causing the presiding officer of the city council to remove the person from two consecutive city council meetings; or 
(2)  Where the person engages in behavior so extremely hostile and rancorous that the announced purpose of the meeting is frustrated. 
(c)  Upon a finding that the penalty in subsection (a) of this section shall be imposed, the presiding officer of the city council shall notify the affected person in writing that he (she) is prohibited from attending certain future council meetings and the effective dates of the prohibition. Notification shall be served by certified mail and by regular mail. 
(d)  This section is adopted as a ban against any person or persons engaging in behavior deemed inappropriate, unseemly and obstructive and not aimed at any one individual or set of individuals nor at the content of the person's speech or expression. 
(e)  The person or persons disallowed from attending future meetings of the city council are by no means or fashion banned or forbidden from engaging in the expression of ideas with any other member of the public on any street, sidewalk, other parts of the public buildings owned or occupied by the city, before any standing committee allowing an opportunity for such expression to be heard, or by any other alternative channel permitted by any other law or ordinance. 
(f)  Those persons disallowed from attending future meetings of the city council are by no means or fashion banned or forbidden from obtaining the minutes or any other recorded version of those proceedings that are maintained and made available to the public. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1041; Ord. No. 1996-34, § 2, 6-12-96; Ord. No. 1997-23, §§ 1—6, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 2000-57, § 1, 10-25-00; Ord. No. 2006-57, § 1, 8-30-06; Ord. No. 2007-68(07-O-0094), § 1, 11-14-07; Ord. No. 2013-09(13-O-0508), § 1, 3-27-13; Ord. No. 2014-32(14-O-1328), § 1, 7-16-14 ; Ord. No. 2018-65(18-O-1671), § 2, 12-12-18 ; Ord. No. 2019-12(19-O-1000), § 1, 1-31-19 ) 
Sec. 2-105. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-45(09-O-1201), § 1, adopted July 28, 2009, amended the title of former § 2-105 and renumbered and amended said section as a new § 2-45. Former § 2-45 was entitled, "Establishment or change in fees for service; notice to public." See also the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis. 
Secs. 2-106—2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDING AND OTHER COMMITTEES 
Subdivision I. - Standing Committees 

Sec. 2-131. - Standing committees established. 
There are established the following standing committees of the city council, which each shall consist of not less than five nor more than seven members of the council, including a chair and vice-chair: 
(1)  Committee on public safety and legal administration. 
(2)  Committee on transportation. 
(3)  Committee on city utilities. 
(4)  Committee on community development and human services. 
(5)  Committee on council. 
(6)  Committee on finance and executive. 
(7)  Committee on zoning. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1021; Ord. No. 1996-74, § 2, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 1998-1, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 2016-49(16-O-1650) , § 1, 12-14-16) 
Sec. 2-132. - Appointment; term; vacancy. 
(a)  The president of the council shall annually at the first council meeting in December appoint the chair of each standing committee and members of such committees established by the council pursuant to section 2-131 and its rules. 
(b)  All such appointments shall be for one year. However, in the year of each general city election held quadrennially on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, the annual committee appointments shall be made as provided in this section by the incoming president of the council in January following the quadrennial general city election after the incoming president of the council and incoming council have taken office. 
(c)  The president of the council shall serve as an ex-officio, non-voting member of each of the standing committees. 
(d)  Any such appointment shall be subject to rejection by a majority vote of the total membership of the council. All motions to reject annual committee appointments that have been made by the president shall be made by the council at the next regular meeting of the council following the annual committee appointments by the president. A motion to reject any committee appointment shall be considered a question of privilege and shall take precedence over all other business before the council. However, for committee appointments by the president other than annual committee appointments made at the first council meeting in December or the first meeting in January after each quadrennial election, no motion to reject any such appointment by the president to any committee shall be in order, unless the motion shall be made at the meeting of the council next succeeding the announcement by the president of such appointment. 
(e)  Should a vacancy occur in any committee by the withdrawal for whatever reason of any committee member, the appointment may be made at any time by the president, provided any such appointment shall be subject to rejection by a majority vote of the total membership of the council at the next regularly scheduled council meeting. All such appointments shall be for the unexpired term of the position created by the vacancy. 
(f)  Each committee shall elect its own vice-chair. 
(g)  The regular committee meetings, with the exception of the committee on council, which shall meet the Monday of council meetings, shall take place on two days of the week preceding council meetings. These days and times shall be determined by the council president in consultation with each committee chairperson. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1022; Ord. No. 1996-74, § 3, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 2006-36, §§ 1—3, 5-24-06; Ord. No. 2016-49(16-O-1650) , § 2, 12-14-16) 
Charter reference— Council president to make committee appointments, § 2-203(3). 
Sec. 2-133. - Operations; procedures. 
(a)  Record of actions. In accordance with applicable state law, each standing committee of the council shall keep minutes of meetings, which shall include a complete written record of all its actions and a record of the votes on any question. Also, in accordance with applicable state law all official reports received by the committee shall be retained and filed along with the minutes. At least one electronic legible copy of such minutes of meetings shall be publishable in readable form on the official City of Atlanta website. 
(b)  Rules. The rules of the council shall be the rules of the committees insofar as applicable. However, motions made in committees, once a quorum is present, shall be carried by a majority of votes cast, and abstentions or failures to vote shall not constitute votes cast for the purpose of this section. Committees may adopt and from time to time amend additional rules not inconsistent with this division, upon a majority vote of committee members present. 
(c)  Quorum. A minimum of four councilmembers assigned to a standing committee shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. The transaction of the official business of each standing committee cannot be conducted without the presence of a quorum. Whenever a quorum is not present, the standing committee may receive reports, information, and/or presentations, but cannot take official action. However, once a quorum is established at any meeting of a standing committee, any member of said standing committee that thereafter abstains from voting or does not vote on a particular matter for any reason shall still be considered to be present for purposes of maintaining the quorum. 
(d)  Duty to bring ordinances and resolutions to vote by council. It shall be the duty of each committee chair to take all steps necessary to bring all ordinances and resolutions voted upon by the applicable committee to a vote by the council. Matters held for further deliberation by committees may be called to the floor for a vote by the sponsor of the legislation if the legislation has been held in committee for two or more meeting cycles. Matters held for further deliberation by committees, whether personal paper or committee paper, may be called to the floor for a vote regardless of the number of meeting cycles it has remained held in committee, but only by the vote of the body to enter into the committee of the whole. 
(e)  Items of legislation resulting in tie vote. Items of legislation which when voted on result in a tie vote on all applicable motions to approve, adverse, hold, or file, and do not receive a majority vote on any dispositive motion, shall remain held in committee. 
(f)  Applicability of the Georgia Open Meetings Act. All meetings of a standing committee, or of a subcommittee created by a standing committee, including regular and special called meetings, shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of the Georgia Open Meetings Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1, et seq.). 
(g)  Committee briefings, hearings and work sessions. All briefings, hearings and work sessions conducted by a standing committee, whether or not a quorum is present, shall be conducted in accordance with the Georgia Open Meetings Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). However, in the presence of a quorum, official action shall not be taken during any such briefings, hearings or work sessions. 
(h)  Annual report. It shall be the duty of the chair of each standing committee of the council to have prepared by the last council meeting in March an annual report on the activities of that committee during the preceding year. Such report shall be presented in writing to the president and to all members of the council during the last regularly scheduled meeting of the council in March. Such report may include a brief synopsis of all major legislative business transacted by the committee as well as a brief description of any goals adopted by the committee. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1026; Ord. No. 1999-8, §§ 1—3, 1-27-99; Ord. No. 2006-40, § 1, 6-14-06; Ord. No. 2009-36(09-O-1062), § 1, 6-24-09; Ord. No. 2011-10(11-O-0445), § 1, 3-30-11; Ord. No. 2013-28(13-O-1049), § 1, 6-26-13; Ord. No. 2016-38(16-O-1546) , § 2, 11-16-16; Ord. No. 2016-49(16-O-1650) , § 3, 12-14-16) 
Sec. 2-134. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  All proposed ordinances, resolutions and other matters shall be referred by the president of the council to one or more of the standing committees of the council, which committee or committees shall have jurisdiction over the matter contained in the proposed ordinance, resolution, or other matter unless there is objection, in which case the council shall determine to which of the standing committees the matter shall be referred. This subsection shall not apply to any ordinance or resolution that can be adopted on the same date that it is introduced. Notwithstanding the referral procedures set forth in this subsection, comprehensive development plan amendments shall follow the committee referral procedures set forth in Code section 6-3004. 
All communications needing confirmation by the council shall be referred to both the committee(s) of purview and the committee on council. 
(b)  Each of the standing committees shall have the power of subpoena. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1023; Ord. No. 1996-74, §§ 4, 5, 10-29-96; Ord. No. 1997-08, § 1, 2-25-97; Ord. No. 1998-24, § 1, 4-29-98; Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 5-24-06; Ord. No. 2012-41(12-O-1143), § 1, 9-13-12) 
Charter reference— Introduction and adoption of ordinances on same date, § 2-402. 
Sec. 2-135. - Jurisdiction of standing committees. 
Each  of the standing committees may, on a quarterly basis, conduct a review of the department/agencies over which it has jurisdiction. Such review may include, but not be limited to review of management objectives, cost control mechanisms (i.e. financial-related audits, compliance audits, contractor/vendor audits, electronic data processing audits, performance audits and other special audits as needed) employee performance appraisal, and other areas that maybe of concern. The standing committees of the council shall have jurisdiction as follows: 
(a)  Committee on public safety and legal administration. 
(1)  The public safety, generally. 
(2)  Department of police, including matters related to code enforcement. 
(3)  Department of fire and rescue. 
(4)  Department of corrections, including matters related to code enforcement. 
(5)  Office of emergency management services. 
(6)  Licenses issued under the police powers of the city (i.e. vending, alcohol.) 
(7)  All matters pertaining to findings of discrimination under the human relations ordinances of the city. 
(8)  All matters pertaining to the drafting, implementation and supervision of all penal ordinances of the city. 
(9)  All matters pertaining to municipal court operations, the number of municipal court judges and their salaries. 
(10)  Duties and number of solicitors, and the salaries of the solicitor and assistant solicitors. 
(11)  The duties, number and salaries of public defenders and assistant public defenders. 
(12)  The number and salaries of court officers pro hac vice. 
(13)  The law department. 
(14)  All budgeted contracts pertaining to the agencies under the jurisdiction of this committee. 
(b)  Committee on transportation. 
(1)  Matters pertaining to transportation generally; 
(2)  Aviation and Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. 
(3)  Department of public works, related to transportation, engineering, operations, planning, streetcar, and capital projects, including traffic engineering and control, bridges, roads, pedestrian facilities, sidewalk waivers, paths, trails and bike facilities. 
(4)  Parking facilities. 
(5)  Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority. 
(6)  Atlanta Regional Commission. 
(7)  Department of city planning activities related to transportation planning. 
(8)  Infrastructure bond issues and other capital funding related to transportation projects. 
(9)  Renew Atlanta related to transportation infrastructure. 
(10)  Atlanta Streetcar/Beltline transit and trails. 
(11)  All budgeted contracts pertaining to the agencies under the jurisdiction of this committee. 
(c)  Committee on city utilities. 
(1)  Solid waste, sanitation and recycling. 
(2)  Sewage, solid waste, bulk waste, construction, and inert waste disposal. 
(3)  Matters pertaining to cable television, and the mayor's office of communications. 
(4)  Department of Watershed Management. 
(5)  Department of Public Works, and matters related to solid waste enforcement/services, street cleaning, and fleet management. 
(6)  Metropolitan Atlanta River Protection Act (ensuring any public hearing is held by the committee on zoning). 
(7)  Office of resilience. 
(8)  City franchise agreements including those related to public access television. 
(9)  Street lighting, banners, utility and other public right of way matters. 
(10)  Street naming, street abandonment, street dispositions. 
(11)  Matters related to the Atlanta Fulton Water Resources Commission, Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission, public access television management, Solid Waste Management Authority, Water & Sewer Appeals Board, and other boards and bodies with subject matter under the purview of this committee. 
(12)  Encroachment and easement agreements. 
(13)  All budgeted contracts pertaining to the agencies under the jurisdiction of this committee. 
(d)  Committee on community development and human services. 
(1)  Department of city planning, office of housing, design, and the planning functions of the city. 
(2)  Comprehensive development plans, and land use plans. 
(3)  Matters pertaining to the reformulation and development of neighborhoods and neighborhood structures within the city including but not limited to the community and urban redevelopment programs Invest Atlanta, tax allocation districts and related boards. 
(4)  Economic development matters. 
(5)  Office of buildings, including zoning and building code enforcement. 
(6)  Department of parks and recreation. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Office of special events. 
(9)  Reserved. 
(10)  Office of human services. 
(11)  Office of grants management. 
(12)  Office of film and entertainment. 
(13)  Capital Improvement Program (CIP). 
(14)  Development impact fee matters (parks, transportation and public safety). 
(15)  Women's Entrepreneurial Initiative. 
(16)  Urban farming initiatives 
(17)  Consolidated plan. 
(18)  Community Development Block Grant funding. 
(19)  Atlanta Housing Authority. 
(20)  Atlanta Workforce Development Agency. 
(21)  Matters pertaining to health, education and welfare. 
(22)  All community services activities of the city. 
(23)  Consumer affairs. 
(24)  Reserved. 
(25)  Convention and tourism. 
(26)  Matters related to the Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau, the Urban Design Commission, Atlanta Planning Advisory Board, the Neighborhood Planning Units, Atlanta/Fulton County Land Bank Authority, Atlanta/Fulton County Recreation Authority, Atlanta Neighborhood Development Partnership, the Atlanta Tree Commission, Municipal Market Board of Directors/Auburn Curb Market, Atlanta Workforce Development Agency, Commission on Aging, Commission on Veterans Affairs, Atlanta Youth Commission, Commission on Homelessness, Community Improvement Districts, Fulton and DeKalb County Boards of Health, Atlanta/Fulton County Library Board of Trustees, Fulton/Atlanta Community Action Authority, all park conservancy boards and advisory committees, the Public Arts Advisory Committee, park and greenway acquisition, and other boards and bodies with subject matter under the purview of this committee. 
(27)  Atlanta Beltline as it relates to housing and the Tax Allocation District. 
(28)  All budgeted contracts pertaining to the agencies under the jurisdiction of this committee. 
(e)  Committee on finance and executive. 
(1)  Matters pertaining to the budget and to transfers of appropriations, including, but not limited to: non-departmental expenditures, trust funds, debt management, and capital budgeting. 
(2)  All matters pertaining to the administration of taxing ordinances and to public revenue. 
(3)  Tax officials and collectors. 
(4)  Department of finance. 
(5)  All licenses other than licenses issued under the police power of the city. 
(6)  Matters pertaining to the operation and maintenance of cable television, and the Mayor's Office of Communications. 
(7)  All matters pertaining generally to legislative oversight of the executive branch of government and specifically those components in the department of administrative services which relate to purchasing functions of the city, including award to the second low bidder, and change orders. 
(8)  Department of human resources. 
(9)  The operation of the office of the mayor, and departments under its jurisdiction that are not within the purview of another standing committee. 
(10)  Department of procurement and office of contract compliance. 
(11)  Intergovernmental relations with the board of education, county, state and federal authorities. 
(12)  International and diplomatic affairs, including activities of the office of immigrant affairs. 
(13)  Executive offices not under the jurisdiction of another standing committee. 
(14)  Department of Atlanta information management. 
(15)  Innovation delivery and performance. 
(16)  Real estate division. 
(17)  Facility management division. 
(18)  Department of customer service/311 call center. 
(19)  Department of enterprise assets management, including capital projects funded by infrastructure bonds and other sources. 
(20)  Office of cultural affairs. 
(21)  Office of constituent services. 
(22)  Awarding of sole source and special procurement contracts 
(23)  Matters related to the Audit Commission, pension boards, the Atlanta City Employees Credit Union, the Living Wage Independent Review Commission, bodies formed related to audits, Atlanta Sister Cities Commission, Citizens Service Planning Review Commission, Civil Service Board, contract compliance hearing officers, procurement appeals hearing officers, and other boards and bodies with subject matter under the purview of this committee. 
(24)  All budgeted contracts pertaining to the agencies under the jurisdiction of this committee. 
(f)  Committee on zoning. 
(1)  The land subdivision ordinance of the city (part 15 of this Code). 
(2)  The zoning ordinance of the city (part 16 of this Code). 
(3)  Board of Zoning Adjustment. 
(4)  Zoning Review Board. 
(5)  Land plat amendments. 
(6)  Metropolitan Atlanta River Protection Act (also under the purview of the committee on city utilities but all public hearings will be conducted by the committee on zoning.) 
(7)  Cultural affairs, as it relates only to public art & murals. 
(8)  All budgeted contracts pertaining to the agencies under the jurisdiction of this committee. 
(g)  Committee on the council. 
(1)  All operations of the council, its officers and employees. 
(2)  All appointments of the executive branch which by law must be approved or confirmed by the council. 
(3)  All questions pertaining to conflicts of interest and standards of conduct. 
(4)  The revision, codification and clarification of all ordinances and examination of all proposed ordinances and resolutions as to their clarity. 
(5)  Formulation of the agenda of the council. 
(6)  All matters pertaining to elections, initiatives and referenda. 
(7)  The rules of the council and any modifications thereof. 
(8)  The conduct, decorum and good repute of the council and the members thereof. 
(9)  Expenditures of funds appropriated for members of council, office of research and policy, council communications, and the office of the municipal clerk. 
(10)  Review of nominations for staff positions of director of council staff and municipal clerk. Recruitment and hiring of council director position. Annual performance evaluations of the municipal clerk and the council director. 
(11)  Matters pertaining to cable television in the office of communication, specifically related to the programming of City Channel 26. 
(12)  Matters related to the board of ethics, elected officials compensation commission, Atlanta Committee on Women, and other boards and bodies with subject matter under the purview of this committee. 
(13)  Conduct an annual review of boards and commissions and make a recommendation thereon to the appropriate standing committee of purview. 
(14)  All budgeted contracts pertaining to the agencies under the jurisdiction of this committee. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1024; Ord. No. 1996-11, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 1996-12, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 1996-74, § 6; Ord. No. 1998-1, § 2, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 2006-34, §§ 1—5, 5-24-06; Ord. No. 2010-01(10-O-0131), § 1, 1-27-10; Ord. No. 2016-49(16-O-1650) , §§ 5—12, 12-14-16; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , §§ 2, 3, 4-26-17; Ord. No. 2017-21(17-O-1174), §§ 1—5, 5-1-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-45(17-O-1424), § 3, 7-26-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 9, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 2-136. - Remarks from public. 
Each standing committee shall hear remarks from the public at its regularly scheduled meetings and at non-regularly scheduled meetings including work sessions, provided that the chairperson may limit receipt of such remarks to legislation pending before such committee; may bar comments pertaining to legislation for which public hearings have been held; may rule out of order personal, abusive, or indecorous language; and may further limit the time allotted to each person to no less than one minute, provided that the chairperson shall provide at least one minute per person prior to the committee taking action on the first legislative item appearing on the agenda. 
(Ord. No. 1996-34, § 3, 6-12-96; Ord. No. 2017-67(17-O-1674), § 1, 11-6-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-62(18-O-1587), § 1, 12-12-18 ) 
Subdivision II. - Advisory Type Committees 

Sec. 2-137. - Definitions. 
An advisory type committee is assembled by a sitting councilmember serving on a germane standing committee and endorsed by city council through legislation. It is composed of stakeholders, councilmembers, and/or citizens who meet regularly to discuss a particular issue/initiative and provide policy recommendations to the same germane standing committee. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 3, 1-27-05) 
Sec. 2-138. - Required. 
(a)  Legislation aimed at creating advisory type committees shall maintain and/or identify the following: 
(1)  Task force objectives; 
(2)  Timeline for completion; 
(3)  Record and/or documentation of proceedings in some permanent records; 
(4)  Membership and attendance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 3, 1-27-05) 
Secs. 2-139—2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STAFF[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Council staff, § 2-308. 
Cross reference— Municipal clerk, § 2-266 et seq.; officers and employees, § 2-781 et seq.; employee benefits, § 2-841 et seq.; personnel, ch. 114. 

Sec. 2-151. - Sergeant at arms. 
(a)  The council, upon the nomination of the president, shall appoint a sergeant at arms, whose duties it shall be to: 
(1)  Attend all meetings of the council and maintain order under the direction of the president or the president pro tempore; 
(2)  Execute all of the demands of the council, including the service and execution of all subpoenas to require the attendance of members of the council; 
(3)  Ensure that no persons shall be within the bar of the council during meetings of the council, other than members of the council, the municipal clerk and assistants, the council staff director and assistant, the city attorney and assistants, the chief financial officer and assistants and accredited members of the press, as approved by the president; and 
(4)  Prevent the general distribution to the members of the council of any written or printed documents which do not bear the name of the person, whether a member of the council or otherwise, proposing the adoption of that paper or causing that paper to be distributed. 
(b)  The sergeant at arms shall be appointed and shall receive no compensation for discharge of the duties as such. 
(Code 1977, §§ 1-2021—1-2023; Ord. No. 2006-30, § 1, 5-18-06) 
Sec. 2-152. - Council assistants. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City council assistant means any employee of a councilmember other than a special or senior city council assistant and who is thereby not entitled to participate in the city's health and life insurance program, pension benefits or any other benefits. City council assistants shall be required to execute a release to the city acknowledging that any such employee is ineligible to participate in the life and health insurance program. 
Senior city council assistant means an employee whose position has been created in section 114-476 and who thereby receives the same benefits afforded to regular city employees. 
Special city council assistant means an employee designated as such by a councilmember and who is thereby entitled to participate in the city's health and life insurance program on the same terms and conditions as other city employees. 
(b)  Number of assistants per councilmember; salaries. Each councilmember shall be entitled to employ up to three senior city council assistants or up to two special city council assistants and such other city council assistants as deemed necessary. Each such employee shall be paid on an hourly or salary basis, as determined by each such councilmember, provided the aggregate compensation on behalf all such employees, including the cost of any benefits provided by the city, shall not exceed the total of the amount appropriated for such purpose plus any amount carried over from previous years in accordance with section 2-39(e). No more than three employees of whatever category of each councilmember shall be entitled to benefits. 
(c)  Responsibilities of councilmembers. Each councilmember shall be responsible to certify that funds expended for employee service in accordance with this section are expended for public purposes, such public purposes not to include any campaign-connected costs, and shall be responsible for establishing the professional standards, work program, wage rate, supervision, hiring and firing and work location of any employee. 
(d)  Nepotism. No person shall be employed in such position where such person directly supervises or is directly supervised by a member of such person's immediate family. The term "immediate family" includes father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister or spouse. 
(e)  Annual appropriations for salaries and benefits. The total amount of $195,973.00 shall be appropriated annually for the salaries and benefits of the assistants authorized in this section. The amount of annual appropriation shall be increased by the appropriate pro rata amount necessary to equal the average amount of any salary and associated benefit increases given to city employees in any given year. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1061(a)—(e); Ord. No. 2001-58, § 1, 7-25-01; Ord. No. 2003-14, § 1, 12-10-03; Ord. No. 2014-01(13-O-1023), § 1, 6-12-13 ; Ord. No. 2018-29(18-O-1339), § 1, 7-11-18 ) 
Sec. 2-153. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-22, § 1, approved March 26, 2002, repealed § 2-153 in its entirety. Formerly said section pertained to the auditor position. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 2-154—2-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MUNICIPAL CLERK[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal clerk, § 2-307. 
Cross reference— City council staff, § 2-151 et seq.; officers and employees, § 2-781 et seq.; employee benefits, § 2-841 et seq.; municipal clerk designated records certifying officer, § 2-1786; personnel, ch. 114. 

Sec. 2-160. - Duties generally. 
(a)  The municipal clerk shall maintain in the office provided at city hall copies of all proposed ordinances and resolutions, which shall be available during business hours for public inspection. 
(b)  The municipal clerk shall maintain a record within the municipal clerk's office of all proceedings of the council and shall note all questions of order, with the decisions thereon, together with a complete and accurate index thereto, to be made available for public inspection at any time during regular business hours. The municipal clerk shall be responsible for the duplication of all proposals and resolutions introduced before the council and distribution thereof to all members of council and to all heads of departments whose departments are affected thereby. The municipal clerk shall attest and affix the seal of the council to all documents, warrants and subpoenas issued by the president or by the council and shall certify to the passage of all ordinances and resolutions. 
(Code 1977, § 1-2002(b), (c); Ord. No. 2002-71, § 1, 9-16-02) 
Note— Formerly § 2-266. 
Sec. 2-161. - Deputy clerks. 
The municipal clerk shall have the power to designate one or more deputy clerks within the municipal clerk's office who shall sign all papers or documents as may be required during the absence of the municipal clerk. In the absence of the municipal clerk, the deputy clerks, whether one or more, shall have all the authority exercised by the municipal clerk under sections 2-266 and 2-267 and are authorized to sign any document to which the signature of the municipal clerk is necessary, using their own names but adding the term "deputy municipal clerk." The signature of the deputy municipal clerk, when so signed, shall be recognized and given all force and effect of the signature of the municipal clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 1-2003; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 1, 9-16-02) 
Note— Formerly § 2-267. 
Sec. 2-162. - Staff members and assistants. 
The council shall employ such staff members and assistants of the municipal clerk as the council shall determine to be necessary in order to carry out the functions and responsibilities of the office of the municipal clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 1-2004; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 1, 9-16-02) 
Note— Formerly § 2-268. 
Sec. 2-163. - Official seal. 
The municipal clerk shall have and use an official seal, which shall be affixed to all documents certified by the municipal clerk or any of the municipal clerk's deputies acting in the municipal clerk's stead, under and in accordance with authority delegated by the Charter and related state laws and ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 1-2005; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 1, 9-16-02) 
Note— Formerly § 2-269. 
Sec. 2-164. - Books and accounts, television tape of council meetings. 
(a)  The municipal clerk shall keep the following books and accounts: 
(1)  A book of neat and accurate minutes; and 
(2)  An ordinance book. 
(b)  A television tape will be kept on file in the municipal clerk's office of special and regular meetings of the council. These shall be kept on file for ten years, at which time they may be destroyed. 
(Code 1977, § 1-2006; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 1, 9-16-02) 
Note— Formerly § 2-270. 
Cross reference— Records management, § 2-1781 et seq. 
State Law reference— Records retention, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq. 
Sec. 2-165. - Issuance of orders, notices, other instruments. 
The municipal clerk shall issue all orders, summonses, notices or other instruments which may be required by the council. 
(Code 1977, § 1-2007; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 1, 9-16-02) 
Note— Formerly § 2-271. 
Sec. 2-166. - Copying, certifying and transmitting copies of ordinances to appropriate persons. 
The municipal clerk shall make or cause to be made copies of all ordinances adopted, all amendments to ordinances that may be adopted and approved and to certify and transmit them to the heads of the departments charged with the enforcement of these ordinances or amended ordinances. When these ordinances provide penalties for the violation thereof, copies shall be transmitted to the judges of the municipal court in the same manner. 
(Code 1977, § 1-2008; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 1, 9-16-02) 
Note— Formerly § 2-272. 
Sec. 2-167. - Charges for copies of documents. 
(a)  The office of the municipal clerk is authorized to make a charge for the following in the amounts specified in article XIV of this chapter: 
(1)  Copying documents, etc.; 
(2)  Issuing a certificate; 
(3)  Issuing a copy of a zoning map and issuing a certified copy of a zoning map; and 
(4)  Transcribing tapes or portions of tapes of council meetings only. 
(b)  Fees collected shall be paid into the general fund through the medium of a miscellaneous receipt. 
(Code 1977, § 1-2009; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 1, 9-16-02) 
Note— Formerly § 2-273. 
Cross reference— Records management, § 2-1781 et seq. 
Sec. 2-168. - Transfer of historical records. 
(a)  The municipal clerk is authorized to transfer to the offices and vault of the Atlanta Historical Society the following records: 
(1)  Council and aldermanic minutes from 1948—1960. 
(2)  Ordinance books from 1850—1960. 
(3)  A minute book containing rough notes about council proceedings from 1851—1894. 
(4)  Council minutes for the Town of West End from 1868—1894. 
(b)  Such records shall be under the custody of and maintained by the Atlanta Historical Society; however, the legal ownership of the records shall remain in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 1-2011; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 1, 9-16-02) 
Note— Formerly § 2-274. 
Cross reference— Records management, § 2-1781 et seq. 
Sec. 2-169. - [Guidelines for administrative corrections.] 
Administrative corrections to legislation that has been adopted by the council and approved by the mayor shall only be made by the municipal clerk or designee, and only under certain circumstances. All such corrections shall be clerical in nature, so as to correct errors such as misspelled words, inconsistent references within legislation, incorrect incorporation of amended language, incorrect grammar and incorrect account numbers, but shall not change the meaning or intent of the legislation in any way. All such corrections shall be made only at the request of a councilmember or the affected department head, in consultation with, and to be approved by, the research and policy analyst who staffs the council committee with jurisdiction over the subject matter of said legislation. In the case of an account number correction, the request shall also be approved by the research and policy analyst(s) for the finance/executive committee. Only one request per legislation will be authorized and only one request is necessary to execute multiple corrections to a piece of legislation. Zoning, comprehensive development plan, and dollar amount changes shall be expressly prohibited from being corrected administratively. 
The following guidelines shall be followed regarding administrative corrections to adopted legislation. 
(1)  All requests for administrative correction to legislation shall be in writing to the municipal clerk in a form giving the following information: 
a.  Legislative identification number; 
b.  Date adopted by council; 
c.  Date approved by mayor; 
d.  Identification of and signature of the requesting party (councilmember/department head); 
e.  Identification of requested change; 
f.  Detailed reason for requested change; 
g.  Approval signature of research and policy analyst for the committee with jurisdiction of the subject matter of said legislation; 
h.  Additional approval signature of research and policy analyst(s) for the finance/executive committee when the requested correction is to an account number. 
(b)  All requests for administrative corrections to legislation shall be copied, by the requestor, to all members of council at the time that formal request is made to the municipal clerk. 
(c)  All administrative corrections shall be made by the municipal clerk or designee at his/her discretion within three business days of receipt of request complying to the aforementioned guidelines. 
(d)  All requests for administrative corrections to legislation that do not comply with the aforementioned guidelines shall be forwarded by the municipal clerk to the chair of the committee with jurisdiction over the subject matter of said legislation and notification of such non-compliance shall be given by the clerk to all members of council, to the requestor(s) of said correction and to the research and policy analyst(s) approving the request. 
(e)  Notification of all administrative corrections to legislation shall be reported by the municipal clerk to the council in the form of a communication at its first regular meeting following the date of the correction. 
(Ord. No. 2000-23, § 1, 4-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 1, 9-16-02) 
Note— Formerly § 2-275. 
Secs. 2-170—2-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MAYOR[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Executive branch offices, § 2-231 et seq.; officers and employees, § 2-781 et seq.; employee benefits, § 2-841 et seq.; contingency fund for mayor, § 2-924; elections, ch. 66; personnel, ch. 114; city employees required to resign prior to filing candidacy for office of mayor, president of city council, or office of councilperson, § 114-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-176. - Execution of contracts. 
The mayor shall execute all contracts approved by the council not more than 90 days from the date of adoption of the ordinance or resolution authorizing the contract and shall indicate, in writing, to the president and members of the city council the reasons why the contract has not been executed. 
(Code 1977, § 2-1002; Ord. No. 2007-05 (06-O-0381), § 1, 1-22-07) 
Sec. 2-177. - Delegation of authority to execute documents to president or president pro tempore of council. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 6-401 of the Charter, the mayor, when it is desirable because of the absence, unavailability, disability, illness or other reason, may authorize execution of any document, contract or paper on behalf of the city by the president of the council or in the president's absence the president pro tempore of the council. The mayor shall have the right and authority to designate the president pro tempore of the council to execute documents on behalf of the city. 
(b)  Such delegation shall be in writing and signed by the mayor and shall by such writing describe the particular document, contract or other paper, either specifically or by general classification, as to which the delegation of the right to sign shall exist. The delegation may be cancelled by the mayor at any time in writing. 
(Code 1977, § 2-1003) 
Charter reference— Delegation of powers and duties, § 3-105. 
Sec. 2-178. - Seal of mayor. 
(a)  The mayor is authorized to have, keep and use an official seal of a size and design and with any inscriptions as the mayor may deem proper. 
(b)  The seal shall be distinguished from the official seal of the city by appropriate inscription and shall be affixed to any instruments the mayor, in the mayor's discretion, may determine. 
(Code 1977, § 2-1005) 
Sec. 2-179. - Emeritus mayor. 
(a)  There is created the office or position of emeritus mayor. 
(b)  Any person who has been elected to the office of mayor and who has served in this capacity shall, upon retirement from that office or upon termination of active service with the city, be eligible, upon the request of the then mayor, to serve as emeritus mayor. 
(c)  Upon that person being requested to assume the office, the person shall serve as emeritus mayor for the remainder of that person's life or until that person resigns therefrom. 
(d)  The emeritus mayor shall serve the city in an advisory capacity when requested to do so by the mayor. 
(e)  Acceptance of appointment as emeritus mayor shall not prevent the person from holding any elective or appointive office under the federal, state or county government, so long as the employment shall not interfere with the person's duties as provided in this section. 
(Code 1977, § 2-1006) 
Sec. 2-180. - Additional functions of chief operating officer and chief of staff. 
In addition to the responsibilities and duties specified by the Charter, the chief operating officer and chief of staff shall: 
(1)  Maintain the provided information on grant funds or other funds that are available to the city from the federal government or any other source; and 
(2)  Review applications from city departments and agencies concerning the assistance. 
(Code 1977, § 2-2001) 
Charter reference— Functions of chief operating officer and chief of staff, §§ 3-106, 3-202. 
Sec. 2-181. - Emergency powers of mayor regarding offenses. 
(a)  In addition to any other emergency powers set forth in the ordinances of the city, the mayor, as chief executive of the city, shall have the emergency power to declare an emergency to exist when, in the mayor's opinion, any one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There is extreme likelihood of danger of destruction of life or property due to unusual conditions; 
(2)  Unusual or extreme weather conditions, making use of city streets or areas difficult or impossible; 
(3)  Civil unrest, commotion or uprising is imminent or exists; or 
(4)  There is a stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of the city. 
(b)  After declaration of such emergency, the mayor, as chief executive, shall have the right to exercise any or all of the following powers: 
(1)  To use employees of the city other than employees of the department of police to assist in the safety and preservation of life, limb and property of the citizenry of the city. 
(2)  To close streets and sidewalks and to delineate areas within the city wherein an emergency exists. 
(3)  To impose emergency curfew regulations. 
(4)  To close business establishments within the affected area. 
(5)  To close any and all city-owned buildings and other facilities to the use of the general public. 
(6)  To do any and all acts necessary and incidental to the preservation of life, limb and property of the citizenry of the city. 
No emergency power as set forth in this section may be effective for more than 72 hours after the declaration of an emergency. Powers as set forth in this section may be exercised during such further emergency period, but never for more than 72 hours in one declared emergency period. No emergency period shall extend beyond the next regular or special meeting of the council. 
(c)  The declaration of an emergency as to a portion of the city shall specify with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared to exist. 
(d)  Any person willfully and knowingly violating any curfew regulations or any other order of the mayor issued under this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 17-6001) 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 106. 
Sec. 2-182. - Powers of mayor in addition to other powers in Charter and Related Laws. 
The mayor, in addition to other powers enumerated in the Charter and Related Laws, shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To promulgate reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct of the internal operation of the executive branch and any department thereunder; 
(2)  To issue executive orders which may apply to events of short duration, including, but not limited to, the temporary exercise of extraordinary police power in times of emergency, such action to expire at the next meeting of the council subsequent to the issuance thereof unless ratified by a majority vote of the council present and voting; 
(3)  To provide direction on subjects relating to economic development; and 
(4)  To delegate duties to the chief operating officer, the chief of staff and heads of departments by administrative order. 
(Ord. No. 1998-4, § 1, 2-10-98; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 2, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 2-183. - Department heads under supervision and direction of mayor; exception; responsibilities. 
(a)  The department heads of each of the departments, with the exception of the heads of the departments of finance and law, shall be under the direction and supervision of the mayor. The departments of finance and law shall be responsible jointly to the mayor and council. Each department head shall be responsible for the detailed administration and direction of the affairs and operation of the department and the bureaus and offices under his or her supervision, shall exercise both detailed and general management and control thereof, and shall direct and supervise the detailed operations of the respective bureau and office directors under their jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 3, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1, 2-28-07; Ord. No. 2007-63(06-O-0787), § 1, 10-24-07; Ord. No. 2009-11 (09-O-0477), § 1, 3-25-09; Ord. No. 2012-24(12-O-0685), § 1, 5-30-12; Ord. No. 2018-41(18-O-1266), § 3, 9-25-18 ) 
Sec. 2-184. - Appointment of department heads upon vacancy. 
(a)  Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the position of department head, commissioner, city attorney or chief financial officer, the mayor shall appoint a permanent replacement or an acting department head, acting commissioner, acting city attorney, or acting chief financial officer within 30 days of the occurrence of the vacancy. Upon the mayor's written notification to the city council that he/she has been unsuccessful in finding a suitable candidate to fill the position on a permanent or acting basis, the time period shall be automatically extended an additional 30 days. 
(b)  In the event the mayor shall appoint an acting department head, acting commissioner, acting city attorney, or acting chief financial officer due to the occurrence of a vacancy, the mayor shall, within 90 days thereafter, make a permanent appointment to fill the position. Upon the mayor's written notification that he/she has been unsuccessful in finding a suitable candidate to permanently fill the position, the time period shall be automatically extended an additional 90 days. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 4, 9-16-02) 
Secs. 2-185—2-189. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-190. - Department of the mayor; executive office of the mayor; administrative functions. 
(a)  The executive office of the mayor shall consist of the mayor's executive and administrative staff and shall include the following executive positions: 
(1)  Chief operating officer; 
(2)  Chief of staff; and 
(3)  Chief policy officer. 
(b)  The department of the mayor shall include the following functional areas: 
(1)  Office of communications; 
(2)  Office of constituent services; 
(3)  Office of contract compliance; 
(4)  Office of human services; 
(5)  Office of intergovernmental affairs; 
(6)  Office of special events coordination; 
(7)  Office of emergency management; 
(8)  Office of community technology; 
(9)  Office of cultural affairs; and 
(10)  Office of entertainment. 
(c)  The executive office of the mayor shall contain the mayor's administrative staff, which staff shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Provide a communications link between and among city agencies, including departments, commissions, boards and committees and the legislative and judicial branches of government; 
(2)  Maintain liaison with federal, state, regional, local and private officials and organizations and assist the mayor in preparing policy positions on legislation or action which affects the city; 
(3)  Provide communication with agencies disseminating information to the public; 
(4)  Coordinate the total city effort of communications of city services and programs to the citizens of the city and provide a clearinghouse for citizen complaints and follow-up with departments and agencies; 
(5)  Provide a research and information capability for the mayor in the area of statistical information on city programs, comparison of existing and proposed programs with other units of government and legislative proposals, and provide up-to-date information files for preparation of reports, speeches and press statements for the mayor; 
(6)  Provide communications between and among urban and social planning agencies of city government; other local governing bodies; metropolitan, state and non-profit entities to ensure that plans reflect the policies and priorities of the mayor; and 
(7)  Provide any other supportive services as the mayor, chief operating officer or chief of staff shall assign. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 6, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 1, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 2, 6-26-13; Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 1, 7-3-13; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 3, 8-29-18 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH OFFICES 

Sec. 2-191. - Functions and duties of office of communications. 
The functions and duties of the office of communications shall include: 
(1)  Refining and developing recommendations and alternatives for communications plans and policies for action by the mayor and council; 
(2)  Communicating with the news media on behalf of the mayor and city; 
(3)  Coordinating the public relations and marketing activities of the city; 
(4)  Handling requests for public information; 
(5)  Coordinating of special events as assigned by the mayor; 
(6)  Developing ceremonial documents for the mayor; 
(7)  Developing the content policy and monitoring for the Internet and Intranet; 
(8)  Monitoring the provision of services and rates charged by any and all CATV and telecommunications franchises in accordance with written contracts and approved regulations; 
(9)  Coordinating with the private CATV, cable and telecommunications industry, the state and federal governments, and private citizens; acting as both a coordinator and disseminator of information affecting the city's plans and policies in the cable/telecommunications area; 
(10)  Renewing, assigning, transferring or terminating any and all CATV and telecommunications franchises in accordance with written contracts and approved regulations, as authorized; 
(11)  Managing the operations of the City Channel and oversight of all public access, education and government (PEG) cable channels; and 
(12)  Serving as liaison to the People TV advisory board; and 
(13)  Broadcasting of City government programming on the City Cable Channel 26 on a 24-hour basis. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 7, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2008-40(08-O-1119), § 1, 6-11-08) 
Sec. 2-192. - Functions and duties of office of constituent services. 
The functions and duties of the office of constituent services are to provide a direct link between the citizens of Atlanta and the office of the mayor. The office of community affairs shall work with city departments to resolve citizen complaints; give citizens an avenue to voice their concerns and suggestions on the improvement of city services; provide information and make appropriate service referrals; and work with citizen, neighborhood and community organizations to resolve community issues. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 8, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 2-193. - Functions and duties of office of contract compliance. 
The functions and duties of the office of contract compliance shall include: 
(1)  Monitoring the effectiveness of all city government efforts with regard to promoting equal opportunity in contracting; 
(2)  Recommending ordinances, executive and administrative directives to ensure that the city's goal and objectives in the areas of affirmative action, equal opportunity and minority and female business enterprise opportunity are implemented in city contracting; and 
(3)  Administering the city's affirmative action and equal opportunity programs as they relate to contracting and purchasing functions. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 9, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 2-194. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479) , § 4, adopted Aug. 29, 2018, repealed § 2-194, which pertained to functions and duties of the office of enterprise assets management and derived from Ord. No. 2002-71, § 10, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-19, § 3, 3-25-05; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 4, 9-24-07. 
Sec. 2-195. - Functions and duties of the Atlanta Workforce Development Agency. 
The functions and duties of the Atlanta Workforce Development Agency shall include: 
(1)  Administering employment and training programs mandated under the Workforce Investment Act (WIA) of 1998 to the citizens of Atlanta; 
(2)  Offering workforce solution services to metro Atlanta businesses; 
(3)  Providing a single point of entry for workforce information by bringing businesses, job seekers, and training providers together to provide skilled workers for every business and employment for every job seeker in the City of Atlanta; 
(4)  Providing management, support, and direction to the city's initiative to bring computer technology to all citizens by working with government and private sector funding sources related to technology; and 
(5)  Administering the First Source Jobs Policy set forth pursuant to Division 2 of Article XI, Chapter 2 of this title and administering the Atlanta CityBuild Program set forth pursuant to Division 3 of Article XI, Chapter 2 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 11, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-20, § 1, 3-25-05; Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 1, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-196. - Function and duties of office of human services. 
The functions and duties of the office of human services shall include: 
(1)  Planning, coordinating, monitoring and evaluating the delivery of various social services, including, but not limited to, poverty programs, economic opportunity resources, programs for the homeless, the Summer Food Service Program, and the Aging Commission; and 
(2)  Coordination of activities to ameliorate the condition of homelessness on behalf of city government; 
(3)  Improving the delivery of human services to citizens of Atlanta through advocacy, resource development, mobilization, collaboration and coordination of resources; and 
(4)  Coordinating and staffing the city's volunteer programs for city employees. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 12, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 2-197. - Function and duties of office of intergovernmental affairs. 
The functions and duties of the office of intergovernmental affairs shall include: 
(1)  Establishing, organizing and maintaining a network and strategy to continually assess the level or status of the city's relations with other municipalities and with federal, state and county governments, and all agencies and instrumentalities; 
(2)  Acting as liaison and communicating with other governments on behalf of the city; 
(3)  Studying proposed legislative of other governments affecting the city, and recommending support or opposition of any such legislation, as may be in the interest of the city; 
(4)  Analyzing the city's legislative needs and recommend methods to successfully enable passage of any laws beneficial to the city; 
(5)  Soliciting grants and other funds as may be available to the city from other governments or any other parties: 
(6)  Establishing, organizing and maintaining. a network and strategy to respond to the demand for the city's officials to support a variety of international economic and cultural community initiatives; 
(7)  Supporting and expanding Atlanta's already established international recognition through progressive programs which are understanding of and responsive to governments and people of the global community; 
(8)  Providing international trade services to the small entrepreneur, as well as acting as liaison with the larger corporate community by working with local and national agencies and organizations on projects such as trade commissions, trade fairs and conferences and conventions; 
(9)  Cooperating with the consular corps and supporting its interests and objectives, providing guidance on protocol appropriate for visiting dignitaries; 
(10)  Welcoming international visitors to Atlanta from all walks of life and presenting the city and its resources in the optimal manner; 
(11)  Managing and supporting the city's sister-city committees, by suggesting fund-raising strategies, and producing new guidelines for consideration of additional applications to the program; 
(12)  Formulating considerate and thoughtful municipal policy in areas of human civil rights issued throughout the world; and 
(13)  Lending support to international, cultural, educational, and social events and activities to the benefit of the global awareness of the community at large. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 13, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 2-198. - Functions and duties of the office of special events. 
The functions and duties of the office of special events shall be to administer the outdoor festivals ordinance, as it may be amended from time to time, under the supervision of the chief of staff. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 14, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 2-199. - Functions and duties of office of emergency management. 
The functions and duties of the Atlanta-Fulton County Office of Emergency Management shall be to conduct, administer and coordinate emergency preparedness programs, including programs for homeland security preparedness, civil disaster, mutual aid and support, emergency medical services and rescue assistance, in cooperation with other local, state and national resources. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 15, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 2-200. - Functions and duties of the City of Atlanta Office of Entertainment. 
The City of Atlanta Office of Entertainment shall be responsible for administering the entertainment filming ordinance in a manner that facilitates the entertainment industry's work in Atlanta and makes Atlanta a best-in-class destination for entertainment production. In addition, the Office's functions and duties may include without limitation: 
(1)  Marketing Atlanta, in association with the Georgia Film, Music & Digital Entertainment Office, to the entertainment industry; 
(2)  Stimulating local community awareness of the entertainment industry and its impact upon Atlanta's economic development; 
(3)  Providing premier customer service and assistance to entertainment production companies working in Atlanta; 
(4)  Compiling a resource list of local laborers and suppliers to facilitate employment of local talent; 
(5)  Promoting creation of local education and training opportunities in entertainment production; 
(6)  Devising strategies that minimize the potential inconvenience to Atlanta's residents and businesses from entertainment production; 
(7)  Serving as a contact for and liaison between Atlanta's residents and businesses and the entertainment industry to answer questions and resolve concerns about entertainment production projects occurring in the city; 
(8)  To report to the finance/executive committee at least three times per year on its structural activities; and 
(9)  To report to the community development/human resources committee at least three times per year on its economic development activities. 
(Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 2, 7-3-13; Ord. No. 2013-38(13-O-1187), § 1, 8-28-13 ) 
Secs. 2-201—2-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION OF THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH 

Sec. 2-220. - Departments divided into bureaus or offices. 
(a)  Departments operating under the executive branch may be divided into bureaus or offices. A deputy commissioner, director or manager meeting the qualifications set forth in section 2-221 shall head each bureau or office. 
(b)  Commissioners of departments shall have the power and duty to appoint deputy commissioners, bureau directors and office heads to the unclassified civil service. Bureau heads shall be subject to the detailed direction and supervision by the department head of each department. Offices organized within departments shall report to that department head. Every other office head shall report to the chief of staff, or the chief operating officer, as directed by administrative order of the mayor. As provided in Charter Section 3-305(c), commissioners may remove deputy commissioners, bureau directors and office heads. 
(c)  The provisions on appointment and removal shall not apply to the Director of the Atlanta-Fulton County Office of Emergency Management Services. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 18, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2002-77, § 1, 10-28-02) 
Sec. 2-221. - Qualifications of heads of departments, bureaus and offices. 
(a)  Each official who is the head of a department, bureau or office shall meet the following general qualifications: 
(1)  Have earned a baccalaureate degree from an accredited institution; 
(2)  Have at least one year in graduate study in business or public administration or in a professional field related to the work of the department, bureau or office; 
(3)  Possess experience at a management level in a field of work related to the essential functions of the department, bureau or office which may be substituted for the requirement of subsections (1) and (2) above on a year-for-year basis; 
(4)  In addition to the requirements set forth above, possess three years of supervisory experience in a public or private agency; 
(5)  Demonstrate ability in prior work of effective cost management, improving performance of employees, introducing modern organization and procedural concepts, improving relations with the public, or improving customer service; and 
(6)  Demonstrate qualities of leadership and supervision, manifest an understanding of the processes of budgeting, personnel management, planning and reporting within the sphere of government. 
(b)  The council may prescribe by ordinance additional specific qualifications for each official who is the head of a department, bureau or office. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 19, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 2-222. - Organization of executive branch. 
There shall exist in the executive branch of government, in addition to the executive office of the mayor, the following departments, bureaus and offices: 
(1)  Department of aviation, to be headed by an aviation general manager; said department to be composed of the following: 
a.  Bureau of airport administration; 
b.  Bureau of airport business and finance; 
c.  Bureau of airport maintenance, operations, and safety; 
d.  Bureau of airport planning and development; and 
e.  Office of airport information services; 
(2)  Department of corrections, to be headed by a chief of corrections; 
(3)  Department of customer service, to be headed by the commissioner of customer service; 
(4)  Department of enterprise assets management, to be headed by the commissioner of enterprise assets management; and said department to be composed of the following offices: 
a.  Office of real estate; 
b.  Office of technical services; and 
c.  Office of building operations. 
(5)  Department of finance, to be headed by the chief financial officer; 
(6)  Department of fire, to be headed by a fire chief; 
(7)  Department of human resources, to be headed by a commissioner of human resources; 
(8)  Department of Atlanta Information Management ("AIM") to be headed by a chief information officer; 
(9)  Department of law, to be headed by the city attorney; 
(10)  Department of parks and recreation, to be headed by a commissioner of parks and recreation; and said department to be composed of the following offices, each of which shall be headed by a director: 
a.  Office of parks; and 
b.  Office of recreation. 
(11)  Department of city planning to be headed by a commissioner of city planning; and said department to be composed of the following offices: 
a.  Office of buildings; 
b.  Office of zoning and development; 
c.  Office of mobility planning; 
d.  Office of housing and community development; and 
e.  Office of design. 
(12)  Department of police, to be headed by a chief of police; 
(13)  Department of procurement to be headed by a chief procurement officer; 
(14)  Department of public works, to be headed by a commissioner of public works; said department to be composed of the following offices: 
a.  Office of transportation; 
b.  Office of solid waste services; and 
c.  Office of fleet services. 
(15)  Department of watershed management to be headed by a commissioner of watershed management; said department to be composed of the following offices: 
a.  Office of engineering services; 
b.  Office of water treatment and reclamation; 
c.  Office of watershed protection; 
d.  Office of the commissioner of watershed management; 
e.  Office of financial administration; 
f.  Office of linear infrastructure operations; and 
g.  Office of customer care and billing. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 20, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2003-83, § 9, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2004-75, § 1, 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2005-89, § 8, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 2, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 2011-57(11-O-1768), § 1, 12-14-11; Ord. No. 2012-46(12-O-1316), § 10, 10-24-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 1, 6-26-13; Ord. No. 2015-27(15-O-1212), § 1, 6-10-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-21(16-O-1346) , § 1, 6-29-16; Ord. No. 2016-40(16-O-1568) , § 8, 11-16-16; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 1, 4-26-17; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 5, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 2-223. - Department of aviation. 
The organizational structure of the department of aviation shall be codified in chapter 22 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 21, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 2-224. - Department of corrections. 
The organizational structure of the department of corrections shall be as codified in chapter 98 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 22, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 2-225. - Functions and duties of the department of customer service. 
The functions and duties of the department of customer service shall include: 
(1)  Strategic and operational management of ATL311, the city's non-emergency contact center, including: 
a.  The ATL311 call center; 
b.  The ATL311 portal; 
c.  The ATL311 mobile app; 
d.  All ATL311 social media support and communication channels; and 
e.  The NotifyATL mass notification system. 
(2)  Providing performance management reports and analysis for city services delivered by departments that utilize ATL311. 
(3)  Sponsoring and participating in community engagement and outreach activities including those in support of other city departments and members of Atlanta City Council. 
(4)  Collaborating with and assisting other agencies/departments in the city on matters relating to customer service, including development of customer service strategies and delivery of customer service improvements as needed. 
( Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 5, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 2-226. - Offices in the department of enterprise assets management. 
The department of enterprise assets management shall consist of the following offices: 
(1)  Office of real estate; 
(2)  Office technical services; and 
(3)  Office building operations. 
( Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 5, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 2-227. - Functions and duties of the department of enterprise assets management. 
The functions and duties of the department of enterprise assets management shall include: 
(1)  Providing strategic oversight, direction, construction and management of city real estate asset holdings, facilities and enterprise assets; 
(2)  Providing safe, clean, well maintained and sustainable facilities; 
(3)  Providing efficient management of leases and property acquisitions; and 
(4)  Maximizing revenue and utilization of enterprise assets. 
( Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 5, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 2-228. - Department of fire. 
The organizational structure of the department of fire shall be as codified in chapter 78 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 23, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 5, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 2-229. - Department of finance. 
The structure, duties and functions of the department of finance shall be as those codified in Articles 3 and 6 of the Charter and Articles VI and IX of chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 24, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 5, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 2-230. - Additional qualifications of commissioner of department of human resources. 
In addition to the general qualifications in section 2-221, the commissioner of the department of human resources shall possess public or private employment experience in at least two of the following fields at a management level for a minimum of two years: workforce planning, affirmative action/ diversity, recruitment, classification and compensation, employee development and training, employee and labor relations, management, policy development, human resource information systems, or employee assistance. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 25, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 5, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 2-231. - Additional duties of commissioner of department of human resources. 
In addition to the duties related to the administration of the department, the commissioner of human resources shall also provide direction for: 
(1)  Human resources support to all departments of city government; 
(2)  Planning, implementing and evaluating employee career development and training activities; 
(3)  Planning and implementing new or revised human resource programs, policies and processes, including the establishment of a compensation philosophy; 
(4)  Coordinating the activities of the Atlanta Civil Service Board; 
(5)  Developing, validating and managing the public safety promotional testing process; 
(6)  Administering the employee relations provisions of the Atlanta Code of Ordinances; 
(7)  Administering and coordinating employee assistance services and programs for employees and their families; 
(8)  Providing psychological pre-employment screening for public safety applicants; 
(9)  Ensuring that City of Atlanta employment policies and practices provide equal opportunity for all qualified persons regardless of race, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, creed, color, national origin or disability; and 
(10)  Administering and accounting for health, life and disability insurance plans for employees, retirees and elected officials. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 26, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-19, § 2, 3-25-05; Ord. No. 2013-24(13-O-1183), § 2, 7-16-13; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 5, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 2-232. - Functions and duties of the department of information technology. 
The functions and duties of the Department of Atlanta Information Management ("AIM") shall include: 
(1)  Overseeing the development of the citywide information and technology strategy; 
(2)  Coordinating all telephony, voice and data equipment and communications to and from city facilities; 
(3)  Coordinating development of information technology-related policies and operational procedures and the standards for the city's information technology infrastructure and architecture; 
(4)  Managing large-scale system implementation projects and other efforts in regard to information technology; and 
(5)  Maintaining the integrity of all data warehouses and systems. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 27, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2015-27(15-O-1212), § 2, 6-10-15 ; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 5, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 2-232.1. - Data handling policy. 
This policy applies to all Department of Atlanta Information Management ("AIM") and city employees, contractors/vendors, and partners that provide IT services to the City of Atlanta government, have access to electronic discovery resources or that have access to City of Atlanta privileged information. Collectively for the purpose of this section ("data employees"). 
This policy should be regularly reviewed in conjunction with City of Atlanta Information Classification Policy; City of Atlanta Records Management Policy; City of Atlanta Electronic Retention Policy; introduction of new software and City of Atlanta Electronic Communications Policy. 
All data employees shall adhere to and are responsible for the following: 
(1)  All City of Atlanta business related data stored in electronic or printed form shall be treated as confidential, unless otherwise stated by the data owner(s). 
(2)  Data employees shall be personally and professionally responsible for maintaining the security and confidentiality of all information within the care of this department and shall take all reasonable and appropriate steps to safeguard this trust. 
(3)  All data stored in electronic form must not be transmitted, copied, displayed or discussed except in the course of your duties and as authorized in writing by the application owning department/agency and your immediate supervisor or manager unless for official business (open records request, discovery or other mandated disclosure). 
(4)  Data employees with access to resources that allow for the remote review, copy or downloading shall not do so unless first contacting the creator, custodian, or owner of the information unless collection is part of an official investigation or prohibited by law. 
(5)  Data residing on tapes or other portable media shall not leave the data center except as authorized in writing by Department of Atlanta Information Management ("AIM") management or application owning department/agency. 
(6)  Any magnetic media being removed from service in the data center shall be rendered unreadable in a manner designated by Department of Atlanta Information Management ("AIM") policies and procedures. 
(7)  All printed materials shall be released only to the application owning department/agency or to the application owning department/agency's authorized courier unless otherwise required by law. 
(8)  Any spoiled or unclaimed printed materials shall be disposed of in a manner designated by Department of Atlanta Information Management ("AIM") policies, procedures and state law. 
All employees, contractors/vendors, and partners shall report any infraction or suspected infraction of this standard to their supervisor and division director and chief security officer immediately. 
All employees, contractors/vendors and partners shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal, termination of contract, in conformance with the provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Atlanta, Georgia for failure to conform to this policy. Violations of this policy may also serve as grounds for revocation of the privilege to use one or more of the resources. In addition, if applicable, violations of this policy may be referred to the appropriate authorities for criminal/civil prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07(13-O-0279), § 1, 2-27-13; Ord. No. 2015-27(15-O-1212), § 3, 6-10-15 ; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 5, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 2-233. - Additional qualifications of chief technology officer. 
In addition to the general qualifications in section 2-221, the chief information officer shall possess a master's degree in business or public administration, computer science, information technology or a closely related field and five years of progressively responsible supervisory experience in information technology management or an equivalent combination of education, training, and experience. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 28, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 5, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 2-234. - Department of law. 
The structure, duties and functions of the law department shall be as prescribed in Article 3 of the Charter and article VI, division 3 of chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 29, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 5, 8-29-18 ) 
Secs. 2-235—2-237. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-238. - Additional qualifications of commissioner of department of city planning; additional duties. 
(a)  In addition to the general qualifications provided in section 2-221, the commissioner of the department of city planning shall possess public or private employment experience in at least two of the following fields at a supervisory level for a minimum of two years: commercial and building code enforcement; economic and community development; urban renewal planning; planning for land use; planning for economic and social development; comprehensive and strategic planning. 
(b)  In addition to the duties related to the administration of the department of city planning, the commissioner shall also be responsible to: 
(1)  Manage the city's impact fee program; 
(2)  Provide neighborhood planning coordination; 
(3)  Manage special projects and initiatives; and 
(4)  Administer fair housing procedures; 
(5)  Develop and maintain a geographic information system which shall contain a series of computerized base maps, thematic maps, and administrative maps for the city along with a parcel-level attribute database linked to said maps. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 31, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2016-21(16-O-1346) , § 2, 6-29-16; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 4, 4-26-17) 
Sec. 2-239. - Offices in the department of city planning. 
The department of city planning shall consist of the following offices: 
(1)  Office of buildings; 
(2)  Office of zoning and development; 
(3)  Office of mobility planning; 
(4)  Office of housing and community development; and 
(5)  Office of design. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 32, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2004-55, § 1, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2011-57(11-O-1768), § 2, 12-14-11; Ord. No. 2016-21(16-O-1346) , § 3, 6-29-16; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 5, 4-26-17) 
Sec. 2-240. - Functions and duties of the office of buildings. 
The functions and duties of the office of buildings shall include: 
(1)  Enforcing all state minimum codes and other codes of the city relating to the construction and renovation of buildings and associated accessory structures, the demolition of buildings and associated accessory structures, and the disturbance of land, including, but not limited to building, plumbing, electrical, heating and air conditioning, building regulations, mechanical, fuel gas, fire, grading and drainage of sites, and tree ordinance; 
(2)  Cooperate with such other agencies of the city as may be charged with the enforcement of building maintenance codes and enforcing ordinances and other laws related the condition of existing structures and vacant or undeveloped real property; 
(3)  Supervising elevator regulations and ordinances either under the authority of the city or in coordination with agencies of the state; 
(4)  Supervising and administering the Georgia Fire Safety Law in cooperation with the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department; 
(5)  Administering the permit process and issuing permits for construction related activity, the demolition of structures, the disturbance of land and other related activities even if such activity is not specifically listed herein but is necessary for the convenience of city operations and the health safety and welfare of citizens and visitors, provided however that this authority shall not relieve an applicant from receiving approvals from other city agencies, including, without limitation, the office of planning, the urban design commission, the department of watershed management and the department of parks recreation and cultural affairs, as may be required by other parts of the City Code; 
(6)  Providing assistance and advice to the trade examining boards; keeping all codes up to date with assistance of advisory boards; 
(7)  Issuing street numbers; 
(8)  Assisting builders and developers with their plans through the various city systems; 
(9)  Processing of development impact and building permit fees; 
(10)  Perform its accounting functions as an enterprise fund as directed by the department of finance as to method under which that this system of accounting is to be adopted; 
(11)  Coordinate the approval of plans with the office of transportation planning and the department of public works for the ingress and egress of vehicular traffic in a manner that best accommodates the orderly and safe flow of such traffic onto city rights-of-way and provides for the safety of pedestrians and bicyclists; 
(12)  Coordinate the approval of plans and the enforcement of ordinances related to the discharge of stormwater from building sites and other parcels with the department of watershed management when necessary to protect and the health safety and welfare of citizens and visitors; and 
(13)  Perform and/or, delegate to other agencies of the city, such tasks as may be necessary in order to perform the functions and duties set forth herein; regulate construction and demolition related activity; regulate the repair or/reconstruction of existing structures for safe occupancy and the performance of all work in a safe and clean condition so as not to be a nuisance to neighboring properties or the general public. In the general performance of such functions and duties set forth herein, the director is also authorized to receive the delegation of authority from other agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 33, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2011-50(11-O-1293), § 1, 11-16-11; Ord. No. 2016-21(16-O-1346) , § 4, 6-29-16) 
Sec. 2-241. - Functions and duties of the office of zoning and development. 
The functions and duties of the office of zoning and development shall include: 
(1)  Providing information and advice to the mayor and city council, and other city officials in order to assist the growth and development of the city; 
(2)  Preparing and revising the city's five-year and 15-year comprehensive development plan in accordance with the requirements set forth in sections 3-60 1, 3-602, and 3-603 of the Charter; preparing the master plan and the official map required by section 3-603 of the Charter; 
(3)  Making comments and recommendations on annexation petitions; 
(4)  Reviewing the city's proposed capital improvements program as prepared by the department of finance and certifying it as to conformance with the city's adopted comprehensive development plan; 
(5)  Preparing reports on the status of all projects set forth in the city's adopted comprehensive development plan; 
(6)  Assisting builders and developers in assuring that building and development plans are in keeping with the city's overall comprehensive development plan; 
(7)  Conducting long-range, strategic planning studies on a broad range of urban issues including demographic and economic trends, financial resources, education, economic development, housing, human services, public safety, transportation, environmental quality, parks, recreation, cultural affairs, and urban design; and 
(8)  Preparing, administering, interpreting, and enforcing the zoning ordinance, including the sign ordinance; 
(9)  Preparing, administering, interpreting, and enforcing the subdivision ordinance in conformance with the city's adopted comprehensive development plan; 
(10)  Preparing, administering, interpreting, and enforcing other land development regulations; 
(11)  Zoning plan review and approval as part of the permitting process and certification; 
(12)  Processing and facilitating all matters that come before the Zoning Review Board; and 
(13)  Processing and facilitating all matters that comes before the Board of Zoning Adjustment; and 
(14)  Coordinating the city's neighborhood planning system including neighborhood impact and engagement. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 34, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2004-08, § 3, 2-10-04; Ord. No. 2016-21(16-O-1346) , § 5, 6-29-16) 
Sec. 2-242. - Functions and duties of office of mobility planning. 
The functions and duties of the office of mobility planning shall include: 
(1)  Transportation planning, including congestion mitigation; 
(2)  Streets and streetscape planning; 
(3)  Bicycle and pedestrian transit; and 
(4)  Coordinate, in collaboration with the Department of Public Works, local and regional transportation planning, including rapid transit system planning, design, construction and operation on behalf of the city; coordination of the city's activities with the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC) and the Georgia Regional Transportation Authority (GRTA); administration of TEA-21 grants, and bicycle plan implementation. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 35, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2016-21(16-O-1346) , § 6, 6-29-16) 
Sec. 2-243. - Functions and duties of office of housing and community development. 
The functions and duties of the office of housing and community development shall include: 
(1)  Assistance in financing city-initiated housing and development programs; 
(2)  Provision of assistance to builders and developers in various aspects of housing construction, rehabilitation and financing in the city; 
(3)  Administration, implementation and execution of housing redevelopment, renewal and conservation programs; 
(4)  Initiation and operation of programs to improve aesthetics conditions within the city, including elimination of unsightly conditions that affect the urban environment; 
(5)  Affordable housing impact analysis pursuant to City Code Sec. 54-2; 
(6)  Provision of relocation assistance to displaced persons and provision of community services and property management in conjunction with the programs and projects for which these services are required; 
(7)  Creating place-based community development strategies focused on improving livability at the neighborhood level; 
(8)  Neighborhood transformation; and 
(9)  Creating and managing economic programs and opportunities which may include, but are not limited to, urban enterprise zones, brownfields, and Main Street neighborhood impact and engagement. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 36, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2004-55, § 2, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2016-21(16-O-1346) , § 7, 6-29-16) 
Sec. 2-243.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-57(11-O-1768), § 3, adopted December 14, 2011, repealed ;;s 2-243.1, which pertained to functions and duties of bureau of code compliance. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 2-244. - Office of design. 
The functions and duties of the office of design shall include: 
(1)  Develop the physical design of the city to ensure a vibrant public realm and to enable landscape and architecture representative of Atlanta as a place; 
(2)  Operation of an urban design studio to review important civic projects for consistency with the design of the city and a vibrant public realm; and 
(3)  Administration of the city's historic preservation laws, including staffing to the Atlanta Urban Design Commission; coordination with local, state and national preservation authorities and organizations; historic review of projects funded with federal funds. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 37, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2016-21(16-O-1346) , § 8, 6-29-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-21(16-O-1346) , § 8, adopted June 29, 2016, added § 2-244 to the Code and renumbered the remaining sections of this article to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 2-245. - Department of police. 
The structure, duties and functions of the police department, shall be as prescribed in chapter 98 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2016-21(16-O-1346) , § 9, 6-29-16) 
Editor's note— Formerly 2-244. 
Secs. 2-246—2-249. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-250. - Functions and duties of the department of procurement. 
The functions and duties of the department of procurement and the chief procurement officer shall include: 
(1)  Serving as the principal public purchasing official for this city; 
(2)  Developing and implementing the procurement strategy for the city; 
(3)  Ensuring that the city maximizes the value it receives on its spending; effectively executing the public policy goals of the city related to purchasing; 
(4)  Overseeing the procurement of and maintaining programs for specifications development, contract administration and inspection and acceptance of supplies, services and professional and consultant services in accordance with the charter and code, as well as the management and disposal of surplus supplies; 
(5)  Negotiating leases in connection with the needs of the programs and projects of the city when authorized or required by law; 
(6)  Assisting in the preparation of contracts for all branches and agencies of the city government; 
(7)  Establishing a program for the general control of all inventories of supplies belonging to this city; 
(8)  Adopting operational procedures relating to the execution of the chief procurement officer's duties. These operating procedures shall be set forth in a contracting and procurement manual and shall be consistent with financial reporting requirements as provided by this Code; 
(9)  Unless otherwise provided, preparing all necessary resolutions or ordinances for adoption by the city council and approval by the mayor, authorizing the city to enter into contracts under this article; and 
(10)  Delivering all original executed contracts, together with all exhibits, bonds and certificates of insurance, to the chief financial officer for retention in the official records of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 39, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 2-251. - Additional qualifications of the chief procurement officer. 
In addition to the general qualifications specified in section 2-221, the chief procurement officer shall possess a master's degree in business administration, public administration or marketing; five years prior experience as a chief procurement officer or a deputy chief procurement officer in a contracting or procurement system of comparable size and scope. The requirement of a master's degree may be substituted by a bachelor's degree in the same field(s), plus ten year's managerial experience in public or corporate purchasing operations, marketing, or contract administration. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 40, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 2-252. - Bond of chief procurement officer. 
The chief procurement officer and the chief procurement officer's signatory designee shall individually give a bond in the sum of $150,000.00 payable to the city, conditioned upon the faithful performance by the official of all duties devolved upon such official and for the faithful accounting to the city for all goods and money that may come into the hands of such official and to indemnify and hold the city harmless for and on account of all the acts of such official in the performance of such official's duties. This bond shall be given by the official before entering upon the discharge of duties and shall be maintained by the official during the official's term of office. The city shall pay the premium on the bond. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 41, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2007-05 (06-O-0381), § 2, 1-22-07) 
Secs. 2-253—2-260. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-261. - Offices in the department of public works. 
The department of public works shall be composed of the following offices: 
(1)  Office of transportation; and 
(2)  Office of solid waste services. 
(3)  Office of fleet services. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 45, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2004-75, § 2, 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 3, 9-24-07) 
Sec. 2-262. - Additional qualifications of commissioner of department of public works; additional duties. 
(a)  In addition to the general qualifications for set forth in section 2-221, the commissioner of the department of public works shall possess a degree in engineering or public administration with five years experience at a senior supervisory level in at least one or in a combination of the following fields: traffic engineering, street and highway construction and maintenance, or solid waste collection and treatment. Such experience may be in either private employment or previous government employment. 
(b)  In addition to the duties related to the administration of the department, the commissioner of public works shall also be responsible for: 
(1)  Engineering reviews and design and construction management services on capital improvements projects in the department of public works; and 
(2)  Engineering services, including but not limited to the furnishing of lines and grades, the preparation of maps, plans and other lands records; when appropriate, maintain an up-to-date file of engineering maps and plans governing streets, easements and rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 46, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 2-263. - Functions and duties of the office of transportation. 
The functions and duties of the office of transportation shall include: 
(1)  Designing, constructing, installing, maintaining, repairing, and cleaning public streets, public alleys, sidewalks, bridges, viaducts and other related structures in the city's right-of-way; 
(2)  Determining the location, time and method of making an opening or excavation in the city's right-of-way, or the installation of any underground street structure and of the repair required because of such opening, excavation and installation; 
(3)  Developing, designing, implementing and maintaining the city's traffic management network which will include but not be limited to a system of traffic signals, street and highway illumination, street marking, lane controls and other traffic management devices; 
(4)  Conducting traffic engineering investigations of existing and anticipated vehicular and pedestrian movement problems; 
(5)  Regulating rights-of-way as it pertains to movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and managing uses in the right-of-way; 
(6)  Conducting traffic planning research and evaluations; 
(7)  Developing initiatives, policies and programs to ensure adequate on-street and off-street parking; 
(8)  Coordinating the city's transportation planning process with other city departments and local, regional, state and federal agencies; 
(9)  Reviewing all actions and activities which may affect the city's traffic and transportation management programs; 
(10)  Constructing, install and maintain street name signs, traffic signs and signals; and 
(11)  Placing of poles and wires of the city and appropriate utility companies in public places so as to cause as little obstruction as possible; compelling the removal of superfluous poles where not consistent with any existing franchises or other agreements. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 47, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 6, 9-24-07) 
Sec. 2-264. - Functions and duties of the office of solid waste services. 
The functions and duties of the office of solid waste services are to: 
(1)  Collect and dispose of garbage and waste matter and operate facilities for such purposes; and 
(2)  Clean the streets, sidewalks and public alleys. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 48, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 16, 9-24-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 16, adopted Sept. 24, 2007, amended the title of § 2-264 to read as herein set out. Formerly, said section pertained to functions and duties of the bureau of solid waste services. 
Sec. 2-265. - Functions and duties of the office of fleet services. 
(1)  Managing, conserving, maintaining, repairing and monitoring all motorized vehicles and related parts, supplies and inventory owned by the City of Atlanta; and 
(2)  Managing, conserving, maintaining, repairing and monitoring all motorized equipment and related parts, supplies and inventory owned by the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 49, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2004-75, § 3, 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 8, 9-24-07) 
Secs. 2-266—2-279. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-280. - Department of watershed management. 
(a)  The department of watershed management shall be composed of the following offices; 
(1)  Office of engineering services; 
(2)  Office of water treatment and reclamation; 
(3)  Office of watershed protection; 
(4)  Office of the commissioner of watershed management; 
(5)  Office of financial administration; 
(6)  Office of linear infrastructure operations; and 
(7)  Office of customer care and billing." 
(b)  The functions and duties of the department of watershed management shall be those prescribed in chapter 154 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 51, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2003-83, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2005-89, § 1, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2012-46(12-O-1316), § 11, 10-24-12, eff. 7-1-12; Ord. No. 2016-40(16-O-1568) , § 9, 11-16-16) 
Secs. 2-281—2-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEPARTMENTS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Departments generally, §§ 3-301 et seq., app. IV, §§ 1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Executive branch offices, § 2-231 et seq.; department contingency funds, § 2-925; office of contract compliance, § 2-1381 et seq.; department of aviation, § 22-26 et seq.; department of fire, § 78-26 et seq.; department of police, § 98-26 et seq.; auxiliary police unit, § 98-106 et seq.; department of corrections, § 98-151 et seq.; department of parks and recreation, § 110-31 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-301. - Functions not specifically enumerated to be assigned to a department by administrative order. 
Any function which by the Charter of the city is given to the mayor and/or the executive branch of government, which function is not enumerated as being the specific function of a specific department, shall be assigned by the mayor to a department, bureau or office by administrative order. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 59, 9-16-02) 
Secs. 2-302—2-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference— Department of finance, app. IV, §§ 1(d), 19 et seq. 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-906 et seq. 

Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 2-321. - Designation of ex officio marshal and treasurer; deputizing employees as deputy marshals, revenue collectors and license inspectors. 
(a)  The chief financial officer shall appoint a designee in the department of finance as ex officio marshal and treasurer. Subject to the approval of the mayor, the chief financial officer may provide for the periodic rotation of staff to serve in this position. 
(b)  The chief financial officer is authorized to deputize any other employees in the department of finance as deputy marshals, revenue collectors and license inspectors. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1013(a), (b); Ord. No. 2003-70, § 1, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 2005-19, § 1, 3-25-05) 
Charter reference— Chief financial officer to be ex officio marshal and treasurer, § 6-103(e), (g). 
Sec. 2-322. - Oath of employee serving as ex officio marshal, deputy treasurer. 
The employee or employees in the department of finance serving as ex officio marshal and deputy treasurer shall take and subscribe to an oath to uphold all the laws of the state and faithfully to perform the duties of office in addition to the oath required of public officials by the laws of the state. Such official shall have authority to conduct investigations, serve warrants and make arrests in the performance of these duties. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1014; Ord. No. 2005-19, § 1, 3-25-05; Ord. No. 2007-28(07-O-0712), § 1, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 2-323. - Investing of city funds. 
(a)  Policy. It is the policy of the city to invest public funds in a manner that will provide maximum security and the best commensurate yield while meeting the daily cash flow demands of the city. This investment policy has been written in compliance with authority granted in Section 2-323 of the Atlanta City Code, O.C.G.A. § 36-83-4 and § 36-82-7, as it may be from time to time amended and will set forth the guidelines and objectives necessary to achieve a prudent cash and investment management program. 
(b)  Scope. This policy governs the investment of the "Restricted Investment Portfolio," and the "General Fund Portfolio", collectively known as the "Total Investment Portfolio." The restricted investment portfolio is comprised primarily of the debt service sinking funds and construction funds resulting from the proceeds of various city bond issues. These bond funds are unique in that they have associated legal covenants which detail specific types of legal investment instruments as per bond issue. The restricted investment portfolio shall be structured to meet known debt service payments and construction draw schedules. In addition to this policy, bond proceeds and other bond funds (including debt service and reserve funds) shall be invested in accordance with governing ordinance and by the provisions of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, including all regulations and rulings promulgated thereunder applicable to the issuance of tax-exempt obligations. 
The general investment portfolio is the largest portfolio, consisting of 16 funds that make up the concentration account. This portfolio encompasses the city's primary operating funds which include the general fund as well as various enterprise funds. The general investment portfolio shall be diversified by maturity date and structured to meet all anticipated net outflows that are projected to occur. 
This policy shall be made available to anyone who has management responsibility for city funds, and in the absence of their specific investment policy, or not being otherwise governed by state law, this policy shall prevail. With respect to the funds of non-profit corporations that are established by city resolution and act as instrumentalities of the city, it is recommended that the city's investment policy be followed. 
(1)  Funds covered by this policy and managed as part of the pooled general investment portfolio: 
(2)  Funds covered by this policy and managed as part of the pooled restricted investment portfolio are as follows: 
Bond funds —Funds established with the proceeds from specific bond issues when it is determined that segregating these funds from the pooled funds portfolio will result in maximum interest earnings retention under the provisions of the Tax Reform Act of 1986. 
Bond reserve funds —Funds set at prescribed levels by certain bond ordinances to pay principal and/or interest if required to prevent default. 
(3)  Funds not governed by this policy include: 
General Employee's Pension Fund; 
Firefighters Pension Fund; 
Police Officers Pension Fund. 
Endowment funds —Funds given to the city with the instructions that the principal is to remain intact, unless otherwise agreed to, and the income generated by the investments will be used for specified purposes. 
(c)  Objective. Investment of the funds covered by this policy shall be governed by the following investment objectives, in order of priority: 
(1)  Legality. All investments shall fully comply with federal, state, and local laws. Additional requirements are discussed in the authorized and suitable investment section of this investment policy. 
(2)  Safety. Safety of principal is the primary objective of the investment policy. Investment of the city's funds shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks to ensure the preservation of capital for the overall portfolio. To attain this objective, investment in only high quality securities and diversification are required in order that potential losses on individual securities do not exceed the income generated from the remainder of the portfolio (see subsection (m) "Diversification and maximum maturities"). 
(3)  Liquidity. The city's investment portfolio will remain sufficiently liquid to enable the city to meet all operating requirements that might be reasonably anticipated. 
(4)  Yield. The city's investment portfolio shall be designed with the objective of attaining a market rate of return, throughout budgetary and economic cycles, while taking into consideration the investment risk constraints and cash flow characteristics of the portfolio. 
(d)  Delegation of authority. The chief financial officer shall assume ultimate responsibility regarding investment decisions on behalf of the city. Under the provisions of state and city codes, the chief financial officer has the ability to designate an employee of the department of finance to manage the daily investment of city funds. This responsibility has been designated to the Director - Treasury Services, who assumes the day-to-day investment decisions. All those responsible for making investment decisions shall be collectively referred to as "investment officers" for purposes of this policy. The chief financial officer is authorized to create forms and questionnaires deemed necessary to assist in the evaluation and selection of broker/dealers that will be required to be completed by that third-party in order to comply with the city's investment policies and state laws. 
(e)  Controls and procedures. The chief financial officer or his designee shall establish written procedures for the operation of the investment program consistent with this investment policy. Such procedures shall include explicit delegation of authority to any other persons responsible for investment transactions. No person may engage in an investment transaction except as provided under the terms of this policy and the written procedures. Authority granted to a person to invest the city's funds is effective until rescinded or until termination of the person's employment by the city. The chief financial officer shall be responsible for all transactions undertaken and shall establish a system of controls to regulate the activities of subordinate officials. Both the chief financial officer and the cash and investment manager shall possess sufficient working knowledge of economics and securities markets, as well as the supervisory experience and judgment necessary to carry out the responsibilities outlined in this policy. 
Formal written procedures shall also include but not be limited to: 
(1)  A formal process that outlines procedures relating to the purchase and sale of securities. 
(2)  A formal reporting system to monitor the performance of investment securities held. This system shall include written reports as outlined in subsection (o) of this policy. 
(3)  A reconciliation process that compares third-party security confirmations to internally produced reports and trade tickets. 
(4)  Performance measurement through the use of appropriate benchmarks that share the same characteristics of the general investment portfolio. 
(5)  A system of compliance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) of the Government Accounting Standards Board (GSFB). 
(6)  A system of internal controls, designed to detect errors, misrepresentation or imprudent actions. 
(7)  Thorough cross training of department employees to allow for back up of critical investment duties. 
(8)  An annual review of investment operations. 
(f)  Prudence. Investment officers shall adhere to the "prudence investor" standard as suggested by the Government Finance Officer's Association (GFOA), which states that: 
"Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their capital as well as the probable income to be derived." 
(1)  The "prudent investor" standard shall be applied in the context of managing an overall portfolio. Investment officers who exercise due diligence and act in accordance with the investment policy and written procedures, shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security's credit risk or market price changes, provided deviations from expectations are reported in a timely fashion and appropriate action is taken to control adverse developments. 
(2)  Investment officers, while acting in accordance with this policy and written procedures pertaining to the administration and management of the city's assets, and who exercise proper due diligence, shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security's credit risk or market price changes, provided that deviations from expectations are reported in a timely fashion and appropriate action is taken to control and prevent any further adverse developments. 
(3)  Securities shall not be purchased with trading or speculation as the dominant selection criteria. 
(g)  Ethics and conflicts of interest. Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that could conflict with proper execution of the investment program, or which could impair their ability to make impartial investment decisions. 
(1)  Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall disclose any material interests in financial institutions with which they conduct business. 
(2)  Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall disclose any large personal financial/investment positions that could be related to the performance of the investment portfolio. The city statute on conflict of interest and disclosure shall be strictly followed. 
(h)  Authorized and suitable investments. City funds governed by this policy may be invested in the instruments described below, all of which are authorized by O.C.G.A. § 36-83-4. However, investments in instruments other than government securities shall be made only if the yield is equal to or greater than the bond equivalent yield on U.S. Treasury obligations of comparable maturity. 
Investments not listed below, including collateralized mortgage obligations and reverse repurchase agreements, are strictly prohibited. In addition, the investment officers may at times restrict or prohibit the purchase of specific issues due to current market conditions. 
An investment that requires a minimum rating under this section does not qualify, as an authorized investment during the period the investment does not have the minimum rating. The city shall take all prudent measures consistent with this investment policy to liquidate an investment that does not have the minimum rating. 
The following securities are authorized under O.C.G.A. § 36-83-4: 
(1)  Obligations issued by the United States government; 
(2)  Obligations fully insured or guaranteed by the United States government or a United States government agency; 
(3)  Obligations of the State of Georgia or of other states; 
(4)  Obligations of other political subdivisions of the State of Georgia; 
(5)  Obligations of any corporation of the United States Government; 
(6)  Prime banker's acceptances; 
(7)  The local government investment pool established by O.C.G.A. § 36-83-8; 
(8)  Fully collateralized repurchase agreements provided the city has on file a signed master repurchase agreement, approved by the city attorney, which details eligible collateral, collateralization ratios, standards for collateral custody and control, collateral valuation, and conditions for agreement termination and provided the repurchase agreement: 
a.  Has a defined termination date; 
b.  Is secured by obligations in accordance with subsection (k) herein; 
c.  Requires the securities being purchased by the city to be assigned to the city, held in the city's name, and deposited at the time the investment is made with the city or with a third party selected and approved by the city; and 
d.  Is placed through a primary government securities dealer, as defined by the Federal Reserve, or a financial institution doing business in this state, and which is rated no less than A or its equivalent by two nationally recognized rating services. 
(i)  Authorized broker/dealers and financial institutions. The chief financial officer and designated investment staff shall review, revise, and adopt a list of qualified broker/dealers and financial institutions authorized to engage in investment transactions with the city. This list may include "primary" government securities dealers or regional dealers (inclusive of minority-owned firms, historically underutilized businesses (HUB's) and/or women-owned business enterprises (WBE's)) that qualify under the Securities & Exchange Commission Rule 15C3-1 (Uniform Net Capital Rule). 
In order to be considered for approval, firms will be required to provide: 
(1)  Audited financial statements for the most recent period. 
(2)  Proof of Financial Industry Regulatory Authority ("FINRA") certification resolution. 
(3)  Proof of registration with the state securities board. 
(4)  Clearing agreement (if net capital falls below $20,000,000.00). 
(5)  Completed broker/dealer questionnaire and acknowledgement of state and city investment policies. 
(6)  Such other documents as the chief financial officer may reasonably require. 
Financial institutions and broker/dealers will be evaluated semi-annually to determine financial stability and degree of service. 
No public deposit shall be made except in a qualified public depository as established by state law. 
(j)  Competitive bidding. It is the policy of the city to limit investment transactions to those banks and broker/dealers on the City of Atlanta's approved bid list. In addition, the city shall seek three competitive bids and offers on all individual security purchases and sales except for: 
(1)  Daily repurchase agreement; 
(2)  Short-term discount paper purchases; 
(3)  Transactions with the local government investment pools (which are deemed to be made at prevailing market rates); 
(4)  Treasury and agency securities purchased at issue or "to be announced" (TBA) through an approved broker/dealer or financial institution; or 
(5)  Automatic overnight "sweep" transactions with the city depository. 
In situations where the exact security being offered is not offered by other dealers, offers on the closest comparable investment may be used to establish a fair market price for the security. 
All bid and offers received shall be documented and retained on individual trade tickets or in trade logs. It shall be the responsibility of the investment officer associated with the transaction to record the following minimum information: Financial institution selected, rate quoted, security description, cover bids/offers, and special considerations in the event that the lowest priced security was not selected. 
(k)  Collateralization. The city requires that all uninsured collected balances plus accrued interest, if any, in depository accounts be secured in accordance with this policy. Financial institutions serving as city depositories will be required to sign a depository agreement with the city which details eligible collateral, collateralization ratios, standards for collateral custody and control, collateral valuation, rights of substitution and conditions for agreement termination. 
The city requires that all securities purchased under the terms of a repurchase agreement be assigned to the city, with clearly marked evidence of ownership through safekeeping receipts. Dealers and financial institutions wishing to transact repurchase agreements with the city will be required to sign the a master repurchase agreement, subject to approval by the city, which details eligible collateral, collateralization ratios, standards for collateral custody and control, collateral valuation, rights of substitution, and conditions for agreement termination. 
Collateral will always be held by an independent third party with whom the city has a current custodial agreement and shall be reviewed at least monthly to ensure that the market value of the pledged securities is adequate. The right of collateral substitution may be granted after obtaining prior approval from the city. 
(1)  Securities authorized for collateral under this policy are limited to those investments outlined in subsection (h)(1) through (h)(3). 
(2)  The collateralization level for repurchase agreements shall be 102 percent of the market value of principal and accrued interest. 
(3)  Depository products including certificates of deposit. 
(4)  The collateralization level for certificates of deposit shall be 110 percent in accordance to the Georgia Code O.C.G.A. § 45-8-12. 
(l)  Safekeeping and custody. Safekeeping and custody of securities and collateral shall be in accordance with state law. All securities transactions, except local government investment pool and money market mutual fund transactions, shall be conducted on a delivery versus payment (DVP) basis. Securities and collateral will be held by a third party custodian designated by the city, and held in the city's name as evidenced by original safekeeping receipts of the institution with which the securities are deposited. The custodian shall also provide monthly safekeeping statements that contain sufficient detail of securities held including, but not limited to, par, security type, CUSIP, maturity date, coupon and market value. Similarly, the city or the city's designated custodian shall take delivery of securities pledged as collateral on repurchase agreements with primary dealer firms. In repurchase transactions involving local banks, delivery is only required on agreements whose terms 
(m)  Diversification. The city shall seek to ladder the maturities of the portfolio to correspond with known projected cash flow needs, taking into consideration large reoccurring expenditure items such as payroll and bond disbursements. 
The city shall seek to ladder the maturities of the portfolio to correspond with known liquidity needs, taking into consideration large reoccurring expenditure items such as payroll and bond disbursements. The city shall seek to maintain a weighted-average maturity of the total portfolio not to exceed five years and shall limit the maturity of any single security to five years. 
The city's investment portfolios, in aggregate, should be diversified to limit market and credit risk in general accord with the following limitations: 

 
(1)  The collateralization level for certificates of deposit shall be 110 percent in accordance to O.C.G.A. § 45-8-2. 
(2)  The city shall have the authority to invest up to $100,000,000.00 in municipal bonds which do not meet the maximum maturity and ratings guidelines above. Those $100,000,000.00 of municipal bonds will be allowed to have single security maximum maturities of up ten years and minimum investment grade ratings (BBB-/Baa3/BBB-). All other criteria herein will be still need to be met. 
The above allocation levels are intended to serve as guidelines for the investment manager. The allocation may be adjusted in response to changing market conditions, cash flow requirements and the discretion of the chief financial officer. 
Capital projects funds are further limited by certain arbitrage restrictions and specific bond covenants. Therefore, prior to investment of these funds, the likelihood of meeting rebate exceptions should be determined, and authorized investments as per the official bond statements shall be verified. 
(3)  With respect to bond proceeds and other bond funds, the city may, in the bond ordinance, specifically authorize investments in repurchase agreements with maturities in excess of 180 days subject to any required approvals from bond insurers. 
(n)  Security swap transactions. The city will seek to maximize its investment opportunities, when advantageous to do so, by selling securities that have become expensive or "rich" to the market and simultaneously purchasing similar securities that offer a higher relative return. This concurrent purchase and sales is commonly referred to as a "swap." The goal of this transaction type is to: 
(1)  Improve the quality of the portfolio by selling a security with a higher risk and buying a security with a lower risk; 
(2)  Adjusting the target duration of the portfolio; or 
(3)  Increase yield by purchasing a security with a higher relative return than the security being sold. 
In certain instances, the city may incur a loss for accounting purposes in the sale of a security during a swap transaction. Such a loss will be considered acceptable only if the loss on the sale is expected to be smaller than the difference in yield advantage over the horizon period. 
If a broker/dealer proposes a swap idea, that same broker/dealer shall be given a "last look" opportunity to match the lowest offer or highest bid. 
(o)  Portfolio monitoring. All trading losses incurred shall be reported immediately to the chief financial officer with appropriate documentation that formed the basis for the transaction. A summary of trading gains and losses shall be provided to the chief financial officer not less than monthly basis in order to determine the propriety of trading activity. This information will be included in the quarterly investment report. 
While this policy prescribes various maximum and minimum limitations, it is intended primarily as a management tool. When the chief financial officer determines that an exception to one of the policy's numerical limits is in the best interest of the city, and is otherwise consistent with the investment policy, such exception is permitted so long as it is likewise consistent with applicable city, state and federal laws. All exceptions made to this policy and the appropriate explanation or justification for the exceptions shall be reported in the quarterly investment report. 
Whenever an exception is caused by an inadvertent breach of these policies, that fact shall be reported in writing to the mayor and city council. Such report shall be made on a timely basis, but no later than five business days from the discovery date of the policy exception. 
(p)  Reporting. The cash and investment manager shall prepare a quarterly investment report. This report which will include a summary of the current status of the general investment portfolio and security transactions made over the prior quarter, will be delivered to each council member and the mayor. The quarterly investment report shall include: 
(1)  A review of the bond market and U.S. economy; 
(2)  Realized and unrealized gains or losses on the portfolio (in accordance with GASB requirements); 
(3)  Security allocation and maturity distribution of the portfolio; 
(4)  Portfolio characteristics as measured against selected benchmarks; 
(5)  Proposed portfolio strategy for the next reporting period; 
(6)  Detail of portfolio holdings; and 
(7)  Statement of compliance with written investment policy. 
The above stated components of the portfolio performance reports can be adjusted at the discretion of the chief financial officer. 
In addition, the portfolio shall be marked-to-market monthly and a report shall be produced and distributed to the chief financial officer showing realized/unrealized gains and losses on the portfolio at the end of each monthly reporting period. 
(q)  Investment strategies. The following strategies may be used to maximize return on investments: 
(1)  Asset/liability matching— Matching maturities to anticipated cash flow requirements. This strategy could extend the average weighted maturity of a subset of the portfolio and the absolute maturity of securities within the portfolio. 
(2)  Matching maturities to anticipated cash flow requirements. At times, this strategy may be exited. 
(3)  Maturity extension— A positive sloping or "normal" yield curve rewards longer-term investments. All purchase decisions that do not involve the matching of known cash needs shall be based on an analysis of the relative yield benefit to lengthening the maturity. 
(4)  Determination of an investment's relative value— By following historical spread relationships between different security types and issuers, it is possible to determine the securities that offer the best yield value on any given day. The city will seek to invest funds in the highest yielding investment security within established policy guidelines for safety and liquidity. 
(5)  Market opportunities— Although money markets are generally efficient, there are opportunities for yield enhancement by selling securities that become unusually "expensive" or high in price, and purchasing similar securities that are considered "cheap" or low in price. These "swap" opportunities often occur as the spreads between different types of securities narrow or widen. 
(6)  Anticipating market changes— Although it is not possible to consistently predict market trends, an understanding of the factors that affect the market is important when determining an optimal maturity for the portfolio. Trading is not to be made solely on the basis of interest rate forecasts, but specific decisions involving maturity dates should consider short-term market expectations. 
(r)  Performance measurement. The investment performance of the City of Atlanta will be evaluated quarterly by comparison to established benchmarks. The selection of the benchmarks will be based upon the investment strategy and length of the investment portfolio and shall be approved by the chief financial officer and the city council. The city currently measures performance against the following indices: 
(1)  Three-Month Constant Maturity (CMT) Treasury Index. 
(2)  One-Year Constant Maturity (CMT) Treasury Index. 
(3)  Three-Year Treasury Rate. 
(4)  Five-Year Treasury Rate. 
(s)  Training. The investment officers and the persons authorized to execute investment transactions shall attend at least one investment training session within 12 months after taking office or assuming duties and receive not less than eight hours of instruction relating to investment responsibilities every two years. Within 12 months of assuming investment duties, investment officers will be required to acquire the Certified Treasury Professional (CTP) designation and enroll in the Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) program. 
(t)  Investment policy adoption. The city's investment policy is hereby adopted by ordinance of the Atlanta City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1996-08, §§ 1—13, 3-3-96; Ord. No. 2001-68, §§ 1.0—20.0, 9-25-01; Ord. No. 2014-24(14-O-1149), § 1(Exh. B), 6-25-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-43(15-O-1239), § 1(Exh. A), 8-26-15 ) 
Sec. 2-324. - Investments in predatory lenders and affiliates. 
(a)  No monies or funds held under any provision of any pension or retirement provisions shall hereinafter be invested in the stocks, securities, or other obligations of any business entity that is a high cost lender or a predatory lender or that is an affiliate of any business entity that is a high cost lender or a predatory lender as defined by section 58-102 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  No monies or funds held under any provision of any pension or retirement provisions shall hereinafter be invested in the securities collateralized by any interest in loans originating or purchased by any business entity that is a high cost lender or a predatory lender or that is an affiliate of any business entity that is a high cost lender or a predatory lender as defined in section 58-102 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2001-71, § 3, 9-25-01) 
Secs. 2-325—2-340. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Chief Financial Officer[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference— Chief financial officer generally, § 3-304, and app. IV, § 18. 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-781 et seq.; employee benefits, § 2-841 et seq.; personnel, ch. 114. 

Sec. 2-341. - Oath, bond. 
The chief financial officer shall qualify by taking an oath for the faithful performance of duties and by giving a bond to the city in the sum of $100,000.00, with good securities, subject to approval by the mayor, conditioned for the faithful performance of duties. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1011) 
Sec. 2-342. - Expenditures for continuing operation of city. 
The chief financial officer, with the approval of the mayor and monthly report to the council, shall be authorized to make such expenditures of city funds as are deemed necessary and proper for the continuing operation of the city and its various departments, in accordance with good businesslike practices, between July 1 and such time as the new general budget for the city is adopted by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1018; Ord. No. 2003-70, § 3, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 2009-39(09-O-1109), § 1, 7-13-09) 
Note— Formerly § 2-343 
Sec. 2-343. - Copy of proposed budget and supporting legislation furnished to Councilmembers prior to submission for adoption. 
It shall be the duty of the chief financial officer to furnish each member of the council a complete detailed copy of the proposed annual budget and legislation designed to support the proposed annual budget at least five days before the budget is submitted to the council for adoption. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1027; Ord. No. 2003-70, § 3, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 2010-19(10-O-0893), § 1, 5-26-10; Ord. No. 2010-38(10-O-1241), § 1, 7-15-10) 
Note— Formerly § 2-344 
Charter reference— Mayor to submit proposed budget to council, § 6-302. 
Sec. 2-344. - Annual report. 
It shall be the duty of the chief financial officer to supervise the details of the preparation of an annual report, and the chief financial officer is empowered to employ temporary personnel skilled in such matters if so desired. The committee on finance shall annually make suitable appropriations for the preparation of such annual report. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1028; Ord. No. 2003-70, § 3, 5-27-03) 
Note— Formerly § 2-345 
Sec. 2-344.1. - Reports regarding variable rate debt obligations. 
The chief financial officer shall provide a written report to the president and members of the city council setting forth the status of the interest rates associated with all outstanding variable rate debt of the city. This report shall be provided on a monthly basis and shall include the series of debt, the outstanding amount of debt, and the rate or rates associated with the debt during the immediately preceding month. 
(Ord. No. 2008-76(08-O-1751), § 1, 9-24-08) 
Sec. 2-345. - File of official newspaper advertisements; execution docket; record of sales. 
It shall be the duty of the chief financial officer to keep the following: 
(1)  A file of all newspapers in which the chief financial officer's official advertisements appear. 
(2)  An execution docket, wherein the chief financial officer shall enter a full description of all executions levied on any kind of property, showing the property on which the levy was made, the date of levy and of the service of notice, together with all acts and doings thereon of the chief financial officer. 
(3)  A book, in which shall be entered a record of all sales made by the chief financial officer, describing accurately the property and process under which sold, the date of the levy and sale and the purchaser and price. 
(4)  A proper index for each of such books, which shall be kept up for each entry thereon. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4005; Ord. No. 2003-70, § 3, 5-27-03) 
Note— Formerly § 2-346 
Sec. 2-346. - Inventories of department property. 
The chief financial officer shall require and it is made the duty of each department to make and keep continuous inventories of the property of the department and, at regular intervals and at any other time when in the judgment of the chief financial officer it is necessary, make reports of the inventories to the chief financial officer. The chief financial officer shall make this property accounting one of the features of the bookkeeping system of such departments. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1021; Ord. No. 2003-70, § 3, 5-27-03) 
Note— Formerly § 2-347 
Sec. 2-347. - Investigation of officers and employees. 
The chief financial officer shall have the authority to investigate alleged irregularities on the part of any elected or appointed employee or officer whose salary is paid in whole or in part from the city treasury in any matters in which the city is or may be a party in interest. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1036; Ord. No. 2003-70, § 3, 5-27-03) 
Note— Formerly § 2-348 
Sec. 2-348. - Records of bonds and revenue certificates. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the chief financial officer to see that complete records are maintained on all city bonds, revenue bonds and revenue certificates issued by the city, together with the interest due on such bonds and revenue certificates to maturity. 
(b)  Bond registers. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the chief financial officer to maintain the necessary bond registers to record each individual bond on each issue as to maturity dates and to make the necessary entries when the bonds are paid so that the bond registers will at all times reflect the outstanding bonds and certificates. 
(c)  Bond ledger. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the chief financial officer to maintain a registered bond ledger and to record in such ledger all bonds and revenue certificates and to make semiannual interest payments due the holder of the registered bonds as the payments become due. 
(d)  Contract with bank for keeping of records. The chief financial officer, with the approval of the committee on finance of the council, may contract with an Atlanta clearing house bank to keep a record of all city bonds, revenue certificates and interest coupons paid. The bank shall submit to the chief financial officer a detailed report of such payments, together with a certificate showing that such paid bonds, revenue certificates and interest coupons have been cremated. However, the records to be maintained by such bank shall not in any way relieve the chief financial officer of the responsibilities set forth in this section. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1026; Ord. No. 2003-70, § 3, 5-27-03) 
Note— Formerly § 2-349 
Sec. 2-349. - Indexed record of streets on which curbing or sewers have been ordered. 
The chief financial officer shall keep a record showing all the streets and portions of streets on which curbing or sewers have been ordered to be laid by the mayor and council, shall prepare suitable indexes to such records and shall keep these records in the office of the chief financial officer for the inspection of the public. However, this section shall not be construed as seeking to interfere with ordinances or provisions of the Charter and related state laws respecting the time of fixing the lien for the laying of curbing or sewers on streets or portions thereof, but this section is only intended for the convenience of the public who may desire to inspect the index for such information as it may furnish. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1025; Ord. No. 2003-70, § 3, 5-27-03) 
Note— Formerly § 2-350 
Sec. 2-350. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-22, § 2, approved March 26, 2002, repealed § 2-351 in its entirety. Formerly said section pertained to preparation of audits on contracts. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Note— Ord. No. 2003-70, § 3, adopted May 27, 2003, renumbered § 2-351 as 2-350. 
Sec. 2-351. - Authorization to issue commercial paper. 
(a)  Whenever the city is authorized by law to issue bonds, notes or certificates, including but not limited to general obligation bonds, revenue bonds, bond anticipation notes, tax anticipation notes, or revenue anticipation certificates, the chief financial officer is authorized to issue commercial paper notes in accordance with the provisions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-82-240, et seq., as may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  When the chief financial officer deems that issuance of commercial paper is prudent for the undertaking of certain capital projects, the council shall authorize the chief financial officer to set the maturity dates, principal amounts, redemption provisions, interest rates and other terms and conditions, subject to the parameters established by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  The chief financial officer, in consultation with the city's financial advisors, is empowered to conduct the transaction of commercial paper notes by competitive or negotiated sale in public offerings and private placements. 
(d)  In addition to the criteria set forth in Code section 2-323(i), the chief financial officer shall also consider experience as potential underwriters/commercial paper dealers when choosing a financial institution(s) for tax-exempt commercial paper transactions. 
(Ord. No. 2004-47, § 1, 8-20-04) 
Secs. 2-352—2-369. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Bureaus and Divisions 

Sec. 2-370. - Divisions in the department of finance. 
The department of finance shall be responsible to the mayor and to the council, and shall consist of the following divisions: 
(1)  Office of budget and fiscal policy; 
(2)  Office of the controller; 
(3)  Office of the treasurer; 
(4)  Office of grants management; 
(5)  Office of administrative services; 
(6)  Office of administrative services; 
(7)  Office of financial systems; 
(8)  Office of revenue; 
(9)  Office of enterprise risk management; 
(10)  Office of management consulting. 
(Ord. No. 2001-9, § 2, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 69, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2003-70, § 4, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 2005-19, § 1, 3-25-05; Ord. No. 2007-28(07-O-0712), § 2, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 2009-38(09-O-1102), § 2, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 2011-11(11-O-0350), § 1, 4-27-11; 2018-24(18-O-1330), § 1, 6-27-18) ) 
Sec. 2-371. - Office of budget and fiscal policy. 
(a)  In addition to the general qualifications set out in section 2-221, the chief of the office of budget and fiscal policy shall have the following qualifications: 
(1)  Graduation from an accredited college or university with a baccalaureate degree and one year of graduate study in business administration, public administration, finance or a related field and experience in budget preparation, budget analysis, budget execution, financial analysis, financial management, management analysis or a related area; and 
(2)  Eight years of experience at a supervisory level in the areas specified in subsection (1) of this section; and 
(3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(b)  The functions and duties of the office of budget and fiscal policy shall include but not be limited to: budget and management analysis, budget development and management for general government operations and enterprises, programmatic and operational analysis, support of CIP and capital projects management; analysis and forecasting, revenue forecasting, rate studies, and exploration of new revenue sources. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1002(b); Ord. No. 2003-70, § 5, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 2005-19, § 1, 3-25-05; Ord. No. 2007-28(07-O-0712), § 3, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 2-372. - Office of the controller. 
(a)  In addition to the general qualifications set out in section 2-221, the controller shall have the following qualifications: 
(1)  Graduation from an accredited college or university with a baccalaureate degree in accounting or a closely related field; and 
(2)  A license to engage in practice as a certified public accountant in the State of Georgia; and 
(3)  At least ten years of accounting and leadership experience with employment as a corporate or division controller; a chief financial officer; a director of internal auditing, or a reasonable equivalent thereof; 
(4)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this section. 
(b)  The functions and duties of the office of the controller shall include but not be limited to: general accounting to include financial statement reporting, coordination of the external audits, coordination of the department of finance responses to compliance issues and development of financial policy and procedures, and the offices of accounts payable and payroll. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1002(d); Ord. No. 2003-70, § 6, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 2005-19, § 1, 3-25-05; Ord. No. 2007-28(07-O-0712), § 3, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 2011-11(11-O-0350), § 2, 4-27-11) 
Sec. 2-373. - Office of the treasurer. 
The functions and duties of the office of the treasurer shall be to oversee major functions of the city's financial position with primary responsibilities for the management of the city's debt, cash and investment functions to include debt management, long term financial plans, debt issuances, analysis and management of existing debt, cash flow, forecasting, liaising with financial advisors, bond rating agencies and investors, and maintaining banking relationships. The responsibilities of this office also include performing evaluations on the city's financial position and the development of recommendations to improve the city's finances. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1002(e); Ord. No. 2003-70, § 7, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 2005-19, § 1, 3-25-05; Ord. No. 2007-28(07-O-0712), § 3, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 2011-11(11-O-0350), § 3, 4-27-11; 2018-24(18-O-1330), § 2, 6-27-18) ) 
Sec. 2-374. - Office of grants management. 
The primary functions of the office of grants management is to manage a citywide grants program inclusive of all federal entitlement and competitive grants, foundation, state and pass-through grants. Additional functions of the office shall include the coordination and assistance with the application process for new grants and renewals from federal and state governments, as well as foundations and private entities. Management of grants compliance through coordination of regular monitoring of agencies shall be scheduled, as required, to ensure compliance with applicable regulations and laws. Additionally, the office reviews all grant applications, monitors grants for compliance, manages the financial and reporting aspects of grants, and provides grants services. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1002(f); Ord. No. 2003-70, § 8, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 2005-19, § 1, 3-25-05; Ord. No. 2007-28(07-O-0712), § 3, 5-29-07; 2018-24(18-O-1330), § 3, 6-27-18) ) 
Sec. 2-375. - Office of administrative services. 
The office of administrative services manages functions associated with responses to open records requests, human resource administration, staff recruitment and training, background investigations, internal staff investigations, procurement, organizational design, space management, financial management and budget administration, invoice management; and, the office of records management including the physical maintenance of records for city departments being transferred to and from the outsourced contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2005-19, § 1, 3-25-05; Ord. No. 2007-28(07-O-0712), § 3, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 2011-11(11-O-0350), § 4, 4-27-11; 2018-24(18-O-1330), § 4, 6-27-18) ) 
Sec. 2-376. - Office of financial systems. 
The functions and duties of the office of financial systems shall include ensuring that the financial management systems comply with established policies including all information technology security requirements. The office of financial systems shall also serve as the chief financial officer's principal interface with the licensor of the city's financial database management applications and the provider of maintenance and support for the financial database management applications as well as the Department of Atlanta Information Management ("AIM"), and shall develop, arrange and manage the independent verification and validation of new financial systems software and/or modifications to existing systems. 
(Ord. No. 2007-28(07-O-0712), § 4, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 2011-11(11-O-0350), § 5, 4-27-11; Ord. No. 2015-27(15-O-1212), § 4, 6-10-15 ) 
Sec. 2-377. - Office of revenues. 
The functions and duties of the office of revenue shall include, but not be limited to: billing and collections including billing of fees, taxes, rents, etc.; managing accounts receivable, managing outside collection efforts, revenue auditing, and audits of business license fees and tax payments. 
(Ord. No. 2007-28(07-O-0712), § 4, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 2-378. - Office of enterprise risk management. 
The office of enterprise risk management has responsibility for evaluating, identifying and analyzing potential risk exposures of the city and for recommending the most appropriate combination of risk control and risk financing techniques. This office also has responsibility for the administration of the Workers' Compensation Self-Insurance Program, oversees and implements policies and procedures which promote a safe work place via the safety program, ensures compliance with occupational safety requirements, has responsibility for overseeing and administering the Owner Controller Insurance Program (OICP), and directs the purchase and placement of all insurance coverage under the OICP, consisting of general liability, workers' compensation, excess liability, professional liability, pollution liability and builder's risk insurance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11(11-O-0350), § 6, 4-27-11) 
Sec. 2-379. - Office of management consulting. 
The functions and duties of the office of management consulting shall be to provide financial business process support through the identification and development of process change within the department of finance and citywide. This office will serve as liaison in the development of processes inherent to responsibilities unique to the department of finance. The office of management consulting is responsible for benchmarking, developing and implementing best practices in the completion of financial processes. This office is also responsible for coordinating contract compliances issues, support of ATLstat in the absence of the deputy chief financial officer or the chief financial officer, financial reporting, the development of a citywide disaster recovery plan, and other special projects as assigned. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11(11-O-0350), § 7, 4-27-11) 
Secs. 2-380—2-395. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENT OF LAW[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Charter reference— Department of law generally, app. IV, §§ 1(g), 27, 28; city attorney, § 3-303. 

Sec. 2-396. - Authority of department. 
The department of law is vested with complete and exclusive authority and jurisdiction in all matters of law relating to the executive branch of the city government and of every department, bureau, office, institution, commission, committee, board and other agency thereof. Every department, bureau, office, institution, commission, committee, board and other agency of the city government is prohibited from employing counsel in any manner whatsoever, unless otherwise specifically authorized by law, provided that the council is authorized, in its discretion, to employ directly, by contract and for specific assignments, legal counsel for the limited purpose of fulfilling its obligation to provide legislative oversight to the operations of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 4-1004) 
Sec. 2-397. - City attorney's power of appointment and removal of personnel; accountability. 
The city attorney, as head of the department of law, shall have the power of appointing and removing all or any of the city attorney's assistant or associate city attorneys, claim attorneys, investigators and clerical assistants. The city attorney shall be accountable to the mayor and council for the faithful performance of duties. 
(Code 1977, § 4-2001) 
Charter reference— Authority of department heads over department personnel, app. IV, § 2. 
Sec. 2-398. - City attorney's office. 
The city attorney shall maintain an office in some centrally located building of the city attorney's choice in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 4-2010) 
Sec. 2-399. - Powers and duties of city attorney and assistants. 
The city attorney, assistant or associate city attorney shall: 
(1)  When required by the mayor, any department head, the president or any member of the council, give an opinion in writing on any question of law connected with the interest of the city or the duties of any of the departments; 
(2)  Attend all meetings of the council and meetings of the committees of the council, when requested to do so by the mayor, a department head or a member of such committee; 
(3)  Superintend, administer and perform all claims work arising under O.C.G.A. tit. 34, ch. 9 (O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq.), the workers' compensation act of the state; and 
(4)  Perform any other services as are consistent with the usual and customary duties of municipal corporation counsel. 
(Code 1977, § 4-2002) 
Sec. 2-400. - Investigations directed by mayor or president of council. 
The mayor or the president of the council may at any time direct the city attorney to conduct an investigation into the affairs of any city department or into the official conduct of any city official or employee or into the affairs of any person dealing with the city. 
(Code 1977, § 4-1005) 
Sec. 2-401. - Investigation of departments, boards and agencies and persons having dealings with city. 
(a)  The city attorney, as head of the department of law and as chief legal officer of the city, is authorized and empowered to institute and conduct investigations at any time into the affairs of the following: 
(1)  The city or any department, board, bureau, commission, institution, authority, instrumentality, retirement system or other agency of the city; or 
(2)  Any person or organization to the extent that the person or organization shall have or shall have had any dealings with the city or any department, board, bureau, commission, institution, authority, instrumentality, retirement system or other agency of the city. 
(b)  For such duties and responsibilities set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the investigators of the city shall, when so designated by the city attorney, be clothed with full authority as peace officers of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 4-2003) 
Sec. 2-402. - Filing and prosecuting civil recovery actions. 
The city attorney is authorized and empowered to file and prosecute civil recovery actions in the name of the city without prior authorization of the city council for those filings which are necessary to carry out the city's daily business; these actions include, but are not limited to, responsive pleadings in pending lawsuits including cross claims and counterclaims, bankruptcy claims, workers' compensation cases, account collection cases, breach of contract cases, appeals from administrative determinations, petitions for certiorari with any court of appropriate jurisdiction and cases in which the statute of limitations will extinguish a valid city claim before council approval can be obtained. 
(Code 1977, § 4-2004; Ord. No. 1999-41, 4-27-99) 
Sec. 2-403. - Representation of person or cause in conflict with city's interests. 
Neither the city attorney nor any of the city attorney's assistants or associate city attorneys shall directly or indirectly represent, as attorney or counselor at law, any person or cause whose interests are in conflict with the interests of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 4-2006) 
Sec. 2-404. - Settlement of claims. 
The city attorney shall have authority, without approval of the council, to settle all claims and suits for sums not to exceed $500.00 in each instance. Settlement of claims and suits in excess of $500.00 shall first be approved by the council. 
(Code 1977, § 4-2007) 
Sec. 2-405. - Condemnation proceedings. 
Whenever the city attorney is authorized to institute condemnation proceedings for the acquisition of additional lands by the city for any public purpose, the city attorney may bring these condemnation proceedings under any law authorizing the proceeding. 
(Code 1977, § 4-2008) 
Sec. 2-406. - Real estate purchases. 
When real estate is purchased by the city, the title search therefor shall be made by the city attorney or by a private attorney, whose qualifications are approved by the city attorney and who shall make a report to the city attorney. When the title to the real estate is acquired, it may be insured by a title insurance company licensed to do business in the state whenever deemed necessary or desirable. 
(Code 1977, § 4-2009) 
Cross reference— Real estate acquisition, § 2-1541 et seq. 
Sec. 2-407. - Outside counsel. 
The city attorney shall seek authorization from the council before hiring outside counsel where the fee for services exceeds or is expected to exceed $50,000.00 of the previously budgeted appropriations for the law department or if the law department needs to transfer fund from any other portion of the city budget. 
The city attorney shall provide on a monthly basis in writing to all city councilmembers a list of all outside counsel currently retained-or engaged by the law department including whether the general type of work being performed or to be performed by such counsel is "civil" "criminal" or "transactional" in nature. 
(Ord. No. 2001-41, § 1, 6-13-01; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 1, 1-14-04) 
Secs. 2-408—2-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference— Department of administrative services, app. IV, §§ 1(a), 7—12. 

Sec. 2-421. - Bonds of chief procurement officer and commissioner of administrative services. 
The chief procurement officer and the commissioner of administrative services shall individually give a bond in the sum of $150,000.00 payable to the city, conditioned upon the faithful performance by the official of all duties devolved upon such official and for the faithful accounting to the city for all goods and money that may come into the hands of such official and to indemnify and hold the city harmless for and on account of all the acts of such official in the performance of such official's duties. This bond shall be given by the official before entering upon the discharge of duties and shall be maintained by the official during the official's term of office. The premium on the bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 5-5022; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 42, 9-16-02) 
Secs. 2-422—2-425. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-71, § 43, adopted Sept. 16, 2002, repealed §§ 2-422—2-425 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to bureau of general services director; bureau of management information systems director; bureau of motor transport services director; and bureau of purchasing and real estate director. 
Secs. 2-426—2-440. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-71, § 42, adopted Sept. 16, 2002, repealed div. 5, §§ 2-441—2-444, in their entirety. Formerly said division pertained to the department of personnel and human resources. 

Secs. 2-441—2-460. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-71, § 42, adopted Sept. 16, 2002, repealed div. 6, §§ 2-461—2-463, in their entirety. Formerly said division pertained to the department of public works. 

Secs. 2-461—2-480. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RESERVED[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-71, § 42, adopted Sept. 16, 2002, repealed div. 7, §§ 2-481—2-485, in their entirety. Formerly said division pertained to the department of housing and community development. 

Secs. 2-481—2-780. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[16] 
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Charter reference— Civil service, § 3-501 et seq. 
Cross reference— Lease of city owned houses to certain public officers, § 2-6; city council staff, § 2-151 et seq.; mayor, § 2-176 et seq.; executive branch offices, § 2-231 et seq.; municipal clerk, § 2-266 et seq.; chief financial officer, § 2-341 et seq.; employee benefits, § 2-841 et seq.; chief procurement officer, § 2-1136 et seq.; municipal court judges, § 62-27; municipal court solicitor and assistants, § 62-28; municipal court public defender and assistants, § 62-29; municipal court clerk, § 62-34; personnel, ch. 114. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-781. - Official oath. 
The following is the official oath to be assumed by all officials of the city who by law, except the mayor and members of the council, are required to assume an oath of office, except the mayor and members of the council: 
GEORGIA 
FULTON COUNTY 
I, ___________, do solemnly swear that I will faithfully and impartially perform the duties imposed upon me as during my continuance in office, without fear or favor, reward or the hope thereof, to the best of my ability. 
I further swear that I will uphold and support the Ethics Code of the City of Atlanta, so help me God. 
Sworn to and subscribed before me this _____ day of _______. 

 
(Code 1977, § 18-4001; Ord. No. 2002-54, §§ 1, 2, 6-20-02) 
Sec. 2-782. - Bonds of officials. 
(a)  Conditions, form, filing, premium. If official bonds are required, they shall provide that the officials bonded shall account to the city for all articles, goods and moneys coming into their hands by virtue of their offices, including books, papers or other property. The form of these bonds shall be approved by the city attorney and their suretyship by the mayor, and they shall thereafter be filed with the chief financial officer, provided that the chief financial officer's bond shall be filed with the municipal clerk. Surety company bond premiums shall be paid by appointment made therefor in current apportionment sheets. 
(b)  Officers disqualified as sureties. No member of the council or the mayor or any other city officer shall become a surety on the bond of any city official or contractor for city work. A violation of this section shall subject the offending city official to dismissal from office, and a new bond shall be made without that officer as surety thereon. 
(c)  Requirements of sureties. No individual shall be accepted as personal surety on any bond, official or otherwise, that under the Charter and related state laws or ordinances of the city or under general law is required to be given to the city or to the council or to the mayor or to any officer or department of the city or to any head of any department of the city, unless that person shall own real estate in the state of a value over and above any homestead exemption allowed by law and any incumbrances thereon and that is equal to the full amount of the bond on which the person is tendered as surety. 
(Code 1977, § 18-4002) 
Sec. 2-783. - Defense in civil litigation. 
(a)  Authority. Pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. tit. 45, ch. 9, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 45-9-20 et seq.), the city adopts a policy establishing the terms and conditions under which the city may provide for the defense of any officer or employee involved in civil litigation arising out of the performance of the official duties of the officer or employee and under which the city may pay part or all of any civil judgment rendered against any officer or employee or of any monetary settlement of pending litigation against any such officer or employee when any such claim or civil judgment arises out of the performance of official duties or is in any way reasonably related thereto and in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Immunity of city not waived. Nothing in this section shall be construed to constitute any waiver by the city of the governmental immunity afforded it under the laws and constitution of the state, except as specifically set forth in this section. This section shall not apply to those claims or judgments for damages of $25,000.00 or less which are authorized pursuant to section 2-4 of this Code and which constitutes a waiver of governmental immunity only up to such amount. Nothing in this section shall be construed in any way to reduce or eliminate the rights of any officer or employee against any other party. 
(c)  Defense upon request of officers and employees. Whenever any civil litigation is instituted in or before any court of this state or of any other state or of the United States against any officer or employee in either such officer's or employee's individual or official capacity asserting personal liability for damages arising out of the performance of the official duties of such officer or employee or in any way reasonably related thereto, whether based upon negligence, violation of contract rights or violation of civil, constitutional, common law or other statutory rights, whether federal, state or local, the city, upon the written request of any such officer or employee and as a part of such officer's or employee's compensation and terms of employment, subject to the limitations and exclusions as set forth in this section, may in its discretion undertake to defend the civil action on behalf of any such officer or employee by and through the office of the city attorney. 
(d)  Expenditures for defense. The city may expend funds for such purposes, including but not limited to court costs, deposition costs, witness fees and compensation, and all other like costs, expenses and fees. 
(e)  Notice to city attorney. This section shall not apply unless the officer or employee or the department head of such officer or employee has given notice in writing of any such pending civil action to the city attorney within ten days after the officer or employee has received notice thereof or has been served with any such summons and complaint. 
(f)  Grounds for refusal of defense. The city shall refuse to undertake to defend civil actions brought against any officer or employee if it is determined by the city attorney that: 
(1)  The act or omission did not arise out of and in the course of the employment of such officer or employee nor was the act or omission reasonably related to such employment. 
(2)  The officer or employee acted or failed to act because of actual or intentional misconduct, fraud, corruption or malice. 
(3)  The defense of any such civil action by the city would create a conflict of interest between the city and the officer or employee. 
(4)  The litigation is for the purpose of criminal prosecution. 
(5)  Undertaking to defend against any such civil action would not be in the best interest of the city. 
(6)  The officer or employee acted or failed to act as a result of impaired judgment caused by the voluntary consumption of alcohol or by the voluntary illegal use of any controlled substance as defined by the laws of the state. 
(7)  Except in an emergency situation or upon the existence of extenuating circumstances, the officer or employee acted or failed to act directly contrary to the advice of the city attorney. 
(8)  The officer or employee acted or failed to act in such a manner as to constitute a criminal offense involving theft, embezzlement or other like crime with respect to the property or money of or in which the city has an interest. 
(g)  Conflict of interest between officers or employees. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the city from undertaking to defend against any such civil action on behalf of any officer or employee where there exists a conflict of interest with another officer or employee. If, at the initiation of or during the course of any such civil litigation, a conflict of interest arises as to the representation of any officers or employees, the city attorney shall provide representation pursuant to the following: 
(1)  As between elected officials and other officers and employees, the city attorney shall represent the elected officials; 
(2)  As between officers and employees, the city attorney shall make the determination, subject to the approval, by resolution duly adopted and approved, of the council and the mayor; and 
(3)  As between elected officials, the determination shall be made by a resolution duly adopted and approved by the council and the mayor. 
Further, where any such conflict of interest exists and a determination has been made as to which officers or employees shall be represented by the city attorney, the city in its discretion may by a resolution duly adopted and approved, authorize those officers or employees not represented by the city attorney to employ counsel at the expense of the city. However, the selection and compensation of such other counsel shall be subject to the prior approval by the city. 
(h)  Payment of judgments or monetary settlements. Where the city has undertaken to defend civil actions brought against officers or employees as provided by this section, the city may, in its sole discretion, by resolution duly adopted and approved, pay all or any part of final judgments awarded against officers or employees by courts of competent jurisdiction or any amount payable as a monetary settlement of any such civil action, subject to the limitations and exclusions which follow: 
(1)  Payments on behalf of officers or employees in satisfaction of any judgment or as a monetary settlement of any pending litigation, shall not exceed the total amount of $2,000.00 for any and all civil actions instituted as the result of any single or continuing incident or occurrence. 
(2)  No sum shall be paid pursuant to this section where punitive or exemplary damages have been assessed against any officer or employee by any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(3)  No sum in excess of $25,000.00 shall be paid pursuant to this section for damages on account of bodily injury, death or property damage arising from the ownership, maintenance, operation or use of any motor vehicle by the city under its management, control or supervision, as provided for in section 2-4. 
(4)  No sum shall be paid pursuant to this section when the officer or employee has, without prior authorization, been represented by counsel other than the city attorney. 
(5)  No sum shall be paid pursuant to this section unless the claimant unconditionally releases each and every officer and employee and the city from any and all suits, claims, actions, causes of action, demands, damages, costs, expenses and compensation on account of or in any way arising out of or related to any such single or continuing incident or occurrence. 
(i)  Disbursements paid from city funds. Any such disbursement as provided in this section shall be deemed to be for public purposes and may be paid from city funds. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3017.1; Ord. No. 2000-37, §§ 1, 2, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 2002-7, §§ 1, 2, 3-5-02) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2002-7, approved March 5, 2002, states that the provisions of subsections 2-783(b), (h), and (h)(3) shall become effective Jan. 1, 2003. 
Sec. 2-784. - Treatment of employees at hospitals other than Grady Memorial in emergency situations. 
(a)  Each department head shall be authorized to permit an employee working under the department head to receive treatment in emergency situations at hospitals other than Grady Hospital when such employee is injured arising out of and in the course of employment by the city and where it is determined by the department head or the person supervising such employee at the time of such injury deems it to be in the best interest of the employee to receive treatment at the hospital nearest to the place where such injury is incurred. 
(b)  The chief financial officer is authorized to make payment pursuant to provisions of workers' compensation laws for the cost of such treatment at such hospital without prior approval for such treatment. 
(c)  The treatment as provided in this section shall apply only to emergency treatment. All followup and continuing treatment shall be accomplished through Grady Hospital, unless prior permission for treatment elsewhere is obtained from the office of the risk management division. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4111) 
Secs. 2-785—2-800. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS OF CONDUCT[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, approved April 10, 2002, repealed and reenacted §§ 2-801—2-824 to read as herein set out. Formerly, said sections pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Ethics in public contracting, § 2-1481 et seq. 

Sec. 2-801. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agency means any board, bureau, body, commission, committee, department or office of the city, including any joint board to which the council or the mayor has appointment powers. 
Business means any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, organization, self-employed individual and any other entity operated for economic gain, whether professional, industrial or commercial, and entities which for purposes of federal income taxation are treated as nonprofit organizations. 
Direct ownership, leasehold or option interest in real property means the holding or possession of good legal or rightful title of property or the holding of real or beneficial use of the property by an official or employee, including any interest owned or held by the spouse of the official or employee if such interest is held jointly or as tenants in common. 
Confidential information means information which has been obtained in the course of holding public office, employment, an independent contract or otherwise acting as an official or employee, and which information is not available to members of the public under state law or other law or regulation and which the official or employee is not authorized to disclose. 
Filing means delivered to the municipal clerk by the end of the designated business day or, if the designated day is not a business day, the first business day thereafter or depositing in the United States mail, properly addressed, with adequate postage affixed, postmarked by the designated day; or any other method of delivery authorized by the board of ethics. 
Financial interest means any interest which shall yield, directly or indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit to the official or employee, other than the duly authorized salary or compensation for the official's or employee's services to the city, or to any person employing or retaining the services of the official or employee or to the official's or employee's immediate family. 
Gratuity means anything of value given by or received from a prohibited source; provided, however, that the term "gratuity" within the meaning of this division does not include any of the following: 
(1)  Payment by the city of salaries, compensation, expenses, or employee benefits; or payment by an employer or business other than the city of salaries, compensation, expenses, or employee benefits or payment of fees for services rendered pursuant to a contract, when the payment is unrelated to the official's or employee's status with the city and is not made for the purpose of influencing, directly or indirectly, the vote, official action or decision of the official or employee; or 
(2)  Campaign or political contributions made and reported in accordance with state law; or 
(3)  Reasonable meals or refreshments furnished in connection with an official's or employee's appearance in an official capacity at a public, civic, charitable or non-profit ceremony, event, convention or conference whether the sponsor of the event does or does not do business with the city; or 
(4)  Hospitality, or meals, extended for a social, charitable, non-profit, convention, conference, or business purpose unrelated to the official business of the city; or 
(5)  Reimbursements from non-city sources of reasonable hosting expenses, including travel, meals, and lodging, provided to an official or employee in connection with speaking engagements, participation on professional or civic panels, teaching, or attendance at conferences in an official capacity; provided, however, that receipt of such reimbursements is subject to the reporting requirements governing disclosure of expense reimbursements found at section 2-815; or 
(6)  An award, plaque, certificate, memento, novelty or similar item given in recognition of the recipient's civic, charitable, political, professional, or public service; or 
(7)  Nominal gifts or other tokens of recognition presented by representatives of governmental bodies or political subdivisions who are acting in their official capacities; or 
(8)  Anything of value when the thing of value is offered to the city, is accepted on behalf of the city, and is to remain the property of the city provided that the recipient complies with the provisions governing solicitation found at section 2-818; or 
(9)  Commercially reasonable loans made in the ordinary course of the lender's business in accordance with prevailing rates and terms, and which do not discriminate against or in favor of an official or employee because of such individual's status; or 
(10)  Anything of value received as a devise, bequest or inheritance; or 
(11)  A gift received from the official's or employee's immediate family or a relative within the third degree of consanguinity under the civil law computation method. 
Honorarium means a payment of money or anything of value for any service, including but not limited to an appearance, speech or article, or a series of appearances, speeches, or articles, if the subject matter is related to the official's or employee's official duties or the payment is made because of the official's or employee's status with the city. 
Immediate family shall include the spouse, domestic partner registered under section 94-133, mother, father, sister, brother, and natural or adopted children of an official or employee. 
Income means any money or item of value in excess of $5,000.00 received or to be received as a claim on any future services, including but not limited to fees, salaries or commissions. 
Official or employee means any person elected or appointed to or employed or retained by the city or any agency, whether paid or unpaid and whether part time or full time. This definition includes retired employees or former city employees during the period of time in which they are later employed or retained by the city or any agency. 
Personal interest means any interest arising from relationships with immediate family or from business, partnership or corporate associations, whether or not any financial interest is involved. 
Prohibited source means any person, business or entity that an official or employee knows or should know: 
(1)  Is seeking official action from the city; or 
(2)  Is seeking to do or does business with the city; or 
(3)  represents a client who meets the definitions in subparagraphs (1) or (2) above; or 
(4)  Has interests that may be substantially affected by performance or non-performance of the official's or employee's official duties; or 
(5)  Is a registered lobbyist in accordance with state law. 
Public entity means any office, agency, authority, department, commission, board, division, institution or other instrumentality of the state or any other state in the United States of America, local government, special purpose district, or the federal government of the United States of America. 
(Code 1977, § 18-2001; Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02; Ord. No. 2006-48, § 1, 7-25-06; Ord. No. 2016-39(16-O-1550) , § 1, 11-16-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-802. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this division to promote the objective of protecting the integrity of the government of the city by prohibiting any official or employee from engaging in any business, employment or transactions, from rendering services or from having contractual, financial, or personal interests, direct or indirect, which are in conflict with or which would create the justifiable impression in the public of conflict with the proper discharge of the official or employee's official duties or the best interest of the city or which would tend to impair independence or objectivity of judgment or action in the performance of official duties. It is also the purpose of this division to require disclosure of the assets and income of elected officials and certain employees so that the public may review actual and potential conflicts of interest. It is also the purpose of this division to monitor contractors of the City of Atlanta for any conflicts of interest. Finally, it is the purpose of this division to provide for an orderly and fair process for raising and addressing ethical questions and for disciplining those officials and employees and other persons who violate these standards of conduct. 
(Code 1977, § 18-2002; Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02; Ord. No. 2018-35(18-O-1472), § 1, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 2-803. - Reporting violations. 
Any person who witnesses or becomes aware of a violation of this division may complain of that violation as follows: 
(1)  By appearing before a judge of the municipal court, the city solicitor or the solicitor's assistant and swearing out a complaint for the violation. Upon signing the complaint, under oath, a warrant may be issued by the municipal court for the accused to appear and answer the charges; or 
(2)  By communicating with the ethics officer. Where a complaint is communicated anonymously to the ethics officer, such complaint shall be made in good faith, and with veracity and sufficient specificity so as to provide the ethics officer with salient and investigable facts. The ethics officer may require the anonymous complaint to be made in a manner and form that is intended only to obtain relevant facts related to the alleged violation of this division, and that is not designed to reveal the identity of the complainant; or 
(3)  By filing a sworn written complaint with the ethics officer or the board of ethics, as described in this division. All written complaints to be considered by the board of ethics and the ethics officer shall contain the following if applicable: 
a.  The name and address of the person or persons who file the complaint. 
b.  The sworn verification and signature of the complainant. 
c.  The name and address of the party or parties against whom the complaint is filed, and if such party is a candidate and the office being sought. 
d.  A clear and concise statement of acts upon which the complaint is based along with an allegation that such facts constitute one or more violations of law under the jurisdiction of the board of ethics. 
e.  A general reference to the statutory provision(s) of the Code within the jurisdiction of the board of ethics allegedly violated. 
f.  Any further information which might support the allegations in the complaint including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  The name and address of all other persons who have firsthand knowledge of the facts alleged in the complaint; and 
2.  Any documentary evidence that supports the facts alleged in the complaint. 
(4)  Preliminary action on complaint. Upon receipt of a complaint whether by the ethics officer or by the ethics board, the ethics officer or the secretary of the ethics board shall send a written notice to the subject of the complaint by the next business day. Both this notice and any subsequent documents are subject to the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(5)  Defective complaint. Upon receipt of a written, non-anonymous complaint which does not conform to the applicable requirements of paragraph (3) of this section, the ethics officer shall by letter acknowledge receipt of the complaint and advise complainant of the defect in the complaint and that the complaint will not be considered by the board of ethics unless the defect is corrected. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02; Ord. No. 2002-44, § 1, 5-28-02) 
Sec. 2-804. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  There is hereby continued in existence an independent board of ethics to consist of seven members, all of whom shall be known for their personal integrity and all of whom shall be residents of and domiciled in the city. It is further urged that the members of the board of ethics shall reflect the diversity of the city with regard to race, color, creed, religion, gender, marital status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age and disability. At all times, at least three members shall be attorneys licensed to practice law in the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Appointments to the independent board of ethics shall be made by the mayor and city council, the governing authority of the City of Atlanta. Nominations to the board may be made by the following organizations. 
(1)  The Atlanta Bar Association may nominate one member, chosen from the attorney members of the association; 
(2)  The Gate City Bar Association may nominate one member, chosen from the attorney members of the association. 
(3)  The Atlanta Business League may nominate one member, chosen from the organizations that are members of the league, which member shall not be an attorney; 
(4)  The Metro Atlanta Chamber of Commerce may nominate one member from the organizations that are members of the chamber, which member shall not be an attorney; 
(5)  The Atlanta-Fulton County League of Women Voters may nominate one member, which member shall not be an attorney. 
(6)  The Atlanta Planning Advisory Board may nominate one member, which member shall not be an attorney nor an officer of a neighborhood planning unit. 
(7)  The seven major universities/colleges within the city (Georgia State University, Georgia Institute of Technology, Clark Atlanta University, Emory University, Morehouse College, Morris Brown College, and Spelman College) may collectively nominate one member. 
(c)  The members shall each serve for terms of three years; without compensation. The members shall elect a chair and develop their own organization internally. 
(d)  The position of a member of the board shall be deemed vacated: 
(1)  Upon the expiration of his or her term; 
(2)  Upon the death of a member or the disability or incapacity of a member for more than 90 days; 
(3)  Upon the written resignation of the member, tendered to the board of ethics, 
(4)  By the member ceasing to be a resident of the city; or 
(5)  Upon removal of the member for good cause by a majority vote of the board of ethics; 
(6)  Nominees for the board of ethics and ethics officer shall be subject to an education and employment background check as well as a criminal history check. Nominees shall execute all releases necessary for the department of personnel and human resources and the department of police to accomplish the same. If the nominee is determined to have committed a felony, the nomination shall be withdrawn. 
(e)  Members shall be prohibited from engaging in city election political activities and from making campaign contributions to candidates in city elections during their terms as board members. Violations of this subsection may be punished by removal from board membership by a majority vote of the members. 
(f)  The board of ethics shall: 
(1)  Elect a chair by majority vote of the serving members. Each chair will serve a one-year term and shall be eligible to serve as chair in successive years. 
(2)  Elect a vice-chair to preside in the absence of the chair. The vice-chair will serve a one-year term and shall be eligible to serve as vice-chair in successive years. 
(3)  Elect a secretary to provide administrative assistance to the board. 
(4)  Hold regular monthly meetings at City Hall. Such meetings shall be televised. All meetings of the board shall be conducted as required by the Georgia Open Meetings Act. 
(5)  Conduct its business only with a quorum. A majority opinion of the members sitting at any hearing shall govern as to decisions of the board. In no event shall a decision of the board be voted upon by fewer than four members. 
(6)  Be free to contract for the services of a competent court reporter to take down statements, testimony and discussions at its meeting or to use in lieu thereof a competent person adept at shorthand reporting and/or mechanical transcribing devices, whichever method is from time to time desired by the board, such services to be paid for by the city. 
(7)  Maintain all records in the office of the ethics officer as required by the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(8)  Report, as appropriate, suspected ethical and criminal violations to state or federal law enforcement agencies. 
(9)  Notify the ethics officer of any report of an alleged violation of the code of ethics received by the board. 
(10)  Establish procedures to notify the subject of any report of an alleged violation of the code of ethics as required by the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(g)  The city shall pay all administrative costs, including those specifically stipulated in this section, pertaining to the operation of the board of ethics. 
(h)  The board shall have the authority to prescribe rules and regulations pursuant to this division to administer the financial disclosure process and to issue opinions under this division. The board shall prescribe appropriate financial disclosure forms, instructions and methods of disclosure as required to comply with the requirements of disclosure of income and financial interests found at section 2-814. 
(i)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, the meetings of the board will be governed by Robert's Rules of Order. 
(j)  The board shall render an advisory opinion based upon a real or hypothetical set of circumstances, when requested in writing by anyone who is an official or employee of the city or a member of a board, council, committee or commission who is personally involved in a matter requiring interpretation of the ethics code. Any person requesting an opinion in accordance with this section who has made a full and complete disclosure of all relevant facts shall be entitled to rely on the opinion or finding of the board of ethics as a guide to the conduct of such person in the person's relations to and with the city. Compliance with the opinion or finding of the board of ethics shall serve in mitigation in any proceedings against such person for violation of this division. Advisory opinions based upon current law shall be maintained as required by the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(k)  The board of ethics shall have the authority to investigate any alleged violation of the code of ethics as follows: 
(1)  Upon a sworn written complaint by any person in a form prescribed by the board; 
(2)  Upon the request of the ethics officer; or 
(3)  Upon the determination by a majority of the board that any matter should be investigated. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02; Ord. No. 2002-45, § 1, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 2017-52(17-O-1490), § 1, 9-5-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-59(18-O-1662), § 1, 11-28-18 ) 
Sec. 2-805. - Ethics officer. 
(a)  There is hereby created as a full time salaried position an ethics officer for the city. The city ethics officer must be an active member of the Georgia Bar Association in good standing with five years experience in the practice of law. The ethics officer shall be appointed by a majority of the members of the board of ethics for a period of five years, subject to confirmation by a majority of the council and approval by the mayor. Removal of the ethics officer before the expiration of the designated term shall be for cause by a majority vote of the members of the board of ethics. 
(b)  The ethics officer need not be a resident of the city at the time of his or her appointment, but he or she shall reside in the city within six months of such appointment and continue to reside therein throughout such appointment. 
(c)  The ethics officer shall not be involved in partisan or nonpartisan political activities or the political affairs of the city. 
(d)  The duties of the ethics officer shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Educating and training all city officials and employees to have an awareness and understanding of the mandate for and enforcement of ethical conduct and advising of the provisions of the code of ethics of the city; 
(2)  Maintaining the records of the board of ethics as required by the Georgia Open Records Act; 
(3)  Meeting with the board of ethics; 
(4)  Advising officials and employees regarding disclosure statements and reviewing same to ensure full and complete financial reporting; 
(5)  Urging compliance with the code of ethics by calling to the attention of the board of ethics any failure to comply or any issues, including the furnishing of false or misleading information, that the ethics officer believes should be investigated by the board so that the board may take such action as it deems appropriate; 
(6)  Monitoring, evaluating and acting upon information obtained from an "ethics hotline" which shall be a city telephone number for the receipt of information about ethical violations. Each complaint, as of the time it is reported, whether by telephone or otherwise, shall be deemed to be a separate pending investigation of a complaint against a public officer or employee as provided by the Georgia Open Records Act; 
(7)  Notifying the subject of a report of any alleged violation of the ethics code, whether the report is anonymous, made by an identified individual or is written. Such notice shall be given in writing, by facsimile or hand delivery, to the subject of the complaint at the same time and in the same form that any disclosure of information is required by the Georgia Open Records Act; 
(8)  Notifying the board of ethics of any report of an alleged violation of the ethics code received by the ethics officer; 
(9)  Reporting, as appropriate, suspected ethical violations to the city board of ethics; 
(10)  Reporting, as appropriate, suspected criminal violations to state or federal law enforcement agencies; and 
(11)  Filing with the board, the mayor and the council each January a written report describing the activities of the ethics officer in carrying out the goals of his or her office and the code of ethics and reporting on the ethical health of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02; Ord. No. 2011-48(11-O-1495), § 1, 11-16-11) 
Sec. 2-806. - Investigations and hearings. 
The board of ethics shall conduct investigations into alleged violations of the ethics code, hold hearings and issue decisions as prescribed below: 
(1)  The proceedings of the board and records shall be open unless otherwise permitted by state law. 
(2)  Upon request of the board of ethics, the city attorney, or any attorney representing the city attorney's office, or in the event of a conflict, any attorney who shall be selected by a majority of the board and who will provide pro bono services to the board, shall advise the board of ethics. 
(3)  a.  Preliminary investigation of complaint. The ethics officer shall conduct a preliminary investigation of any complaint and provide a written report to the board of ethics discussing the ethics officer's findings and recommend to the board of ethics whether there is probable cause for belief that this division has been violated warranting a formal hearing. 
b.  If the board determines after the preliminary investigation of a complaint that there does not exist probable cause for belief that this division has been violated, the board shall so notify the complainant and the subject of the investigation. If the board determines after a preliminary investigation of the complaint that there does exist probable cause for belief that this division has been violated, the board shall give notice to the person involved to attend a hearing to determine whether there has been a violation of this division. 
(4)  For use in proceedings under this division, the board shall have the power to issue subpoenas to compel any person to appear, give sworn testimony, or produce documentary or other evidence. Any person who fails to respond to such subpoenas may be subjected to the penalties set forth in section 2-807 of this division. 
(5)  All hearings of the board pursuant to this section shall be as follows: 
a.  All testimony shall be under oath, which shall be administered by a member of the board. Any person who appears before the board shall have all of the due process rights, privileges and responsibilities of a witness appearing before the courts of this state. Any person whose name is mentioned during a proceeding of the board and who may be adversely affected thereby may appear personally before the board on such person's own behalf or may file a written sworn statement for incorporation into the record to be made part of all proceedings pursuant to this subsection. 
b.  The board's decision shall be governed by a preponderance of the evidence standard. 
c.  At the conclusion of proceedings concerning an alleged violation, the board shall immediately begin deliberations on the evidence and proceed to determine by a majority vote of members present whether there has been a violation of this division. The findings of the board concerning a violation and the record of the proceedings shall be made public by the board as soon as practicable after the determination has been made. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02; Ord. No. 2002-44, § 2, 5-28-02) 
Sec. 2-807. - Violations; appeals. 
(a)  Any intentional violation of this division or the furnishing of false or misleading information to the board of ethics or the ethics officer, or the failure to follow an opinion rendered by the board or the failure to comply with a subpoena issued by the board pursuant to this division shall subject the violator to any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Administrative sanction of not more than $1,000.00 assessed by the board of ethics; 
(2)  Public reprimand by the board of ethics; and 
(3)  Prosecution by the city solicitor in municipal court and, upon conviction, to a fine of up to $1,000.00 per violation and up to six months imprisonment, whether the official or employee is elected or appointed, paid or unpaid. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to conflict with state law. An action for violation of this division or the furnishing of false or misleading information or the failure to comply with a subpoena issued by the board must be brought within two years after the violation is discovered. 
(b)  With regard to violations by employees, in addition to the remedies in paragraph (a) the board may recommend any one or more of the disciplinary actions set forth in section 114-502. 
(c)  With regard to violations by persons other than officials or employees, in addition to the remedies in paragraph (a) the board may recommend to the purchasing director any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Suspension of a contractor; and 
(2)  Disqualification or debarment from contracting or subcontracting with the city. 
(d)  The decision of the board after a hearing shall be final; provided, however, that such proceeding shall be subject to review by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. The board's designee shall be authorized to acknowledge service of any such writ and shall, within the time provided by law, certify and cause to be filed with the clerk of the superior court a record of the proceedings before the board, the decision of the board and the notice of the board's final actions. 
(e)  The value of any gratuity transferred or received in breach of the provisions of this division may be recovered from either the receiving official or employee or the person or entity providing the gratuity, for deposit in the City of Atlanta General Fund. 
(f)  All violations of this division shall be prosecuted in accordance with chapter 62, article II, division 2 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02) 
Sec. 2-808. - Representing private interest before agencies. 
No official or employee shall appear on behalf of private interests before any agency, except as a matter of public record in a court of law as provided by section 2-809 of this division. Councilmembers may appear on behalf of constituents or in the performance of public or civic obligations before any agency but only without compensation or remuneration of any kind. In no instance shall council members appear before the Zoning Review Board (ZRB) or the Board of Zoning Adjustment (BZA) on behalf of constituents or in the performance of their public or civic obligations; they may, however, appear in their own behalf, in relation to their own property interests. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02; Ord. No. 2014-46(14-O-1479), § 1, 10-29-14 ) 
Sec. 2-809. - Representing private interest before courts. 
No official or employee shall represent any person or private interest in any action or proceeding in conflict with the interests of the city, in any litigation in which the city or any agency of the city is involved or is a party, or any action or proceeding in the municipal courts and traffic courts of the city involving any charges or violations in which the complainant is the city or any agency of the city or any official or employee thereof pertaining to the official's or employee's official duties. However, this section shall not restrict or prohibit any official or employee who is an attorney at law from appearing or participating as an attorney in the representation of a client in any action or proceeding in the municipal courts or the City Courts of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02; Ord. No. 2002-37, § 1, 5-28-02) 
Sec. 2-810. - Representation after separation from employment. 
(a)  No person who has served as an official or employee shall, for a period of one year after separation from such service or employment, appear before any agency or receive compensation for any services rendered on behalf of any person, business or association in relation to any case, proceeding, or application with respect to which such former official or employee was directly concerned or in which such official or employee personally participated during the period of such official's or employee's service or employment or which was under such official's or employee's active consideration or with respect to which knowledge or information was made available to such official or employee during the period of such official's or employee's service or employment. 
(b)  There shall be a presumption, subject to case-by-case review by the Atlanta Board of Ethics or the ethics officer, that the appearance of a former official or employee of the city before any city agency on behalf of a public entity as defined in section 2- 801 is not a violation of this section. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude a former official or employee from being engaged directly by the city to provide services to or on behalf of the city during this one-year period. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02; Ord. No. 2016-37(16-O-1404) , §§ 1, 2, 11-16-16) 
Sec. 2-811. - Use of property and services. 
No official or employee shall request, use or permit the use of any publicly owned or publicly supported property, vehicle, equipment, labor or service for the private advantage of such official or employee or any other person or private entity. However, no official or employee is prohibited from requesting, using or permitting the use of any city-owned or city-supported property, vehicle, equipment, material, labor or service which as a matter of city policy is made available to the public at large or which is provided as a matter of stated public policy for the use of officials and employees in the conduct of official city business. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02) 
Sec. 2-812. - Participation in contracts. 
No official or employee, including but not limited to those identified in section 2-813(b), shall participate directly or indirectly through decision making, approval, disapproval, recommendation, the preparation of any part of specifications or requests for proposal, influencing the content of any specification or contract standard, rendering advice, investigating, auditing or reviewing of any proceeding or application, request for ruling or other determination, claim or other matter pertaining to any contract or subcontract and any solicitation or proposal therefore or seek to influence the votes or decisions of others with respect thereto when the official or employee knows or with reasonable investigation should know that there is a financial or personal interest possessed by: 
(1)  The official or employee; 
(2)  One or more members of the immediate family of the official or employee; 
(3)  A business other than a public agency in which the official or employee, or a member of the official's or employee's immediate family, serves as an officer, director, stockholder, creditor, trustee, partner or employee; or 
(4)  Any other person or business with whom the official or employee or a member of the official's or employee's immediate family is negotiating or seeking prospective employment or other business or professional relationship. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02) 
Cross reference— Ethics in public contracting, § 2-1481 et seq. 
State Law reference— Voting upon questions by interested councilmembers, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-6; sale of city property to city officer or employee, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6. 
Sec. 2-813. - Disclosure of interests. 
(a)  Every official or employee listed in paragraph (b) of this section who knows or with reasonable investigation should know that the official or employee has a financial interest or personal interest, direct or indirect, in any proposed legislation or in any decision pending before that official or employee or the agency of which the official or employee is a member or employee shall not vote for or against, discuss, decide, in any way participate in considering the matter or seek to influence the votes or decisions of others on such matter. 
(1)  Prior to any determination of the matter, the official or employee shall verbally disclose at the meeting, if any, the nature of such interest, and shall have such disclosure placed on the official records of the agency. 
(2)  Should an official or employee be absent from that meeting or a portion of that meeting, the official or employee is required to verbally disclose the nature of the conflict at the next attended meeting and said disclosure shall be placed on the official records of the agency. 
(3)  Further, the official or employee must complete an online Disclosure of Conflicts of Interest form at https://apps.atlantaga.gov/efile as maintained by the City of Atlanta Ethics Officer, immediately upon his or her recognition of said conflict. 
(b)  The officials and employees covered by this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  Mayor; 
(2)  President of council; 
(3)  Members of council; 
(4)  Municipal and traffic court judges; 
(5)  Chief operating officer and deputy chief operating officers; 
(6)  Chief of staff and deputy chiefs of staff; 
(7)  All employees of the office of the mayor who report directly to the mayor; 
(8)  Commissioners, deputy commissioners, department heads and their equivalents; 
(9)  Bureau directors, assistant bureau directors and managers; 
(10)  Division heads; 
(11)  Executive directors of city boards, commissions, authorities or other similar bodies; 
(12)  Zoning administrator and any assistant zoning administrators; 
(13)  Inspectors of all departments and bureaus; 
(14)  City attorney and deputy, assistant, and associate city attorneys; 
(15)  Director of the office of contract compliance and employees of the office of contract compliance with discretionary or supervisory authority over certification, compliance, monitoring, or auditing; 
(16)  Assistant directors, contracting officers, and buyers in the purchasing bureau; 
(17)  Within the department of finance, assistant directors and all employees who have discretionary or supervisory authority over the investment of city funds or the auditing of city finances or city contracts; 
(18)  City internal auditor and employees of the office of internal auditor with investigative and supervisory authority over audits, the audit process, and audit reports; 
(19)  City ethics officer; 
(20)  Hearing officers; 
(21)  Members, whether paid or unpaid, of all city boards, committees, councils, commissions, authorities and other similar bodies created by state law, Charter ordinance or resolution; 
(22)  Members appointed by the mayor and/or council or council president to other public boards, committees, councils, commissions and authorities of the city, county, or state; and 
(23)  Officers of neighborhood planning units. 
(c)  Every contractor bidding on or currently conducting business with the City of Atlanta who knows or with reasonable investigation should know that the contractor has a financial or personal interest with any official or employee or the agency of which the official or employee is a part of, shall disclose such conflict of interest during the procurement bidding process. If a conflict of interest arises during the performance of the contractor's work on behalf of the City of Atlanta, the contractor shall within seven (7) days file a supplemental disclosure with the City of Atlanta outlining the conflict of interest. 
(d)  Every contractor bidding to conduct business with the City of Atlanta shall sign an ethics pledge acknowledging that the contractor understands and shall comply with the applicable provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02; Ord. No. 2006-44, § 1, 6-22-06; Ord. No. 2018-35(18-O-1472), § 2, 8-29-18 ) 
State Law reference— Voting upon questions by interested councilmembers, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-6. 
Sec. 2-814. - Disclosure of income and financial interests. 
(a)  The officials and employees listed in subsection (b) of this ordinance shall annually file with the ethics officer statements disclosing the following: 
(1)  All positions of employment held by the official or employee in any business (as defined in section 2-801 (b)) for all or any portion of the year, including a description of the type of business and the existence and nature of any business done by the employer entity with the city. Lawyers, accountants, consultants, public relations representatives, and other persons rendering services for financial consideration shall disclose the organization, if any, with which they are connected, the type of services offered by the organization, and any particular segment of such services in which the member specializes; 
(2)  Each and every source of income from any business received by such official or employee in excess of $5,000.00 derived from any single source in the preceding calendar year. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require reporting of the identity of individual clients, customers or patrons; however, the president of council and members of council shall include the information required to be reported under paragraph (d) of this section; 
(3)  Any benefit, whatever its nature, of such official's or employee's immediate family derived from transactions with the city or an agency, by employment, contract, or otherwise, either directly or through a business in which such immediate family member has a majority or controlling interest; 
(4)  All direct ownership interests in real property held by the official or employee; and 
(5)  All persons listed in subparagraphs (b)(1) through (8) of this section shall also disclose the identity of all stocks, blind trusts, bonds, debentures, and other forms of debt obligations of any corporation or any business or entity collectively in excess of $10,000.00 held by the official or employee at any time during the year except for mutual funds, personal checking accounts, time deposit accounts, other savings or retirement fund accounts held by any financial institution of the United States government, or any city approved or maintained deferred compensation or pension program. 
(b)  The following officials and employees shall be required to file annual statements disclosing information set forth in subsection (a) of this ordinance: 
(1)  Mayor; 
(2)  President of council; 
(3)  Members of council; 
(4)  Municipal court judges; 
(5)  Chief operating officer and deputy chief operating officers; 
(6)  Chief of staff and deputy chiefs of staff; 
(7)  All employees of the office of the mayor who report directly to the mayor; 
(8)  Commissioners, deputy commissioners, department heads and their equivalents; 
(9)  Bureau directors, assistant bureau directors, managers and their equivalents; 
(10)  Division heads and their equivalents; 
(11)  Executive directors of city boards, commissions, authorities or other similar bodies; 
(12)  Zoning administrator and any assistant zoning administrators; 
(13)  Inspectors of all departments and bureaus; 
(14)  City attorney, deputy, chief counsel, assistant, associate city attorneys and their equivalents; 
(15)  Director of the office of contract compliance and employees of the office of contract compliance with discretionary or supervisory authority over certification, compliance, monitoring, or auditing; 
(16)  Department of procurement deputies, contract administrators, contracting officers, buyers and their equivalents; 
(17)  Within the department of finance, assistant directors and all employees who have discretionary or supervisory authority over the investment of city funds or the auditing of city finances or city contracts; 
(18)  City internal auditor and employees of the office of internal auditor with investigative and supervisory authority over audits, the audit process, and audit reports; 
(19)  City ethics officer, associate ethics officer and all employees of the ethics office; 
(20)  Administrative hearing officers and their equivalents; 
(21)  Members, whether paid or unpaid, of all city boards, committees, councils, commissions, authorities and other similar bodies created by state law, Charter, ordinance or resolution; 
(22)  Members appointed by the mayor and/or council or council president to other public boards, committees, councils, commissions, task forces, authorities of the city, county or state, or similar entities; and 
(23)  Officers of neighborhood planning units; and 
(24)  All positions for which the job descriptions or actual duties include negotiation, authorization, or approval of contracts, leases, franchises, revocable consents, concessions, variances, special permits, or licenses; the purchase, sale, rental, or lease of real property, personal property, or services, or a contract for any real or personal property or services; obtaining grants of money or loans; adoption or repeal of any rule or regulation having the force and effect of law; or positions for which the job description or actual job duties present a significant risk of a potential conflict of interest under division 2 of chapter 2 (Administration), article VII (Officers And Employees), of the Code of Ordinances, City of Atlanta, Georgia. 
(c)  The municipal clerk shall maintain a list of all current members of all city boards, committees, authorities and commissions and all current members appointed by the mayor and council to other public boards, committees, councils, commissions, and authorities of the city, county, or state. The chief operating officer or his designee shall provide a complete list of all employees required to submit income disclosure forms as designated in subsection (b) of this ordinance, including the employee's name, title and department, to the municipal clerk and ethics officer no later than January 5 of each calendar year. The board of ethics shall prescribe the form and method of disclosure statement forms. The ethics officer shall have such forms made available to each official and employee required to file disclosure statements, by first class mail or by hand delivery, no later than February 15 of each year. The failure of the ethics officer to cause a disclosure form to be delivered to any official or employee required to file a disclosure statement shall not relieve such official or employee of the obligation to file a disclosure statement. The ethics officer shall maintain all completed disclosure forms as public documents available for public inspection immediately upon filing. 
(d)  With respect to the president of council and members of council, if the official reports income from a business in accordance with paragraph (a)(2), said official shall be required to report the identity (name and address) of individual clients, customers, or patrons of the business when (i) the client, customer, or patron is a prohibited source; (ii) the official has actual knowledge that the client, customer, or patron is a prohibited source; and (iii) the official has actual knowledge that the prohibited source is a client, customer, or patron of the official's business. 
(e)  Every official and employee required to file an annual disclosure statement shall do so on or before the close of business on April 1 of each year in which the official or employee holds a position with the city or an agency and for the year following that in which the official or employee leaves such position. Such official or employee shall sign such disclosure statement under penalty of perjury. The failure of any official or employee so required to file an annual disclosure statement by April 1 without reasonable cause shall render such person delinquent and result in an administration sanction of $50.00 per day for each business day beyond April 1 of such delinquency, provided that the maximum penalty for the first offense shall be $500.00. 
(f)  The ethics officer shall prepare and forward to the board of ethics a report of all persons required to file under this section, those who have complied with the filing requirements, those who have filed a late or incomplete statement, and those who have failed to file a disclosure statement. The ethics officer shall be responsible for collecting all administrative sanctions levied by the board of ethics under this section for deposit to the City of Atlanta General Fund. 
(g)  For the year 2002 only: A list of employees to be provided by the chief operating officer pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section shall be provided within five days after this ordinance is signed by the mayor. Because the board of ethics will not have had sufficient time to prescribe a new financial disclosure form as provided in section 2-804(h) of this division, copies of the current disclosure form must be distributed as required by paragraph (c) no later than ten days after receipt of the list of employees. Every official and employee required to file an annual disclosure statement must do so within 35 days after this ordinance is signed by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02; Ord. No. 2013-54(13-O-1294), § 1, 10-30-13 ; Ord. No. 2016-25(16-O-1405) , §§ 1, 2, 8-24-16) 
State Law reference— Acceptance by public officers of monetary fees or honoraria, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-11. 
Sec. 2-815. - Disclosure of expense reimbursements. 
Within 30 days of receipt of reimbursements authorized to be received under section 2-801 ["gratuity" definition, subsection (5)], any official or employee must report such reimbursements on a form to be developed and provided by the ethics officer. The form shall be filed with the municipal clerk, with a copy sent by the official or employee to the ethics officer. The form shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and position of employment with the city; 
(2)  Name and address of all persons or entities providing reimbursement; 
(3)  Date, location, and subject matter of conference, speaking engagement, or event for which the official or employee received reimbursement; and 
(4)  Amount and category (e.g., travel costs, meals, lodging) of each component of the reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02) 
Sec. 2-816. - Passes, tickets and gratuities. 
(a)  No contract or lease with the city may require passes, tickets or gratuities to be given to officials or employees or permit reduced fees to be paid by officials or employees. The contracting party shall not provide gratuities or prerequisites to any official or employee in connection with execution of or performance under the contract or lease. 
(b)  No official, employee or person appointed to any board, corporation, commission or authority, including the mayor, the president of council, members of council, and judges of the municipal and traffic courts, shall knowingly accept any ticket of admission or other evidence of right of entry to any entertainment event, such as, but not limited to, musical concerts and dramatic productions, or to any athletic events, as a gift or for a value less than the price printed on the ticket, which would not be offered or given to such official or employee if such person were not an official or employee. For purposes of determining whether such ticket would be offered or given by reason of the official's or employee's position with the city, it shall be presumed that the offer of such ticket or right of entry from a member of the official's or employee's immediate family or from a business other than a public agency in which the official or employee, or a member of the official's or employee's immediate family, serves as an officer, director, stockholder, creditor, trustee, partner, or employee, is not made by virtue of that official's or employee's position. For purposes of determining whether such ticket would be offered or given by reason of the official's or employee's position with the city, it shall be presumed that any offer of such ticket or right of entry made by any prohibited source, but not limited to the Atlanta Fulton County Recreation Authority and any professional sports team located in the metro Atlanta area, is given by reason of such official's or employee's position with the city. As used in this section, "entertainment event" shall not include breakfasts, lunches, or dinners. 
(1)  Any official or employee who is performing an official duty at an entertainment event shall be exempt from this section with regard to that particular entertainment event. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02) 
Sec. 2-817. - Prohibition on giving or receiving gratuities. 
(a)  No official or employee shall accept any gratuity as defined in section 2-801(g). 
(b)  No person, business, or other entity shall give or convey to any official or employee a gratuity as defined in section 2-801. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02) 
Sec. 2-818. - Solicitation. 
No official or employee shall solicit or accept anything of value, in any form whatsoever, calculated to influence a vote, decision, or the exercise of official authority in any manner involving the city; provided, however, nothing in this section shall prohibit any official or employee from accepting a gift on behalf of the city which is properly reported to the board of ethics and the department of administrative services for addition to the inventory of property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02) 
Sec. 2-819. - Disclosure of confidential information. 
No official or employee shall disclose confidential information concerning the property, governing operations, policies or affairs of the city, except when required by state or federal law or by a court order or lawful subpoena, nor shall such official or employee use such confidential information acquired in an official capacity to advance the financial interest or personal interest of the official, employee or others in any instance where such would conflict with the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02) 
Sec. 2-820. - Incompatible interests. 
(a)  No official or employee shall invest or hold any investment, directly or indirectly, in any financial, business, commercial or other private transaction, which creates a conflict with and adversely affects official duties of the official or employee to the detriment of the city. 
(b)  No official or employee shall engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties of the official or employee. 
(c)  No official or employee shall own stock in or be employed by or have any business, financial or professional connection with or ownership interest in any business, company or concern which does business with the city, unless such business with the city is conducted through sealed competitive bidding or requests for proposal where such bids are opened and the awards are made at meetings open to the public. Such involvement shall not be considered as doing business with the city so as to cause any conflict of interest; provided, however, that any such person shall remain subject to sections 2-812 and 2-813 governing participation in contracts and disclosure of interests. This section is not intended to apply to ownership of less than ten percent of any publicly traded stock. 
(d)  Commissioners, deputy commissioners, department heads, chief operating officer, deputy chief operating officers, chief of staff, deputy chiefs of staff, bureau directors, and employees of the office of the mayor who report directly to the mayor shall not engage in any private employment or render any services for private interests for remuneration, regardless of whether such employment or service is compatible with or adverse to the proper discharge of the official duties of such employee. However, the employees named in this paragraph may engage in private employment or render services for private interests only upon obtaining prior written approval from the board of ethics in accordance with this paragraph. The board of ethics shall review each request individually and provide written approval or disapproval of the notification within 30 days. All requests for approval of outside employment shall state the type and place of employment, the hours of work, and the employer's name and address. City employment shall remain the first priority of the employee, and if at any time the outside employment interferes with city job requirements or performance, the official or employee shall be required to modify the conditions of the outside employment or terminate either the outside employment or the city employment. This paragraph shall not apply to single speaking engagements or to participation in conferences or on professional panels; provided, however, that any expense reimbursements received for such engagements must be reported in accordance with section 2-815. 
(e)  The mayor shall not accept honoraria, earned income other than the salary of the mayor, or payments-in-kind in any amount as remuneration for services. This section does not apply to receipt of dividends, interest, passive investment income, or income from a blind trust. 
(f)  Officials and employees other than the mayor may not accept honoraria from a prohibited source. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02) 
Sec. 2-821. - Loans. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any official or employee to lend money to any employee or to charge for obtaining credit for that employee, except that loans of $2,000.00 or less may be made or credit may be obtained for employees in cases of emergency. When these loans are made in emergencies, if not made voluntarily without charge, they shall be made only at the legal rate of interest on judgments in the state. If this loan or accommodation is made, it shall be unlawful for the official whose duty it is to pay the employee to deduct the amount so lent from the pay of the employee. All such accommodations or advances made, together with the interest thereon, shall be reported by the person making them to the head of his or her department or, if made by the head of the department, shall be reported to the mayor. These reports shall be made monthly and filed with the mayor and the municipal clerk in the public record. 
(b)  The mayor shall see that this section is complied with and that no business or practice shall be carried on of making loans by officials or employees to other employees of the city but that only accommodation loans in emergencies and for legal interest on judgments in the state shall be made or allowed. In no event shall any charge for obtaining credit be made or allowed. Any officer or employee violating this section shall, on conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code and shall also be dismissed from the service of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02) 
Sec. 2-822. - Persons handling city funds becoming surety, guarantor or endorser. 
No official or employee who handles or controls any funds of the city shall, during the official's or employee's term or continuance in office, become surety, guarantor or endorser of any bond, note or other obligation for any person employed by the city, excluding a member of the official's or employee's immediate family, an adult child or a parent. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02) 
Sec. 2-823. - Protection for reporting of violations. 
Officials and employees are encouraged to report suspected ethical violations to the ethics officer. No official or employee shall use or threaten to use any official authority or influence to discourage, restrain or interfere with any other person for the purpose of preventing such person from acting in good faith to report or otherwise bring to the attention of the board of ethics information relating to an ethics violation or investigation. No official or employee shall use or threaten to use any official authority or influence to effect any action as a reprisal against an official or employee who reports, initiates a complaint, or otherwise brings to the attention of the board of ethics information relating to a board investigation or an ethics violation. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02) 
Sec. 2-824. - Effective date and interim provisions. 
The ethics board members serving on June 8, 2002 are authorized to remain office and to administer the ethics code until August 5, 2002, or such other time as the new ethics board is constituted. 
(Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 4-10-02; Ord. No. 2002-52, § 1, 6-20-02) 
Sec. 2-825. - Mandatory ethics training. 
(a)  AH part-time, full-time, and contract employees of the offices of council members, council staff, municipal clerk, and council president shall receive a minimum of two hours of training within six months of the effective date of this ordinance and receive additional training at least once every three years after completing the initial training. This includes, but is not limited to, all employees reporting to the director of council staff and the municipal clerk, as well as city council assistants, senior council assistants, special council assistants, and contracted employees of the council member offices. Contract employees covered in this code section shall be persons that receive a 1099 FORM or 1099- MISC FORM from the Internal Revenue Service, pursuant to Section 530 of the Revenue Act of 1978 as extended by section 269(c) of P.L. 97-248, for services offered to a council member, the council President or any office of the council member or council president that amounts to $600.00 or more per calendar year and work for the department of council for a period of 21 days per calendar year or more. 
(b)  The ethics officer, or a designee, and the office of ethics shall be responsible for offering the training at least once a month or more and providing for all the staffing, materials, and all other operations of the training. 
(c)  The department of human resources shall be responsible for maintaining and enforcing this code section and ensuring that all the eligible employees meet the minimum requirements set forth in this code section. 
( Ord. No. 2014-36(14-O-1369), § 1, 7-30-14 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, approved April 10, 2002, did not set out provisions for § 2-825. Formerly said section pertained to registration and disclosure of reports by lobbyists. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2014-36(14-Or-1369), § 1, approved July 30, 2014, added provisions designated as a new § 2-825. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 2-826—2-829. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASING CARD POLICY 

Sec. 2-830. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to set requirements and standards for the City of Atlanta Purchasing Card Program. The policy is not intended to replace current State of Georgia statutes but is intended to comply with such state laws and establish more efficient guidelines for elected officials designated executive officials/employees using such purchasing cards. At no time should a city-issued purchasing card or credit card be used for personal purchases regardless of the circumstances. Utilizing the purchasing card or credit card for personal use or for any item or service not directly related to such official's public duty may result in disciplinary action including, but not limited to, felony criminal prosecution. All purchases utilizing a government purchasing card or government credit card must be in accordance with this division and with state law. 
( Ord. No. 2019-13(19-O-1004), § 1, 1-28-19 ) 
Sec. 2-831. - Scope. 
This division, as required by state law under O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c), applies to the use of government purchasing cards or government credit cards used by the elected mayor and designated executive officials/employees authorized to be issued such government purchasing cards or government credit cards. 
( Ord. No. 2019-13(19-O-1004), § 1, 1-28-19 ) 
Sec. 2-832. - Authorized cardholders. 
The below list of officials/departments have been authorized by the governing authority of the city to use such government purchasing cards or government credit cards and must abide by all of the applicable state laws and this purchasing card policy: 
(1)  Executive office. 
a.  Mayor. 
b.  Chief of staff. 
c.  Chief operating officer. 
d.  Chief financial officer. 
(2)  Law. 
(3)  Airport. 
(4)  Corrections. 
(5)  Police department. 
a.  Chief of police. 
b.  Mayor's executive protective team. 
Authorized cardholders shall have 60 days to review the purchasing card bill to verify or dispute charges on the purchasing card. 
( Ord. No. 2019-13(19-O-1004), § 1, 1-28-19 ) 
Sec. 2-833. - Purchasing restrictions. 
The following types of purchases and uses are strictly prohibited: 
(1)  Goods or services not directly related to official city business. 
(2)  Data plans, software, or applications for non-city-issued devices, including, but not limited to, smartphone, laptop computers and tablets. However, data plans purchased by the authorized cardholder when traveling on official city business are a permissible use of the business credit card. 
(3)  Memberships at wholesale warehouses and shopping clubs (e.g. Sam's Club, Costco, Amazon Prime). 
(4)  Cash advances. 
(5)  Gift cards, store value cards, calling cards and similar products. 
(6)  Personal dry cleaning charges. 
(7)  Entertainment (e.g. in-room movies for city employees traveling on business). 
(8)  Alcoholic beverages or products. 
(9)  Tobacco products. 
(10)  Fuel, mechanical repairs, and/or maintenance for personally owned vehicles. 
(11)  Airline tickets for family and friends. 
(12)  Any personal use. 
(13)  Use of the business credit card by anyone other than the authorized cardholder or the authorized cardholder's, CFO approved, designated personnel. 
( Ord. No. 2019-13(19-O-1004), § 1, 1-28-19 ) 
Sec. 2-834. - Allowable purchases. 
Elected officials may use government purchasing cards or government credit cards to purchase goods and/or services not prohibited by this policy or state law. Such purchases include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Purchases of items for official city use which fall within the transactional restrictions of this policy. 
(2)  Purchase of lodging, fuel, food, non-alcoholic beverages, or education and training materials while on city business. 
(3)  Emergency purchases necessary to protect city property. 
( Ord. No. 2019-13(19-O-1004), § 1, 1-28-19 ) 
Sec. 2-835. - Declared emergencies. 
The city grants authority to forego requirements for needs arising from unforeseen causes. In cases involving the welfare for the citizens of Atlanta, public, extreme weather conditions, or official declared emergencies, the government purchasing card or government credit card may be used in assisting with emergency purchases as warranted by authorized cardholder. 
( Ord. No. 2019-13(19-O-1004), § 1, 1-28-19 ) 
Sec. 2-836. - Administrator. 
Pursuant to Atlanta City Charter § 6-103(e), (g), the city designates the chief financial officer, as the program administrator of government purchasing cards or government credit cards. Such administrator shall: 
(1)  Serve as a liaison between the city's cardholders and the issuers of such cards. 
(2)  Maintain the cardholder agreement for all cardholders. 
(3)  Provide instruction, training, and assistance to cardholders 
(4)  Maintain account information and secure all cardholder information. 
(5)  Keep cardholders up-to-date on new or changing information. 
(6)  Upon receipt of information indicating fraudulent use or lost/stolen cards immediately report it to appropriate parties, including the issuer. 
(7)  Ensure all card accounts are being utilized properly as set forth by state law and this policy. 
(8)  Define the city's policy and procedures for proper documentation and storage of receipts, logs, and approvals required under this policy. 
(9)  Identify any changes to named persons authorized to use a government purchasing card or government credit card. 
(10)  Any other duties assigned by the municipal governing authority. 
( Ord. No. 2019-13(19-O-1004), § 1, 1-28-19 ) 
Sec. 2-837. - Legal consequences. 
This division applies to the usage of the government purchasing card or government credit card. Elected officials and city employees who knowingly, or through willful neglect fail to comply with this division may be subject to termination of account privileges and face other disciplinary action. including termination of employment. Repeated misuse of the government purchasing card or government credit card. including for personal use may be considered fraud, waste, and/or abuse, which may result in revocation of credit card privileges and/or disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. The user must pay back any unauthorized expenses and may face criminal charges. 
( Ord. No. 2019-13(19-O-1004), § 1, 1-28-19 ) 
Sec. 2-838. - Violations. 
The use of the government purchasing card or government credit card may be suspended or revoked when the chief financial officer, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that an authorized cardholder has violated this division. The government purchasing card or government credit card shall be revoked whenever an authorized cardholder is no longer employed with the city. 
( Ord. No. 2019-13(19-O-1004), § 1, 1-28-19 ) 
Secs. 2-839—2-840. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS[18] 
Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Cross reference— City council staff, § 2-151 et seq.; mayor, § 2-176 et seq.; executive branch offices, § 2-231 et seq.; municipal clerk, § 2-266 et seq.; chief financial officer, § 2-341 et seq.; officers and employees, § 2-781 et seq.; personnel, ch. 114. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-841. - Measures for increase of salaries or wages referred to committee on finance. 
No increase in the salary or wage of any official or employee shall be made except prior to March 31 in any year and unless the motion or resolution or ordinance providing the increase shall have first been referred to the committee on finance and considered and reported on by that committee. All measures which provide for increases without such reference shall be declared out of order, and if passed without such reference, they shall be ignored and are declared void. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4110) 
Sec. 2-842. - Deduction from pensioner of certain amounts permitted for active employees. 
The chief financial officer is authorized upon request by a person entitled to receive pension benefits to deduct from such payments to the pensioner payments for federal tax, state tax, hospitalization insurance, life insurance, back pension deductions, credit union savings, credit union loans and any other deduction provided active employees of the city, if such deductions are approved by the board of trustees responsible for the disbursement of funds to such pensioner. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4097) 
Sec. 2-843. - Automobile allowances. 
(a)  Employees who occupy positions with established auto allowances shall be compensated for the use of their personal automobiles on city business as follows: 
(1)  There shall be paid a monthly mileage reimbursement of $0.325 per mile driven per month on city business. 
(2)  An employee with an established auto allowance shall also be reimbursed for all documented parking fees incurred by the employee while away from the employee's principal place of employment. 
(b)  Employees who are recalled after their normal working period to deal with an emergency situation and who are not assigned a city-owned vehicle on an overnight basis or who receive an auto allowance may be reimbursed on a monthly basis in an amount of $0.325 per mile for their expense in traveling to and from the emergency location. The amount received shall not exceed $14.00 for each time that an employee is called back. 
(c)  Employees who are not assigned a city-owned vehicle and who do not occupy a position with an established automobile allowance may be reimbursed on a monthly basis for their expenses in using their personal automobiles on official city business at the rate of $0.325 per mile traveled. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the various department heads to certify to the chief financial officer, on a monthly basis, those city employees entitled to emergency mileage reimbursement and their mileage. 
(e)  The committee on finance of the council and the chief financial officer shall make such rules and regulations and provide necessary forms for carrying out the purpose of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4112; Ord. No. 2000—32, §§ 1, 2, 5-23-00) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-32, § 1, approved May 23, 2000, amended the city's mileage reimbursement rate to read as herein set out. Further, said ordinance, § 2, stated that the city's reimbursement mileage rate will hereinafter be the same as the current IRS reimbursement rate, effective May 1, 2000. 
Sec. 2-844. - Credit union deduction from salaries or wages. 
The city shall deduct from the salaries or wages of each employee such sums at such intervals as may be authorized by such employee to cover payments to the Atlanta City Employees' Credit Union, and the chief financial officer is authorized to pay the sums so deducted to the Atlanta City Employees' Credit Union. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4113) 
Sec. 2-845. - Employee suggestion program. 
(a)  There is established an employee suggestion program in city government. 
(b)  The employee suggestion program will function as follows: 
(1)  Compensation shall be granted to city employees who submit eligible suggestions which specify a method to perform city operations better, quicker, easier, safer or for less cost. This compensation will be in the form of either cash or a nonmonetary award. The cash award will be paid as a percentage of the cost savings or revenue gain generated by a suggestion. This award will equal ten percent of the estimated first year's net savings or revenue gain, but no such award shall exceed $500.00 per employee suggestion. 
(2)  An employee suggestion committee shall be responsible for determining whether or not a suggestion merits a nonmonetary award or the employee is entitled to cash compensation. 
(3)  The suggestion committee shall be composed of members selected from the city's administrative, legislative and service-delivery departments. The mayor or the mayor's designee shall determine the tenure, size and manner in which committee members are chosen. Once constituted, the majority of members will select a chair to preside over the functioning of the committee. The employee suggestion committee shall have the power to adopt those rules which are considered necessary to conduct the committee's business. 
(4)  The administrator of the governmental unit responsible for coordinating suggestion program activities shall provide an annual report to the council on the condition and achievements of the program no later than January 31 of the following year. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4114) 
Sec. 2-846. - Supplemental pension payment. 
(a)  Officers and employees who retired or who will retire as a matter of right under the most recent amendment under the provisions of the laws establishing the three pension systems of the city as of the date of their retirement shall be paid a minimum amount per month for each full year of active creditable service. Retirees of the city shall be paid a minimum of $12.00 per month for each full year of active creditable service. Beneficiaries of these pensioners shall be paid $9.00 per month for each full year of active creditable service of the officer or employee. Retirees of the city board of education shall be paid a minimum of $17.00 per month for each full year of active creditable service. Beneficiaries of these pensioners shall be paid $12.75 per month for each full year of active creditable service of the officer or employee. However, if the normal monthly pension benefit payable to a former officer or employee or the beneficiary of such officer or employee was reduced at the time of retirement due to the fact that applicable age requirements were not met, the minimum monthly amounts specified in this section shall be reduced by the same percentage as the normal monthly pension benefit was reduced at the time of retirement. For purposes of this section, active creditable service for an employee or officer who was granted a disability in-line-of-duty pension from the police officers' or firefighters' pension funds prior to April 1, 1964, or from the general employees' pension fund prior to April 17, 1973, shall be set at a minimum of 25 years. The records kept in the department of finance, employee benefits division, shall be conclusive as to time served. 
(b)  Increased pension benefits payable to former officers and employees under this section shall be reduced in an amount equivalent to the total pension supplement paid directly to such former officer or employee by the state teacher's retirement system under O.C.G.A. tit. 47, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 47-3-1 et seq.). 
(c)  As to former members, officers and employees of the city and their dependents, such increased benefits payable under this section shall be paid from the general fund of the city. With respect to those former members, officers and employees of the board of education and their dependents, such increased benefits, as provided in this section, shall not be paid from the general fund of the city, but shall be paid, if at all, from monies appropriated by the board of education and paid to the city for the purpose of making such payments to the former members, officers and employees of the board of education. 
(Code 1977, §§ 7-4098(g), 7-4098.3(a), (c)) 
Charter reference— Pension plan modifications, § 3-507. 
Sec. 2-847. - 1985 supplemental cost-of-living pension payment. 
(a)  Monthly pension payments due to former officers and employees who have retired as a matter of right prior to April 1, 1978, under the laws establishing the three pension systems of the city, that is 1924 Ga. Laws, page 167 et seq., as amended; 1927 Ga. Laws, page 265 et seq., as amended; and 1933 Ga. Laws, page 213 et seq., as amended, and beneficiaries of pensioners who retired as a matter of right prior to April 1, 1978, shall be increased effective January 1 of each year by an amount equivalent to three percent of the sum of the monthly pension payment being received from any of the three pension systems, together with any monthly amounts being received under any previously enacted supplemental pension payment ordinances and any previously enacted supplemental cost-of-living pension payment ordinances. 
(b)  This section shall not be effective to or be construed to confer eligibility for a pension upon any former officer or employee who was not eligible for a pension under the provisions of the acts set forth in subsection (a) of this section in effect on the date of the retirement, resignation or other withdrawal from service of such former officer or employee. 
(c)  As to former officers and employees of the city and their beneficiaries, such increased benefits shall be implemented only to the extent that moneys are appropriated from the general fund of the city to support these increased benefits. With respect to those former officers and employees of the board of education and their beneficiaries, such increased benefits, as provided in this section, shall not be paid from the general fund of the city, but shall be paid, if at all, from moneys appropriated by the board of education and paid to the city for the purpose of making such payments to the former officers and employees of the board of education and their beneficiaries. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4098.8) 
Charter reference— Pension plan modifications, § 3-507. 
Sec. 2-848. - Additional group life insurance. 
(a)  In addition to the group life insurance provided for, the mayor and council are authorized to contract for additional group life insurance sufficient to provide a maximum of $10,000.00 on the life of each officer or employee who was employed by the city as of May 31, 1967, in such groups and in such classifications as the mayor and council deems proper, provided that the payment by the officer or employee shall not exceed $0.70 per $1,000.00 per month. The balance of the cost required to pay for such group insurance shall be paid by the city. No officer or employee shall be compelled to take such additional insurance, but if the officer or employee voluntarily elects to do so the chief financial officer shall be authorized to deduct the contributions of such officer or employee from the salary or wages of the officer or employee so insured. However, subsequent to May 31, 1967, no officer or employee shall be allowed to come under the group life insurance plan providing only a maximum of $10,000.00 on the life of each officer or employee. 
(b)  In addition to the group life insurance provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the mayor and council, with respect to those officers or employees who are employed by the city on or subsequent to June 1, 1967, are authorized to contract for additional group life insurance in such amounts as the mayor and council may from time to time determine on the life of each officer or employee in such groups and in such classifications as the mayor and council deems proper, provided the payment by the officer or employee shall not exceed $0.70 per $1,000.00 per month. The balance of the cost required to pay for such group insurance shall be paid by the city. No officer or employee shall be compelled to take such additional insurance, but if the officer or employee voluntarily elects to do so the chief financial officer shall be authorized to deduct the contributions of such officer or employee from the salary or wages of the officer or employee so insured if the officer or employee is an employee of the city, and the board of education is authorized to deduct the contributions of its employees. Any officer or employee, employed as of May 31, 1967, may voluntarily elect to come under the group life insurance plan, as provided for in this subsection, and contributions shall be deducted as set forth in this subsection; provided, however, that such officer or employee making such election shall not be permitted thereafter to continue in the group life insurance plan providing a maximum of $10,000.00 upon the life of each officer or employee, as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4101) 
Sec. 2-849. - Annual appropriation for group life insurance. 
The mayor and council are required to make an appropriation annually sufficient to cover the difference in the amount paid by the employee and the amount due the insurance company for the group life insurance plan. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4103) 
Sec. 2-850. - Health insurance. 
(a)  The mayor and council are authorized to contract for group health and dental plans, either or both, for the benefit of city employees, in such groups or classifications as the mayor and council deem proper, and are authorized to contribute to the cost of such insurance. No employee shall be compelled to take such insurance, but if the employee voluntarily elects to do so, the chief financial officer shall be authorized to deduct the employee's contribution from the salary or wages of the employee so insured. 
(b)  Officers and employees will become eligible for the group health and dental benefits after 90 days of continuous service; however, officers and employees may, at total cost, without city contribution, purchase coverage under the city group health and dental benefit plans which are adopted by the city. 
(c)  Officers and employees shall cease to be eligible to participate in the group health and dental benefit plans upon separation or termination from the city. Retirees may continue to be covered under group health and dental plans, provided that such plans are adopted by the city. Surviving spouses and dependent children may continue to be covered under group health and dental plans, provided that such plans are adopted by the city. 
(d)  Participants in the group health and dental plans may terminate their participation in the plans only during the annual open enrollment period. 
(e)  Any intentional false statement, deception or fraud in the enrollment application for the group health and dental coverage will result in the loss of eligibility to participate in the group health and dental benefit plans. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4104) 
Sec. 2-851. - Personal accident insurance. 
The mayor and council, with respect to those officers or employees who are required or who elect to come under the group life insurance plans as set forth in section 2-848, are authorized to contract for group personal accident insurance in the like amounts, as provided for the benefit of the officers or employees, or in such groups or classifications as the mayor and council may deem proper. The payment of not more than $0.70 per $1,000.00 per month, by the officers or employees, as provided for in section 2-848, shall include both group life insurance and group personal accident insurance. The balance of the cost required to pay such group personal accident insurance shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4105) 
Sec. 2-852. - Continuance of life, health and dental insurance while on leave of absence. 
City officers and employees may continue their group life insurance and group health and dental benefits insurance, if they so desire, while on leave of absence from the employ of the city, provided that such leave of absence is granted for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  Military leave of absence. 
(2)  Maternity leave of absence. 
(3)  Sick leave of absence. 
(4)  Study leave of absence. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4106) 
Sec. 2-853. - Persons ineligible to receive group life insurance. 
Officers and employees employed on a casual or temporary basis with the city are not eligible for group life insurance. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4107) 
Sec. 2-854. - Dependent's life insurance. 
In addition to other group life insurance provided for in section 2-848, the mayor and council are authorized to contract for group life insurance on the dependents of officers and employees in such amounts as provided for in the respective insurance plans, for the benefit of officers and employees, or in such amounts as the mayor and council may from time to time deem proper, provided that the full payment for dependent's life insurance shall be contributed by such officers and employees who elect coverage for their dependents. No officer or employee shall be compelled to take such additional insurance on dependents, but if the officer or employee elects to do so the chief financial officer shall be authorized to deduct the contributions of such officer or employee so insured if the officer or employee is an employee of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4108) 
Sec. 2-855. - Employees' scholarship fund. 
(a)  The term "employees of the city," for the purpose of this section, means all of those officers and employees who have been regularly employed by the city for a period of not less than six months. 
(b)  There is established, to be funded from the general revenues of the city, a scholarship fund to assist city employees who desire to begin or further their formal education. 
(c)  This fund shall be administered in accordance with a plan to be adopted by the mayor and council by ordinance. The mayor and council may amend the plan from time to time as the mayor and council may deem necessary. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4109) 
Sec. 2-856. - Payment as witnesses. 
(a)  Effect on pay. When officers or employees are subpoenaed on behalf of the city as witnesses in any court and are absent from duty because thereof, no deduction shall be made in pay. 
(b)  Witness fee when city is party. It shall be unlawful for the officers charged with the duties of auditing and paying bills or accounts against the city to audit, allow or pay any bill or claim for witness fees in favor of any officer or employee of the city or any department thereof in any case to which the city is a plaintiff or defendant, when the officer or employee serving as witness is already paid a salary or per diem wages equal to or greater than the witness fees allowed by law and when such officer or employee has not lost time or been docked in regular pay for loss of time, which would otherwise have been paid for because of attendance at court as a witness for or against the city in any such case. However, it shall be lawful for any such auditing or paying officer to audit or pay any such bill or claim in any case in obedience to an order of the court having jurisdiction thereof. In such case no penalty shall follow obedience to the order of the court. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3018) 
Sec. 2-857. - Reimbursement of convention, conference, training, travel and other expenses. 
(a)  City employees who attend conventions and training conferences representing the city or who travel in an official capacity shall be reimbursed for all or a portion of the expenses incurred in connection therewith as follows: 
(1)  Cost of hotel or lodging accommodation expenses incurred per person for each day of the conference or convention being attended or for each day of the business trip being attended in an amount not to exceed lodging rate for the primary destination as noted on the General Services Administration (GSA) website (www.gsa.gov/perdiem) or designated convention hotel rate for the city being visited. 
(2)  All registration fees. 
(3)  Cost of coach air fare or other common public transportation by the most direct route from the city to the city where the convention, the training or the business is being transacted. 
(4)  Meals and incidental expenses for the primary destination as noted on the GSA website (www.gsa.gov/perdiem) to be applied for each full day of the convention, the training or the business being transacted. 
(5)  Meals and incidental expenses for the first and last day of travel will be reimbursed at 75 percent of the rate noted above (Subpart B Section 301-11.101 of the GSA code). 
(6)  Taxi or commuter bus fares between the airport or station and your hotel and between the hotel and your business meeting place are reimbursable if a printed receipt is provided in accordance to the City of Atlanta's Travel and Expense Reimbursement Policy. 
(7)  If a privately owned vehicle (POV) is utilized in lieu of travel by air or other common carrier, the reimbursement mileage rate for privately owned vehicles shall be consistent with the rate set by GSA (www.gsa.gov POV Mileage Reimbursement Rates) . This reimbursement must be supported by odometer readings or printed digital driving maps or other mileage tracking system reports in accordance to the City of Atlanta's Reimbursement Policy. 
(8)  If a POV is not available and it is more economical than travel by air or other common carrier, a compact or smaller rental car may be utilized for travel. Requests for a rental car must be approved by the department head before the rental reservation is made. 
(b)  Requests for convention, training or travel expenses shall be approved in advance by the mayor or designee; provided, however, for judges, solicitors and members of their staffs, such requests shall be approved in advance by the chief judge. 
(c)  Requests for convention, training and travel expenses shall be approved in advance as to the availability of funds by the department head. 
(d)  An itemized expense account (I-Expense) shall be prepared by the employee attending the convention, training or traveling on business of the city, in accordance to the City of Atlanta Reimbursement Policy within seven days of the return from the convention, training or business trip. 
(e)  It is specifically declared that the reimbursement of expenses, to the amount set forth in this section, incurred by department heads or employees when attending various meetings and conventions outside the city in an official capacity is in no way intended, to be any form of compensation to that department head or employee, as long as the reimbursement does not exceed the amount authorized by GSA. 
(f)  Employees will be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenditures incurred while performing official business of the city. Official business shall be defined as when a city official or employee acts in an official capacity to perform official duties on behalf of the city. The city's official business does not include an activity or event done solely for the personal benefit of an individual official or employee, such as a political campaign activity, a private business transaction, or an event sponsored by a private, social or non-city group. 
Allowable expenses include: 
Communicating with representatives of local, regional, state and national governments on City of Atlanta adopted policy positions 
Participating in local, regional, state and national organizations whose activities affect the City of Atlanta interest 
Recognizing service to the City of Atlanta 
Membership dues are not an authorized expenditure except for memberships in those governmental, professional associations, and/or certifications related to employment with the city in which the city's memberships extends to its officials. 
(g)  Acceptable receipts include: 1) Original receipts, which include vendor name, location, date and dollar amount, 2) copy of credit card itemized receipt or credit/debit card billing statement, 3) electronic ticket receipt. 
Unacceptable receipts include those from a "receipt or guest book" or handmade receipts. 
(h)  Charitable contributions are not a reimbursable expense. If donations need to be made to a qualified organization for a valid business purpose, they must be processed as a payment directly to the third party through accounts payable. Donations made on behalf of position with the City of Atlanta must be requested through accounts payable as a disbursement request for donation to be paid on COA check stock. The public purpose must be documented on the disbursement request. At no time should charitable contributions be made directly to a third party nonprofit organization. 
The Internal Revenue Service defines qualified organizations as nonprofit groups that are religious, charitable, educational, scientific, or literary in purpose, or that work to prevent cruelty to children or animals. 
(i)  This section does not apply to members of the council or municipal clerk or their employees. 
(j)  Subsection (a)(4) of this section regarding travel by coach air or common public transportation does not apply to the mayor. 
(k)  The chief financial officer is responsible for establishing policies and procedures regarding City of Atlanta Travel and Expense Reimbursements in accordance with IRS Publication 463. These Policies and Procedures (P&P) will be posted online on the city website along with links to appropriate GSA websites. This P&P document will be the primary guide for all City of Atlanta Employees to adhere to regarding travel, training and expense reimbursements. The chief financial officer will ensure that the document is up to date with the latest policy or regulation changes per IRS regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 5-2020; Ord. No. 2007-12 (07-O-0272), § 1, 3-13-07; Ord. No. 2017-66(17-O-1642), § 2, 11-6-17 ) 
Sec. 2-858. - Domestic partnership benefits. 
A city employee may apply for and obtain health and dental insurance benefits for a person registered as his or her domestic partner under chapter 94, article V hereof upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Definitions: 
a.  "Dependent" and "dependency" defined . 
1.  As used with regard to domestic partnership benefits, the term "dependent" shall mean one who relies on another for financial support. Dependency does not depend on whether the dependent could support himself/herself without the supporter's earnings or whether the dependent could so reduce his/her expenses such that he/she could live independently of the supporter's earnings. Dependency does not depend on whether the dependent is employed and/or earns a substantial part of his/her own support. Dependency depends on whether the dependent was and is supported, in whole or in part, by the supporter's earnings. 
2.  An employee's domestic partner shall be deemed a "dependent" of the employee if: 
i.  The employee makes contributions to the domestic partner of cash and supplies, and the domestic partner relies upon and uses those contributions to support himself/herself in order to maintain his or her standard of living. The contributions may be at irregular intervals and of irregular amounts, but must have existed for at least six months, and must be continuing. 
ii.  The employee is obligated, based upon his/her commitment set forth in the declaration of domestic partnership, to continue the financial support of the domestic partner for so long as the domestic partnership shall be in effect. 
iii.  The domestic partner is supported, in whole or in part, by the employee's earnings, and has been for at least the last six months. 
b.  "Affidavit of financial reliance" defined. An "affidavit of financial reliance" is a form, provided by the city business license office, upon request, to any city employee who has a domestic partner and who has received a certificate of domestic partnership, as is set forth under chapter 94, article V hereof. The form shall state the definition of "dependent," as is set forth in subsection (1)a.1 above. The form shall require the employee and his/her domestic partner to attest that the domestic partner is a dependent of the employee. The form shall require the employee and his/her domestic partner to attest that each of the requirements set forth in subsection (1)a.2 above are met when the affidavit of financial reliance is signed. The form shall also require the employee and his/her domestic partner to agree to notify the department of personnel and human resources and the employee benefits division of the department of finance, in writing, within 30 days, if the domestic partners no longer meet all of the requirements set forth in subsection (1)a.2 above. The form must be signed by the employee and his/her domestic partner, under penalty of perjury, and must be witnessed and notarized. The business license office shall, within 30 days of the effective date of this section, make such forms available. 
c.  "Dependency tax questionnaire" defined. A "dependency tax questionnaire" is a form, provided by the city business license office to each employee who requests an affidavit of financial reliance form. The dependency tax questionnaire shall state that the value of the city's contributions toward the payment of the domestic partner's health and dental insurance premiums are taxable income to the employee if the employee's domestic partner does not receive more than 50 percent of his/her "support" (as defined by the Internal Revenue Service) from the employee. The questionnaire shall require the employee and the employee's domestic partner to check one of two statements which applies to them, either that the domestic partner receives more than 50 percent of his/her support from the employee or the domestic partner does not receive more than 50 percent of his/her support from the employee. The questionnaire shall be signed by the employee and his/her domestic partner. The business license office shall, within 30 days of the effective date of this section, make such questionnaires available. 
(2)  Sick leave, funeral leave, and annual leave benefits. An employee who has filed a sworn affidavit of domestic partnership with the business license division in accordance with chapter 94, article V hereof, and who has received a certificate of domestic partnership, may file a copy of that certificate with the department of personnel and human resources and with the employee benefits division of the department of finance, for the purpose of city sick leave, funeral leave, and annual leave benefits. 
(3)  Filing of affidavit of financial reliance. An employee eligible to receive city health and dental insurance benefits, who has filed a copy of his/her certificate of domestic partnership with the department of personnel and human resources and with the employee benefits division of the department of finance may also file an affidavit of financial reliance with those departments (original to employee benefits division and a copy to the department of personnel), for the purpose of obtaining city health and dental insurance coverage for the employee's domestic partner. The affidavit of financial reliance must be filed within 31 days of the domestic partners' receipt of their certificate of domestic partnership, or during an open enrollment period. 
(4)  Entitlement to insurance benefits; effective date. Any city employee who requests health and dental insurance benefits for his/her domestic partner pursuant to subsection (3) above, shall receive such benefits, provided that the employee shall pay 25 percent of the domestic partner's insurance premiums and city shall pay 75 percent of the domestic partner's insurance premiums. However, if the employee is required to pay 100 percent of his/her health and dental insurance premiums, the employee shall pay 100 percent of the health and dental insurance premiums of his/her domestic partner. Health and dental insurance benefits shall be extended to domestic partners effective January 1, 1997. 
(5)  Filing of dependency tax questionnaire. Every employee who files an affidavit of financial reliance with the employee benefits division of the department of finance shall also file his or her original dependency tax questionnaire with the employee benefits division of the department of finance. If the questionnaire states that the employee's domestic partner does not receive more than 50 percent of his/her support from the employee, the value of the city's contributions toward the domestic partner's insurance premiums shall be added to the employee's income for taxation purposes only. The employee and his/her domestic partner shall file a new dependency tax questionnaire, with the employee benefits division of the department of finance, within 30 days of a change of financial status which would change the answer provided on their current dependency tax questionnaire. 
(6)  Notice of change of conditions; penalties. Any employee who receives insurance coverage for a domestic partner shall notify the employee benefits division within 30 days of any change in or termination of the domestic partnership, or if the employee's domestic partner is no longer a dependent of the employee, as is set forth in their affidavit of financial reliance. Any employee who fraudulently obtains coverage for a person who is in fact not a domestic partner, as defined under chapter 94, article V hereof, or for a domestic partner who is not in fact a dependent of the employee, as is set forth in subsection (1)a above, shall reimburse the city for any costs involved in providing such coverage and be subject to criminal penalties as provided by the laws of the State of Georgia and the City of Atlanta. 
(Code 1977, § 5-9008; Ord. No. 1996-70, § 2) 
Cross reference— Domestic partnerships generally, § 94-131 et seq. 
Sec. 2-859. - Employees who have not designated a spouse to receive benefits. 
(a)  For purposes of eligibility for city benefits including, but not necessarily limited to health and dental insurance, each city employee who is unmarried and does not have a registered domestic partner, and who has no other dependent, may designate one dependent who shall be eligible for benefits coverage and treatment to the same extent as a regular dependent of a city employee. 
(b)  That for purposes of such coverage, a designated dependent shall be defined as any person, not otherwise covered by city ordinances, whom the employee may claim as a dependent for federal income tax purposes. 
(c)  That the employee shall pay full premium costs associated with coverage for designated dependent. 
(Ord. No. 1993-80, §§ 1—3, 10-21-93) 
Editor's note— Sections 1—3 of Ord. No. 1993-80, approved October 21, 1993, did not specifically amend this Code and were adopted prior to adoption of this Code; however, they have been included at the city's request and, at the editor's discretion, added as § 2-859. 
Sec. 2-860. - Open enrollment. 
The chief financial officer shall complete open enrollment for employee benefits for the upcoming calendar year no later than the fifth working day in the month of November of the current year. 
(Ord. No. 2005-14, § 1, 2-28-05) 
Secs. 2-861—2-875. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OLD-AGE AND SURVIVORS INSURANCE FOR BOARD OF EDUCATION[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
State Law reference— Social security for public employees, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; local plans for coverage, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-40 et seq. 

Sec. 2-876. - Extension to employees and officials. 
It is declared to be the policy and purposes of the city to extend at the earliest date possible under the agreement entered into by the state and the Federal Social Security Administration, to the employees and officials of the city board of education not excluded by law, the benefits of the system of old-age and survivors insurance as authorized by the federal social security act, the state enabling act and amendments thereto. In pursuance to this policy and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 5-2101) 
Sec. 2-877. - Authority to make agreements with state employees' retirement system. 
The mayor authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state employees' retirement system as provided for in section 28-76, not to include any employees who are in positions covered by a public retirement system, in the manner provided by state law. 
(Code 1977, § 5-2102) 
Sec. 2-878. - Salary withholdings. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided for in this division are authorized in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
(Code 1977, § 5-2103) 
Sec. 2-879. - Appropriation for funds. 
There shall be appropriated from the general fund of the board of education such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal law or regulations for employer's contributions, administrative expenses and a guaranty fund to ensure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in section 2-877. Such funds shall be paid over to the state employees' retirement system in accordance with regulations established by such agency. 
(Code 1977, § 5-2104) 
Sec. 2-880. - Records and reports. 
For the purposes of this division, the city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 5-2105) 
Sec. 2-881. - Exclusion. 
There is excluded from this division any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 5-2106) 
Secs. 2-882—2-905. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FINANCE[20] 
Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Charter reference— Revenue and fund administration, art. 6. 
Cross reference— Department of finance, § 2-32 et seq.; procurement and real estate code, § 2-1101 et seq.; risk management, § 2-1741 et seq.; sinking fund commission, § 2-2081 et seq.; occupation tax, § 30-51 et seq.; special assessments, ch. 134; taxation, ch. 146. 
State Law reference— Local government finance, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-80-2 et seq., 36-81-1 et seq., 36-82-1 et seq., 36-83-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-906. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on July 1 of the year and end on June 30 of the following year. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3001; Ord. No. 2005-73, § 1, 11-14-05) 
State Law reference— Fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3(a). 
Sec. 2-907. - Duties of chief financial officer as municipal revenue collector, ex officio marshal. 
In performing the duties required of the marshal by law and in signing all levies, notices, advertisements, deeds and other documents, the chief financial officer or designee is authorized to sign such documents with the title, municipal revenue collector, ex officio marshal. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4001) 
Charter reference— Chief financial officer to be ex officio marshal, § 6-103(e). 
Sec. 2-908. - Financial impact statement of new programs affecting budget. 
An ordinance or resolution submitted to the council or a committee thereof for consideration that initiates a new program after the adoption of the annual budget shall include a statement indicating the financial impact, if any, on the present and future budgets of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1040) 
Sec. 2-909. - Numbering of departments, activities, funds and accounts. 
The chief financial officer is authorized to number the departments, activities, funds and accounts in any manner necessary to effect the proper recording of revenues and expenditures. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3011) 
Sec. 2-910. - Grant applications. 
(a)  "With the exception of grant applications filed by or on behalf of the department of parks and recreation, any grant application which anticipates or proposes a contractual agreement that would bind the city to a particular project or contract or commit the city financially, directly or indirectly, either by a liability for a cash payment or for in-kind or noncash credits, shall be approved before it is filed by resolution or ordinance of the committee on finance of the council and subsequently by the full council as provided by section 2-941. 
(b)  Except as set forth in section 2-910(e) below, any grant application that is filed by or on behalf of the department of parks and recreation is not required to receive approval of the council prior to being filed, however the grant may not be accepted by the City of Atlanta until approved by the council. Any other grant application that is filed without the approval of the council shall be absolutely void and without authority. 
(c)  Approval of funding by the grantor of a grant must be obtained in writing by the chief financial officer or the grant funds must have been received by the city before there shall be a commitment or expenditure of funds in connection with the grant. 
(d)  The council may initiate grant applications. Grant applications would be initiated in the standing committee of the council having purview over the substantive matters included in the grant application. The initiating committee shall review the grant application prior to the finance committee's review and shall recommend approval or disapproval of the grant application to the committee on finance and the council. A committee may amend those portions of the grant applications over which it has purview. 
(e)  Any grant application that is filed by or on behalf of the department of parks and recreation to obtain funds for the Centers of Hope, including funds for elements of the Centers of Hope such as programming, motorized equipment, supplies, personnel, and land/facility expenses, is not required to receive approval of the council prior to being filed. In addition, council approval shall not be required to accept the grant funds, provided that: (1) the department of parks and recreation provides a written update to the council listing each grant received, the amount of the grant, and the provider(s) of the grant; (2) the grant funds are deposited into the city's Centers of Hope Trust Account; and (3) the grant does not require financial commitment from the city. Should these three conditions not be met, council must authorize the acceptance of the grant. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1027; Ord. No. 2007-11 (07-O-0202), §§ 1, 2, 3-13-07; Ord. No. 2010-75(10-O-1659), § 4, 10-12-10 ; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) 
Sec. 2-911. - Review of contracts. 
(a)  Any proposed contract to be entered into on behalf of the city shall be reviewed by the committee on finance, which shall forward its recommendation of approval or disapproval to the full council. 
(b)  This section shall in no way conflict with section 2-1104. 
(c)  Any and all contracts requiring disbursements and/or expenditures of HOME Program funds in excess of $100,000.00, whether by grant, loan or otherwise, shall require approval by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1025; Ord. No. 1997-74, § 1, 12-8-97) 
Cross reference— Contract formulation, § 2-1186 et seq. 
Sec. 2-912. - Procedures for making payments by city. 
The mode of making payments by the city shall be as follows: 
(1)  The departments for which purchases of supplies, services, construction, professional or consultant services of all kinds have been made shall report to the chief financial officer on an official form provided therefor which shall have thereon a form for the chief financial officer's approval for the payment of same. 
(2)  The director, bureau of purchasing and real estate shall send to the chief financial officer a copy of all orders issued by the director for supplies, services, construction, professional or consultant services. 
(3)  The vouchers shall be prepared in the chief financial officer's office with the original invoice, the report of the head of the department and the copy of the purchase order attached, after which the auditor in the chief financial officer's office shall audit the vouchers and they shall be approved for payment by the chief financial officer. 
(4)  All city departments, bureaus, agencies and offices shall properly prepare and submit all required payment authorization documents to the department of finance, accounts payable division not later than five business days after satisfactory receipt of supplies, services, construction and professional or consultant services. 
(5)  Vouchers issued in payment of payrolls shall be supported by payrolls prepared by the respective departments certified to by the head of the department. The mayor and chief financial officer are hereby authorized to sign checks and bank transfers by the means of affixing a facsimile signature thereon with a machine. 
(6)  Checks so drawn shall carry the number, date and amount as reflected by the register maintained therefor and shall be delivered to parties at interest. The chief financial officer shall then be authorized to pay any such check. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3020) 
Sec. 2-913. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-914. - Issuance of duplicate checks when originals lost. 
The chief financial officer shall have authority to issue a duplicate city check upon receipt of proper evidence in writing from the payee that such check has been destroyed, mutilated or lost and was not presented to the bank for payment. Upon notice from the payee, it shall be the duty of the chief financial officer to issue a stop payment order to the bank on which the check was drawn and, upon receipt of written notice from the bank acknowledging the stop payment order, the chief financial officer shall issue a duplicate check and notify the bank to honor such check when presented for payment. It shall further be the duty of the chief financial officer to maintain a record of all duplicate checks issued. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1031) 
Sec. 2-915. - Voucher drawn upon fund of department creating expenditure. 
Each voucher upon the chief financial officer shall be drawn against the fund appropriated for the department creating the expenditure. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3021) 
Sec. 2-916. - Refunds. 
(a)  Requisitions by department heads. The officials in charge of the respective departments are authorized to issue requisitions to the chief financial officer for refunds of amounts not exceeding $5,000.00 which are justifiable, and the chief financial officer is authorized to make refunds after being satisfied as to the facts. The refunds shall be paid from and charged to the proper appropriation account in the fund in which the revenue was received and deposited. 
(b)  Excess bids at tax sales. The chief financial officer is authorized to issue refunds of amounts representing excess bids at municipal tax sales, provided that no single refund shall exceed the sum of $3,000.00 where the refund is necessary because of duplicate or overpayment of city taxes or otherwise. 
(c)  Other. Any refund not made in accordance with subsection (a) or (b) of this section is to be referred to the committee on finance and the council for final determination. 
(d)  Erroneous, duplicate or overpayment of water and sewer charges. Requisitions for refunds of water and sewer payments resulting from overbilling, clerical error or overpayment of charges for meter sizes and/or water main installations shall be forwarded to the chief financial officer where such request is supported by written documentation. Requests for refunds shall be documented by records of original payment on file in the office of the head of the bureau of drinking water. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1035; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 57[2], 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2003-83, § 8, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 2-917. - Petty cash funds. 
The chair of the committee on finance and the chief financial officer are authorized to establish or increase petty cash funds in the various departments of the city government, when in their discretion the fund or increase is justified. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3025) 
Sec. 2-918. - Monthly reports of contracts for revolving funds. 
Any contract through which the city conveys to another party funds to be used in a revolving fund manner shall contain provisions requiring monthly reports in a manner and on forms prescribed by the chief financial officer, which reports shall divulge the status of all city funds and record repayments of principal and interest, and provide that upon the completion of the contract all financial records, funds, notes, deeds to secure debts and other assets shall be returned to the city promptly, at the direction of the chief financial officer. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1039) 
Sec. 2-919. - Periodic payments to contractors. 
(a)  Periodic payments for work approved and materials stored at the site shall be made by the city to each contractor who is performing a construction contract on behalf of the city in the following manner: 
(1)  If the work performed during the previous month on a construction contract on behalf of the city is approved by the project architect and the claim for materials stored on the site or at an approved off-site location is approved by the project architect, the chief financial officer shall pay 90 percent of the amount due for work performed in accordance with the plans and specifications or approved change orders and 90 percent of the value of acceptable materials suitably stored at the end of the preceding month until such time as the balance due the contractor, including approved change orders, is reduced to 50 percent of the contract price, including approved change orders, at which time the chief financial officer shall pay 95 percent of all sums due as set forth in this subsection. 
(2)  The chief financial officer is authorized to promulgate, adopt and from time to time revise such reporting forms and statements to accomplish the objectives of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(3)  All contractors under contract with the city for all construction contracts entered into shall submit all necessary progress payment billing information and requests to the appropriate city department for its review and approval not later than the third business day of each month for work performed during the previous month. The appropriate city department shall review the payment request, make its recommendation concerning the payment request and forward to the department of finance all information and supporting documents necessary for the department of finance payment approval not later than the tenth day of each month. The department of finance shall receive the payment requests, review for approval and make the appropriate payment to the contractor not later than the 15th day of each month for the previous month's billing. 
(b)  Final payment shall be made by the city to each contractor who is performing a construction contract on behalf of the city within 30 days of acceptance and approval by the project architect for payment for completed work, including receipt of all specified documents, such as but not limited to affidavits, bonds and warranties, by the chief financial officer, such payment to be made on such date subsequent to the expiration of the 30 days. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any construction contracts involving the construction of water lines, sewer lines, airport facilities or any construction or maintenance where any of such contracts are funded in whole or in part from the proceeds of airport bonds, water and sewer bonds or from any bonds containing a contract providing for a larger retainage than that set forth in this section. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3023) 
Sec. 2-920. - Reports on lease or rental of city facilities. 
(a)  The mayor or, at the mayor's election, the heads of the respective city departments having jurisdiction over city facilities which are available for rent or lease on an event or per-day basis shall file a monthly report with the committee on finance setting forth the following: 
(1)  Each revenue and non-revenue-producing event; 
(2)  The date of each event; 
(3)  The amount of revenue produced by each event if any; 
(4)  The total number of revenue and non-revenue-producing events held in the preceding month; and 
(5)  The total revenue produced for the month. 
(b)  The report shall be provided by the second meeting of the committee on finance in each month and shall cover the preceding month's activities. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3027) 
Sec. 2-921. - Budget and rental of neighborhood centers and City Hall East. 
(a)  An annual operating budget for each individual neighborhood center and City Hall East shall be prepared. It shall include but not be limited to salaries of the custodial worker assigned to each respective building, utilities, travel, service contracts, membership fees, service to motor equipment, office supplies and expenses, operating supplies, fuel, postage, building repairs, salaries for extra help, salaries for overtime, fringe benefits, consultant fees, facility insurance and any other maintenance and operating expenses relating to the operation of the center, excepting the salaries for administrative staff, including the director and other office staff, and excepting the cost of federally funded positions. 
(b)  Each neighborhood center tenant shall be charged a uniform per square foot rental rate. Each City Hall East tenant shall be charged a uniform per square foot rental rate for office/commercial space and/or a uniform per square foot rental rate for warehouse space. The rate shall be computed by the department of finance based on budgeted M and O cost plus an adjustment to account for the period preceding the adoption of the budget when the prior year rate was in effect. In addition, City Hall East rates may include a general facility capital acquisition and improvement charge. 
(c)  All agencies who occupy the centers and City Hall East shall pay to the city an M and O fee based on the amount computed in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. The fee shall be remitted to the city the first of each month. 
(d)  The city will be responsible for the M and O fee applicable to the exclusive use areas occupied by city general government departments or agencies. 
(e)  The rate shall be set each year with the adoption of the city's annual budget. The new rate shall become effective on the first of the month following the adoption of the budget. 
(f)  Any overpayment of M and O costs, if actual costs should be lower than budgeted costs, shall accumulate in a neighborhood centers or City Hall East renewal fund for major repairs due to normal building deterioration. 
(g)  An annual lease agreement shall be entered into with each agency, commission or board which will provide for the payment of the M and O fee as set out in this section. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3028) 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 110; social services, ch. 126. 
Sec. 2-922. - Vouchers for money delivered only after settlement of city's cross claims. 
No vouchers for money passed in favor of any person, except for court verdicts or judgments, shall be delivered to such person until all past due demands in favor of the city against the person in favor of whom such vouchers are passed have been satisfied. It shall be the duty of the chief financial officer to enforce this section and to require settlement if cross demands occur as specified in this section. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1030) 
Sec. 2-923. - Payment of investment income to Atlanta Art Association. 
The chief financial officer is authorized to pay to the Atlanta Art Association the income from investments of the Hugh T. Inman trust fund, provided said payments do not exceed $250.00 per month or $3,000.00 per year. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1017) 
Cross reference— Civic and cultural affairs, ch. 46. 
Sec. 2-924. - Contingency funds—Mayor and council president. 
The chief financial officer shall be authorized to establish the following accounts: 
(a)  An account within the budget of the mayor and the president of the council for an unrestricted contingency fund, to be spent for any lawful expenditure at the discretion of the mayor and the president respectively, for amenities of their respective offices. Specifically, the purposes for which it is contemplated the funds will be expended include gifts, entertainment, flowers, telegrams, luncheons, dinners, receptions and other expenses deemed proper by the mayor and the council president respectively. Such expenditures are declared to be for a public purpose. 
(b)  An account within the budget of the mayor to which any portion of his or her City of Atlanta salary which the mayor declines to receive may be transferred, and from which disbursements may be made to any 50l(c)(3) corporation duly registered as a charitable organization with the State of Georgia whose activities promote the public good within the City of Atlanta. 
(Code 1977, § 2-1007; Ord. No. 2016-01(15-O-1592), § 1, 1-26-16 ) 
Cross reference— Council president, § 2-36; mayor, § 2-176 et seq. 
Sec. 2-925. - Same—Department heads. 
The chief financial officer shall be authorized to establish an account within the budget of each individual department head for a restricted contingency fund, to be spent for lawful expenditures at the discretion of the department head for expenses related to official duties which are not budgeted elsewhere. Such expenses may include refreshments for receptions and meetings, employee recognition programs, employee recognition awards and departmental publicity. Such expenditures by any department head shall not exceed $2,000.00 in any fiscal year. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1002) 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-301 et seq. 
Sec. 2-926. - Indemnity insurance. 
The chief financial officer, with the approval of the mayor and the council, is authorized to and shall procure indemnity insurance to insure the city against loss of money, records or property through any dishonest or criminal act committed during the continuance of the insurance, through the connivance of any employee while occupying and performing the duties of any position of the city, in an amount not less than $25,000.00 each. Any bureau director in the department of finance serving as deputy municipal revenue collector and the chief financial officer shall be covered by indemnity insurance as required in this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1016) 
Secs. 2-927—2-940. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPROPRIATIONS AND RELATED MATTERS[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Charter reference— Fiscal control, § 6-301 et seq. 
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-941. - Referral of appropriations or expenditures to committee on finance. 
All ordinances or other measures to appropriate money or involving its expenditure, unless governed by resolution or ordinance, shall be referred to the committee on finance for approval or disapproval before being adopted. Any such measure not so referred to the committee shall be void, and the chief financial officer shall not draw a voucher for the appropriation or expenditure nor shall the mayor sign a check therefor. However, if the committee on finance fails to make a report on such measures so referred to it before or at the time of the second regular meeting of the council following such reference, the measure may be introduced and passed by the council with or without the approval of the committee on finance. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3014) 
Sec. 2-942. - Exceeding annual appropriation. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any committee, officer or department to vote to expend or to incur liability or obligation for any amount in excess of the annual appropriation made by the council to or for such committee, officer or department for any year. It shall be unlawful for any committee of the council or the mayor or the head of any department to approve for payment any bill, account, order or resolution, except it be drawn and approved for payment out of some fund appropriated for expenditure in the manner covered thereby and remaining unexpended. It shall likewise be unlawful for the chief financial officer to draw or the mayor to approve or the chief financial officer to pay any voucher not drawn on some fund so appropriated and remaining unexpended; that is to say, no moneys appropriated for expenditure in any department shall be paid out on bills, accounts or other liabilities originating in such department, except for the particular items of expenditure for which they were appropriated. 
(b)  Liability when exceeded. The city shall not be liable for the payment of any amount voted, expended or incurred by or through any committee, officer or department to any such committee, officer or department; but any member of such committee or department and any officer of the city participating and aiding in such illegal expenditure, liability or obligation shall be individually liable to the city for the payment if such illegal expenditure is made and shall be individually liable to the person contracted or dealt with if any such illegal liability or obligation incurred. 
(c)  Removal from office for illegal expenditure. Any member of a committee or department or any officer who shall participate and aid in any illegal expenditure under this section or in the attempted incurring of any such illegal liability or obligation shall be removed from office or service under the city. 
(Code 1977, §§ 7-3012, 7-3024) 
Charter reference— Unlawful obligations void, § 6-305. 
Sec. 2-943. - Annual appropriations divided into 12 parts, expended monthly. 
The appropriations set up and made in the annual budget of proposed expenditures by the city in the various departments thereof shall be divided into 12 equal parts corresponding to the 12 months of the calendar year, and no expenditures of the appropriations beyond the monthly amount so set apart shall be legal nor shall a voucher be drawn for such excess nor payments made thereon. This section shall not apply to special appropriations set up for particular purposes or for appropriations to meet legal requirements, such as payment of bonds, interest payments, costs and other amounts fixed by law. This section shall not prohibit a department head from exceeding such monthly allotment for the purpose of a purchase that would effect a savings to the city, upon the approval of the chief financial officer. If the monthly apportionment provided for in this section is not expended by the department to which it is made, such unexpended balances shall be carried to the month following and added thereto, so that the department will have the benefit of the total apportionment made for the calendar year. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3013) 
Sec. 2-944. - Transfer of appropriations from one account to another. 
All ordinances pertaining to transfer of appropriations from one account to another, whether within the same department or otherwise, shall be submitted to the committee on finance for its approval or disapproval before being adopted. If any such ordinance is introduced to the council without the prior approval or disapproval of the committee on finance, it shall be mandatory that such ordinance be referred to the committee on finance for consideration and report. Any such ordinance that has not been referred to the committee on finance for approval or disapproval shall, if adopted, be null and void, and the chief financial officer shall not draw a voucher or transfer such appropriations and the mayor shall not sign a check therefor. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3015) 
Sec. 2-945. - Appropriation of funds derived from land or facilities purchases. 
Any and all funds derived from land or facilities purchased with city bond proceeds shall be appropriated in the same city appropriations account from which the land or facility was originally purchased, unless the council provides for alternate means of disposition of such funds. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3016) 
Secs. 2-946—2-960. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BILLS AND COLLECTIONS 

Sec. 2-961. - System of collecting moneys. 
All moneys collected for the city by its officials shall be submitted with a prepared bill and at least one duplicate. All bills for the collection of the city's revenue shall be made out by the head of the department in which they originate. Money submitted to the department of finance by various departments shall be accompanied by a cash report form in triplicate. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4009) 
Sec. 2-962. - Report of bills issued for collection—Generally. 
The head of the department issuing a bill for collections shall on the same day report the fact to the chief financial officer with the number, name and amount of the bill. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4011) 
Sec. 2-963. - Same—Corrections. 
All officers reporting to the chief financial officer bills or accounts for collection shall, when their reports are checked and corrected in the chief financial officer's office, make the necessary changes on their books to conform to the corrected reports. In addition to making such daily reports, they shall make monthly and annual reports to the chief financial officer. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4012) 
Sec. 2-964. - Record of bills for permanent improvements. 
(a)  The chief financial officer shall keep a complete record of all bills for permanent improvements delivered to the chief financial officer for collection. The record shall show the names of parties liable; the amount of each bill; for what work the bill is due; the location of the property; and the disposition made of the bill, whether by collection, transfer and to whom or the issuance of execution. When such bills or executions are paid, this fact must be noted on the record in the office of the chief financial officer, which shall be open at all times to the inspection of the public. 
(b)  The books in the office of the chief financial officer shall show the records of all bills and executions for permanent improvements, so as to furnish a complete check upon the records of the office of transportation and municipal clerk with reference to all such bills and executions. 
(Code 1977, §§ 7-4020(a), 7-4021; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 14, 9-24-07) 
Sec. 2-965. - Deposit of moneys. 
(a)  The chief financial officer shall, on the business day next following the day on which money for any bill is collected, deposit the money. 
(b)  City depositories. 
(1)  Each city depository shall: 
a.  Provide the city with an affidavit certifying that neither it, nor any of its affiliates is, and none will become a high cost lender or a predatory lender as defined by Code section 58-102. The affidavit shall be in a form prescribed by the city and shall be sworn by one or more of the officers duly authorized by the depository; 
b.  Permit the city to inspect all documents and other records required to verify that the affidavit is true and correct. 
(2)  The city shall not keep any city funds on deposit in any bank or other financial institution that is a predatory or a high cost lender, or an affiliate thereof, as defined in section 58-102 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4013; Ord. No. 2001-71, § 2, 9-25-01) 
Sec. 2-966. - Disposition of money collected by officers. 
All moneys collected by any officer shall be paid to the chief financial officer. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4014) 
Sec. 2-967. - Interest on bills for public improvements, amount, collection. 
All bills for public improvements in the city against abutting property owners, whether for street paving, curbing, sidewalks or sewer assessments, shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum or one percent per month, beginning 30 days after the date of the bill for the particular assessment. Such interest shall be collected with the principal of each execution from the defendant in fi. fa. or from the property subject to the lien of such assessment. However, as to assessments for paving under what is known as the baby bond plan, interest shall begin to run from the date the mayor approves the assessment ordinance, provided that bills for pavement under such plan may be paid within 30 days after the assessment without the payment of any interest. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4022) 
Sec. 2-968. - Postponement of collection of bills or executions. 
The chief financial officer shall not have authority to postpone the collection of any bill or execution for public improvements due the city for more than 30 days after it is placed in the hands of such officer for collection, without the permission of the committee on finance to make a longer extension of time for special reasons in any case, nor shall the committee on finance postpone a collection in any case for more than three months from the date of the issuance of the execution, without express action of the council so authorizing. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4023) 
Sec. 2-969. - Procedure for collecting assessments. 
The manner of making collections for permanent street improvements, sidewalk and curbing bills, sewer assessments, removing and replacing pavement, repairs to sidewalks, clearing and cleaning vacant lots, administrative and other overhead costs and all other bills for work done for property owners on the streets, alleys, sewers and property, whenever such work is done by the city and collected from property owners by the city, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Bills for such work done shall be made out by the proper officer on receipts and turned over by such officer to the chief financial officer, the receipt being taken therefor. 
(2)  The chief financial officer shall keep all such bills in custody, until they are called for to be paid, when the chief financial officer shall retain one copy as city tax collector and shall receive the money and give the receipt to the person paying the bill and shall file one copy with the tax collector's report. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4024(a)) 
Sec. 2-970. - Property put in possession of purchaser at sale under assessment execution. 
It shall be within the power and authority and shall be the duty of the chief financial officer, in all cases where the chief financial officer has sold any property within the limits of the city, under executions issued to enforce the collection of assessments due the city or transferees of such executions, to put the purchasers of the property so sold in possession thereof, on demand of the purchasers, just as if the property had been sold under an ordinary tax execution issued by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4027) 
Sec. 2-971. - City's costs and fees on executions. 
(a)  The costs and fees of the city on executions shall be as follows: 
(1)  Issuing fi. fa. ..... $ 0.50 
(2)  Settling fi. fa., without levy ..... 10.00 
(3)  Levy service ..... 15.00 
(4)  Making and executing deed ..... 15.00 
(5)  Executing premade deed ..... 10.00 
(6)  Collecting fi. fa. by sheriff or other official: 
a.  Bill of $100.00 or less ..... 4.00 
b.  Bill over $100.00 ..... 7.50 
(7)  Collecting fines in municipal court ..... 2.00 
(8)  Notarizing document ..... 2.00 
(9)  Advertising ..... Actual cost 
(b)  The commission for selling both real and personal property shall be the same as allowed to sheriffs under state law. 
(c)  The bill of the costs enumerated in subsection (a) of this section shall be printed on each execution, and it shall be the duty of the chief financial officer to itemize the costs on the back of each execution handled by the chief financial officer. 
(d)  All taxes, from the date the taxes become delinquent and in default, and all penalties, from the date of imposition, all as provided by law, shall bear interest at the rate as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any section contained in this Code, any purely charitable nonprofit corporation formed in conformity with section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code or such other purely charitable nonprofit entity shown to be such to the satisfaction of the chief financial officer in conjunction with the commissioner of housing may enter into agreements with the city, which agreements shall provide for the waiver of all penalties, interest or other charges related to past-due real property ad valorem taxes levied by the city and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The land is being acquired solely for the purpose of providing housing for persons qualifying as moderate-income or lower-income individuals or families in conformity with definitions promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (currently based on income of not more than 80 percent of the median income of the Atlanta Metropolitan Statistical Area, as adjusted for family size). 
(2)  Within a six-month period, the nonprofit entity will construct, repair or renovate a home thereon, to be sold to a moderate-income or lower-income person qualifying as such under the definitions of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, or within a 12-month period construct, repair or renovate multifamily rental units thereon, not less than 70 percent of which shall be available for rental by such persons, which rental units shall be owned by the charitable entity constructing the rental units or conveyed to another similar charitable nonprofit entity for the same purposes. 
(3)  Upon the sale of any single-family home or upon completion of any multifamily rental facilities, the nonprofit entity shall deliver to the chief financial officer a certificate of occupancy from the city department of planning and development allowing occupancy of any such rental units, with a written five-year commitment to certify annually to the city that any such rental unit facility will have not less than 70 percent occupancy by moderate- or lower-income families or individuals. 
(4)  Upon failure of the nonprofit entity to comply with subsections (2) and (3) of this section, the waiver provided for in this section shall be revoked or in lieu thereof the nonprofit entity may convey the property to another similar charitable nonprofit entity for the same purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4018) 
Sec. 2-972. - Recordation of property sold to city. 
The chief financial officer is authorized and required to have deeds of the chief financial officer covering property sold to the city for taxes, street improvements and the like recorded by the clerk of the superior courts of the county. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4019) 
Sec. 2-973. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-53, § 1, adopted Aug. 29, 2006, repealed § 2-973 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to billing and collection by private contractor responsible for the operation and maintenance of the city's water system and derived from Ord. No. 1998-85, § 1, adopted on Dec. 10, 1998. 
Secs. 2-974—2-990. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BORROWING AND INDEBTEDNESS[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Charter reference— Borrowing and indebtedness, § 6-201 et seq. 
State Law reference— Bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-991. - Employment of special bond counsel. 
Whenever the city issues or proposes to issue any general obligation bonds, revenue certificates, bonds, certificates of participation, or other debt or financing obligations and the services of bond counsel is necessary, the city attorney is hereby authorized and empowered to select such bond counsel according to the procedure set forth in this section. The city attorney, in consultation with the chief financial officer, shall invite qualified persons and firms to submit written competitive proposals based upon criteria made known in writing to said persons or firms. The city attorney, in consultation with the chief financial officer, shall review such proposals as are submitted and shall select bond counsel from such proposals. The city attorney is further authorized and empowered to recommend bond counsel to the city council. Upon approval by city council, the mayor shall be authorized to execute any and all contracts necessary or incidental to such employment. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4084; Ord. No. 1995-19, § 1, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 1996-15, § 2, 4-4-96) 
Sec. 2-992. - Employment of fiscal advisor. 
To the extent that services of financial advisors are appropriate and required, the city shall employ such advisor on an annual or project basis. The mayor and the chief financial officer are hereby authorized and empowered to select such financial advisor according to the procedure set forth in this section. The chief financial officer, in consultation with the chief operating officer, shall identify persons or firms qualified to undertake such work, and shall invite such persons or firms to submit written competitive proposals based upon criteria as established by the mayor and the chief financial officer in consultation with the chief operating officer and made known in writing to such persons or firms. Such criteria shall include, but not be limited to, the scope of work to be performed and the fee proposed to be charged. The mayor and the chief financial officer shall review such written competitive proposals as are submitted and shall propose a financial advisor to the city council. Upon approval by the city council, the mayor shall be authorized and empowered to employ such financial advisor in the name of and in behalf of the city and to execute any and all contracts necessary or incidental to such employment. The financial advisor so employed shall not be involved in any other financial transactions with the city in any capacity other than financial advisor during the term of this engagement as financial advisor and for one year following the end of the contract term. If the financial advisor resigns during the term of the contract, this restriction shall extend for one year thereafter. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4085; Ord. No. 1995-19, §§ 2, 3, 4-25-95; 1996-15, § 1, 4-4-96) 
Sec. 2-992.1. - Investment banking services. 
(a)  The chief financial officer, when authorized by resolution of council, shall be authorized to enter into agreements with qualified investment banking firms for the marketing and sale of the city's general obligation or revenue bonds. 
(b)  The chief financial officer is authorized to consult with the chief procurement officer to pre-qualify a pool of senior managers and co-managers for investment banking services, pursuant to section 2-1199 of this Code. Pre-qualification shall be based upon published criteria developed by the chief financial officer. 
(c)  It is the policy of the city to promote full and equal business opportunity for all persons doing business with the city, including investment banking services. 
(d)  For each bond transaction on which investment banking services will be retained, the chief financial officer may solicit proposals from qualified senior managers and co-managers which include qualified minority and female-owned firms, as well as qualified firms which are local firms. For the purposes of this section only, a local investment banking firm is deemed to be one which: (1) holds a valid city business license; and (2) has its principal place of investment banking business located within the city; and (3) regularly conducts work and business within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-60, § 1, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 2-993. - General obligation bonds. 
(a)  Referral of ordinances and resolutions increasing bonded indebtedness. Any resolution or ordinance introduced in the council which has the purpose of calling for the public advertising of the city's intent to increase the general obligation bonded indebtedness in the annual bond fund or any other general government fund of the city, shall be preceded by a financial feasibility or affordability study, provided by the chief financial officer, indicating the city's ability to absorb additional debt at the levels indicated by the proposed legislation. The resolution or ordinance shall be referred to the appropriate council committees of purview as established in section 2-131, and the committee on finance shall recommend action to the council earlier than the third meeting after having received for consideration such resolution or ordinance. 
(b)  Recommendations of executive branch. The mayor is directed to present to the council the recommendations of the executive branch on the use of general obligation bonds for general purposes during the next succeeding fiscal year no later than December 31 of each year. 
(c)  Board of education recommendations. The board of education is directed to present to the council the recommendations of the board on the use of general obligation bonds for school purposes during the next succeeding fiscal year of the city no later than December 31 of each year. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1049; Ord. No. 2014-43(14-O-1464), § 1, 10-15-14 ) 
Sec. 2-994. - Registration of coupon bonds of city. 
Holders of coupon bonds issued by the city may, if they so desire, have such bonds registered as provided for by the chief financial officer. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4007) 
Sec. 2-995. - Authority of mayor and council to negotiate loans for current expenses. 
The mayor and council shall have full power and authority, in their discretion, to negotiate loans on the most advantageous terms to the city to supply the money for any deficiencies that may exist, during any one year, of the funds in the treasury for the purpose of paying the expenses of the city, which may be incurred under the several heads hereinafter mentioned, in any amount not exceeding $2,000,000.00 and not exceeding the amounts set apart under each head for the year in question. As soon as an amount equal to the amounts so borrowed is paid into the treasury by taxation or from any other sources of revenue not already applied to other debts or liabilities of the city, the mayor and council shall at once apply the amounts or as much as may be necessary to the repayment of the loans or the mayor and council shall be authorized in their discretion to make partial payments upon the loans with any moneys that may come into the treasury, from time to time, under the restrictions provided in this section. In either case the total amount of the loans shall be repaid out of the income of the year in which the loans were made. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4081) 
Sec. 2-996. - Loans for operating expenses of board of education. 
The mayor and chief financial officer shall negotiate loans when requested to do so by the board of education to supply deficiencies in current operating expenses of the board, during any year, in such amounts as may be determined by the board, not to exceed the amount authorized by law. Such loans are to be approved by resolution by the council. The chief financial officer may advance to the board of education from available funds such amounts as may be required in lieu of borrowing. A sum sufficient to repay the loans and advances, together with the interest thereon, shall be deducted by the chief financial officer from ad valorem taxes levied and collected for the board of education during the year in which the loan shall have been consummated. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4082) 
Sec. 2-997. - Report of paid bonds, revenue certificates and interest coupons. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the chief financial officer and the committee on finance of the council to file with the council a complete report of bonds or revenue certificates which have matured and been paid and of interest coupons which have been paid. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4083) 
Secs. 2-998—2-1100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PROCUREMENT AND REAL ESTATE CODE[23] 
Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), §§ 1—17, approved December 15, 2009, amended Art. X, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. X pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of said ordinance. 
Charter reference— Procurement and disposition of property, § 6-401 et seq. 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-906 et seq. 
State Law reference— Acquisition and disposition of property by municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-1101. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the procurement and real estate code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1102. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Actual offeror means any firm that has submitted a bid or proposal in response to the particular solicitation in question. Individual joint venturers, subcontractors, subconsultants, or individuals or entities comprising a part of the bidder or proponent team are not actual offerors. 
Annual contract means any contract entered into for a period of one year or multiple one-year periods (including options to renew for additional one year periods), with a contractor, to provide the city upon request with a specified product or service at a predetermined rate or price. 
Award means when legislation authorizing the award of the contract has been adopted by the council and approved by the Mayor, provided, however, that the contract will not become binding upon the city and the city will incur no liability under it until it has been duly executed by the contractor, returned to the city with all required submittals, including insurance and bonding, if applicable, executed by the Mayor, attested to by the municipal clerk, approved by the city attorney as to form and delivered to the contractor. 
Business means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, firm or any other private legal entity. 
Change order (unilateral) means a written order signed and unilaterally issued by the chief procurement officer or other authorized individual, directing the contractor to make changes that the changes clause of the contract authorizes without the consent of the contractor. 
Chief procurement officer means the person holding the position created in and governed by code sections 2-222, 2-250, 2-251, 2-252 and division 2 of this article, and any other Charter or Code provisions applicable. 
Clock calibration means coordination of the bid clock with the time as indicated by the National Bureau of Standards. 
Construction means the process of building, altering, repairing, remodeling, improving or demolishing any public structure or building or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. It does not include the routine operation, routine repair or routine maintenance of structures, buildings or real property. 
Contract means all types of city agreements, including purchase orders, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement or disposal of supplies, services, construction, professional or consultant services and for the transfer of interests in real property. 
Contract modification or change order means any written alteration in specifications, delivery point, time and rate of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity or other provision of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract. 
Contractor means any person having a contract with the city. 
Cost analysis means the evaluation of cost data for the purpose of arriving at costs actually incurred or estimates of costs to be incurred, prices to be paid and costs to be reimbursed. 
Cost data means factual information concerning the cost of labor, material, overhead and other cost elements that are expected to be incurred or which have been actually incurred by the contractor in performing the contract. 
Cost reimbursement contract means a contract under which a contractor is reimbursed for costs, which are allowable and allocable in accordance with the contract terms and this article, and a fee or profit, if any. 
Data means recorded information, regardless of form or characteristics. 
Days means calendar days. In computing any period of time prescribed by the procurement code, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted. If the last day falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the party shall have through the following Monday. When the last day falls on a legal holiday observed by the city, the party shall have through the next day. 
Designee means a duly authorized representative of a person. 
Discussions means an exchange of information or other manner of negotiation during which the offeror and the city may alter or otherwise change the conditions, terms and price of the proposed contract. Discussions may be conducted in connection with competitive sealed proposals, sole source and emergency procurement. Discussions are not permissible in competitive sealed bidding, except to the extent permissible in the first phase of multi-step sealed bidding, when all competitive bids exceed available funds but the responsive bid does not exceed such funds by more than five percent or as otherwise permitted by applicable law. 
Employee means an individual drawing a salary or compensation from the city, whether elected or not. 
Firm means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, joint venture or other legal entity permitted by law to practice or offer professional or consultant services. 
Grant agreement means any written agreement between the city and a grantor, or donor, or a proposed grant recipient, or beneficiary, which states in specific terms the amount and purposes of the grant, the conditions of the grant, if any, and pursuant to which a grant award is disbursed or otherwise satisfied. A grant agreement may also relate to gifts, bequests or donations. 
Invitation for bids means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids. 
Prequalification means the determination that a prospective offeror satisfies the criteria established for inclusion on the prequalified offeror's list. 
Price analysis means the evaluation of price data, without price analysis of the separate cost components and profit as in cost analysis, which may assist in arriving at prices to be paid and costs to be reimbursed. 
Price data means factual information concerning prices for items substantially similar to those being procured. Prices in this definition refer to offered or proposed selling prices. The definition refers to data relevant to both prime and subcontract prices. 
Procurement means buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring any supplies, services or construction. It also includes all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply, service or construction, including a description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contracts and all phases of contract administration. 
Professional and consultant services means those services within the scope of the practices of architecture, investment banking, professional engineering, planning, landscape architecture, land surveying, the medical arts, management and analysis, accounting or auditing, law, psychology or any other similar kind or type of professional practice. For purposes of this division, professional and consultant services shall not include investment management services. 
Proposal means solicited submission of information from a prospective offeror in accordance with the terms of the applicable request for proposals and applicable law. 
Purchase description means the words used in a solicitation to describe the supplies, services or construction to be purchased, including specifications attached to or made a part of the solicitation. 
Purchase order means a short form of contract which is issued by the chief procurement officer at the written request of the using agency for the procurement of supplies, goods or services. 
Qualified products list means an approved list of supplies, services or construction items described by model or catalogue numbers that, prior to competitive solicitation, the city has determined will meet the applicable specification requirements. 
Request for proposals means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals. 
Responsible offeror means any person who has the capability in all respects to perform fully the contract requirements and the tenacity, perseverance, experience, integrity, reliability, capacity, facilities, equipment and credit which will ensure good faith performance. 
Responsive offeror means a person who has submitted an offer that conforms in all material respects to the invitation for bids or request for proposals. 
Solicitation means an invitation for bids, a request for proposals, a request for quotations or any other document issued by the city concerning its soliciting bids or proposals to perform a city contract or purchase order. 
Service means the furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor, not involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are merely incidental to the required performance. 
Supplies means all property, including, but not limited to, equipment, materials, printing, insurance and leases of real property, excluding land or a permanent interest in land. 
Using agency means any city entity that utilizes any supplies, services, construction, professional or consultant services, real property and leases procured under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1103. - Severability. 
If any section or part of a section of this article or any application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other sections or part of a section or application of this article which can be given effect without the invalid section or part of a section or application, and to this end the sections and parts of sections of this article are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1104. - Interpretation; purposes and policies. 
(a)  Interpretation. This article shall be construed and applied to promote its underlying purposes and policies. 
(b)  Purposes and policies. The underlying purposes and policies of this article are to: 
(1)  Simplify, clarify, consolidate and modernize the law governing procurement and real estate for this city; 
(2)  Permit the continued development of explicit and thoroughly considered procurement and real estate policies and practices; 
(3)  Provide for centralized procurement for this city; 
(4)  Ensure the fair and equitable treatment of all persons who deal with the procurement system and real estate transactions of this city; 
(5)  Provide increased economy in city procurement and real estate activities and maximize to the fullest extent practicable the purchasing value of city funds; 
(6)  Foster effective broad-based competition for public procurement within the free enterprise system; and 
(7)  Provide safeguards for the maintenance of a procurement and real estate system of quality and integrity. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1105. - Application of article. 
(a)  General application. This article applies to contracts for the procurement of supplies, services, construction, professional and consultant services and real estate, solicited or entered into by this city after 12:01 a.m. on November 1, 1983, unless the parties agree to its application to a contract solicited or entered into prior to such date. 
(b)  Application to city procurements and real estate transactions. This article shall apply to every expenditure of public funds, irrespective of the source. It shall apply to the disposal of city supplies, as provided in division 8 of this article pertaining to supply management and to the disposal of city real property, as provided in division 14, subdivision III of this article pertaining to sale and disposition of real estate. Nothing in this article shall prevent any public agency from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift, donation or bequest that are otherwise consistent with law and the operational procedures promulgated by the chief procurement officer as authorized in division 17. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1106. - Supplementary general principles of law applicable. 
Unless displaced by the particular sections of this article, the principles of law and equity, including the uniform commercial code of the state, the law merchant, the law of real property and the law relative to capacity to contract, agency, fraud, misrepresentation, duress, coercion, mistake or bankruptcy, shall supplement this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1107. - Good faith actions. 
This article requires all parties involved in the negotiation, performance or administration of city contracts to act in good faith. The term "good faith" means honesty in fact in the conduct or transaction concerned and the observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1108. - Procurement records. 
(a)  Contract file. All determinations and other written records pertaining to the solicitation, award or performance of a contract or purchase order shall be maintained by the city in a contract file by the chief procurement officer. 
(b)  Retention. All procurement records shall be retained and disposed of by the city in accordance with records retention guidelines and schedules approved by the city council. If a contract is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from a federal agency, all procurement records pertaining to that contract shall be maintained for three years from the closeout date of the assistance agreement or the final disposition of any controversy arising out of the assistance agreement. 
(c)  Public access. Procurement information shall be a public record to the extent required by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1109. - Compliance with federal requirements. 
When the procurement or real estate transaction involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the procurement or real estate transaction shall be conducted in accordance with any applicable mandatory federal law and authorized regulations which are not reflected in this article. Notwithstanding, where federal assistance or contract funds are used in a procurement or real estate transaction, requirements that are more restrictive than federal requirements shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1110. - Construction of water treatment plant. 
The construction and operation of a water treatment plant and appurtenances in North Fulton County, as a joint venture of the city and Fulton County, being necessary to serve the joint needs of the city and Fulton County in ensuring an adequate supply of potable water for their citizens, the Atlanta-Fulton County Water Resources Commission is authorized to contract for goods and services and to make purchases of real and personal property, in connection with the water treatment plant and appurtenances, subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  The funds for the purchase of goods and services are available to the commission in line item appropriations of its approved budget. 
(2)  Such contracts or purchases of goods and services do not exceed $20,000.00, except that contracts exceeding that amount are authorized: 
a.  For goods or services for which the entity providing the goods or services is listed by name in its approved budget; or 
b.  When the chair of the commission certifies that emergency circumstances exist and that failure to contract for goods or services to correct such circumstances would result in the loss of operations of the facilities and that insufficient time is available to secure specific approval of the contract by the city and Fulton County. 
(3)  Such contracts are made pursuant to purchasing and minority participation procedures as determined by the commission. 
(4)  Regardless of the amount and when jointly authorized by resolution of the city council and of Fulton County, all contracts that are reasonable and necessary for the construction of the water treatment facilities and appurtenances, including professional and consultant contracts, may be executed, provided that the funds for the contracts are available to the commission in line item appropriations of its approved budget. 
(5)  All pertinent requirements of the joint venture agreement for the making of contracts and purchases have been met. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1111. - Limitation on work orders authorized under annual contracts. 
Any using agency or bureau may expend up to $100,000.00 under an annual contract individually or in the aggregate with any one contractor. This limitation of $100,000.00 is imposed for the term of the contract. Where the expenditures under an annual contract by any using agency or bureau exceeds $100,000.00 for an individual project or work order or $100,000.00 in the aggregate for a particular contractor, such expenditures shall be subject to the approval of the city council, unless such contract authorizes the issuance of work authorizations or similar directives to the contractor in excess of $100,000.00 without further council approval. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1112. - Multiple awards; limitations on multiple awards. 
(a)  Multiple awards. Unless otherwise provided in this section, or unless otherwise provided by law, two or more offerors may be awarded separate city contracts, at the discretion of the city, on the basis of one solicitation for the same or similar work, supplies or services if the city reserves the right to do so in the solicitation. Multiple contracts may be awarded, in the discretion of the city, for the procurement of annual contracts for supplies, annual contracts for construction, annual contracts for services, and annual contracts for professional and consultant services. The solicitation shall also include a statement that the city may, in its discretion, elect to award only one contract if the chief procurement officer, after consultation with the head of the using agency, determines in writing that one contract is sufficient for the needs anticipated by the city at the level of quality desired. Awards shall be made in accordance with the provisions of division 4 of this article. Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, however, if multiple awards are not anticipated in a solicitation prior to the deadline established for receipt of bids, proposals or quotations, multiple awards shall not be made under that solicitation. 
(b)  Prohibition against multiple awards for the procurement of construction, services or professional and consultant services that are not annual contracts. Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, or unless otherwise provided by law, multiple city contracts shall not be awarded under one solicitation for the procurement of construction, services or professional and consultant services which are not annual contracts. 
(c)  Inapplicability. This section shall not apply to the purchase, sale or disposition of real estate, nor shall this section apply to grant agreements, intergovernmental agreements or emergency procurements. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1113. - Monetary limits; effective date. 
To the extent that any monetary limits in this article specifically relate to monetary limits set forth in Article 3, Chapter 1, section 3-104(14), and Article 6, Chapter 4, section 6-402 of the City's Charter, to become effective on September 30, 2008, such monetary limits in this article will also become effective on September 30, 2008. Prior to such date, the previous monetary limits in this article will apply. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 1, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1114. - Notice of lobbyist laws. 
The chief procurement officer shall develop a written notice of the state law requirements related to persons required to register as lobbyists with the State of Georgia and shall ensure that such notice is included on all contracts and source selection forms prepared by the department of procurement. 
( Ord. No. 2018-51(18-O-1522), § 2, 9-25-18 ) 
Secs. 2-1115—2-1137. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHIEF PROCUREMENT OFFICER 

Sec. 2-1138. - Centralization of procurement authority. 
(a)  Chief procurement officer. Except as provided in this article, the chief procurement officer shall have the authority to solicit and enter into contracts for the procurement of supplies, services, construction, professional or consultant services and real estate for all using agencies of the city. 
(b)  Purchasing staff. Under the authority of the chief procurement officer, the purchasing staff shall execute responsibilities at all bid openings which shall include coordination of clock calibration with the National Bureau of Standards, shall stamp all bids received and shall have any subsequent responsibilities as specified prior to and after all bid openings. 
(c)  Other city officers or employees. Except as provided in this article, no city officer or employee shall order the procurement of supplies, services, construction, professional or consultant services and real estate or make any contract other than through the department of procurement. 
(d)  Delegation of authority. The chief procurement officer shall designate a deputy chief procurement officer to execute contracts on behalf of the chief procurement officer once the chief procurement officer has reviewed and approved said contracts. The chief procurement officer shall assume ultimate responsibility to solicit and enter into contracts for the procurement of supplies, services, construction, professional or consultant services and real estate for all using agencies of the city. 
(e)  Controls and procedures. The chief procurement officer shall establish written procedures for the execution of contracts for the procurement of supplies, services, construction, professional or consultant services and real estate for all using agencies of the city. Such procedures shall include explicit delegation of authority to only the specified deputy chief procurement officer to sign contracts to the extent the chief procurement officer has authority to sign said contracts. The chief procurement officer shall inform the municipal clerk and the mayor's office in writing of the name of the individual he designates to sign on his behalf. No person is authorized to enter into any contract on behalf of the city except as provided under the terms of this article and the written procedures. Authority granted to the deputy chief procurement officer is effective until rescinded or until termination of the person's employment by the city. The chief procurement officer, in consultation with the ethics officer, shall also develop policies and procedures that describe conflicts of interest which may preclude an organization or an individual from competing for a particular contract, as well as establishing written procedures for identifying conflicts and enforcing those policies. The chief procurement officer shall be responsible for all transactions undertaken and shall establish a system of controls, to be reviewed by the city attorney, to regulate the activities of the subordinate official. Both the chief procurement officer and the deputy chief procurement officer shall possess sufficient working knowledge and shall possess a master's degree in business administration, public administration or marketing; five years prior experience as a deputy chief procurement officer or equivalent title in a contracting or procurement system of comparable size and scope. The requirement of a master's degree may be substituted by a bachelor's degree in the same field(s), plus ten year's managerial experience in public or corporate purchasing operations, marketing, or contract administration, economics and securities markets, as well as the supervisory experience and judgment necessary to carry out the responsibilities outlined in this policy. The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 2, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2013-61(13-O-1299), § 1, 11-27-13 ) 
Sec. 2-1139. - Using agency requirements. 
(a)  Relationship with using agencies and other city agencies and departments. The chief procurement officer shall maintain a close and cooperative relationship with the using agencies. The chief procurement officer shall afford each using agency reasonable opportunity to participate in and make recommendations with respect to procurement and real estate matters affecting the using agency. Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, when in consultation with the using agency with respect to a procurement or real estate matter, the chief procurement officer, in cooperation with the head of the using agency, shall consult and seek technical assistance, specialized knowledge and expertise from appropriate subject matter professionals or persons within the affected using agency and, if the knowledge and expertise required are not available within the using agency, then the chief procurement officer shall consult and seek technical assistance, specialized knowledge and expertise from professionals or persons in other appropriate agencies and departments of the city. Such assistance may include, among other things, reviewing bids, evaluating or scoring proposals, making recommendations concerning bids and proposals, and participating during interviews, discussions and negotiations in connection with requests for proposals. The chief procurement officer, to the extent practicable, shall use every effort to reach an agreement with the using agency with respect to procurement or real estate matters affecting that agency. 
(b)  Requisitions. All using agencies, with the authorization of the head of the department under which the using agency operates, shall file with the chief procurement officer detailed requisitions or estimates of the department requirements of supplies, services, construction, professional or consultant services and real property in such manner and at such times and for future periods as the chief procurement officer shall prescribe in writing and as follows: 
(1)  Unforeseen requirements. A using agency may file with the chief procurement officer at any time a requisition or estimate for any supplies, services, construction, professional or consultant services or real property, the need for which was not foreseen or anticipated when the estimates were filed under this subsection; and 
(2)  Revisory power of chief procurement officer. The chief procurement officer shall examine each requisition or estimate and shall have the authority to revise it as to quantity, quality or estimated cost, provided that the needs of the using agency are met and revisions as to quality and quantity shall be made in accordance with standards and specifications established pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Estimates. All using agencies shall file with the chief procurement officer, within 30 days after the adoption of the annual budget and quarterly thereafter, estimates of their needs for the procurement of services, supplies, construction, professional or consultant services and real property for the ensuing fiscal year or calendar quarter. 
The chief procurement officer shall utilize such estimates for the scheduling of work activities and of procurements to be made by the department of procurement. The chief procurement officer shall compile and consolidate all estimates of supplies needed by using agencies to determine total requirements of a given commodity. 
(d)  List of authorized signatures. Every head of a using agency shall provide the chief procurement officer annually with a list of signatures of persons in the using agency who are authorized to sign requisitions on behalf of the using agency. 
(e)  Examination of contracts. The chief procurement officer and the head of the using agency shall examine all contracts to determine the accuracy of the substance and the inclusion of required bonds and certificates of insurance. 
(f)  Receiving reports. The head of the using agency shall deliver receiving reports to the chief financial officer and to the chief procurement officer upon receipt of supplies procured under city contracts. 
(g)  Buy and pay entities. The chief procurement officer, in cooperation with each using agency, and the chief financial officer, shall establish buy and pay entities for appropriate designation in all procurement and real property transactions, contracts issued by the city pursuant to agreements adhering to special grantor agreements, and city contracts of whatever kind and nature, regardless of what they may be called. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 2, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1140. - Signing contracts on behalf of mayor. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the chief procurement officer shall have the authority to sign contracts on behalf of the mayor, pursuant to section 6-401 of the Charter, in the following circumstances: 
(1)  For the purchase of supplies of every type and description and contracts which take the form of purchase orders where the city council has authorized the purchase in the normal course of the budget process, without further authorization by the city council; or 
(2)  For services, construction, professional and consultant services, grant agreements and intergovernmental agreements, when a duly enacted appropriation is passed by the city council which authorizes the expenditure of moneys for such purpose and the purchase amount does not exceed $100,000.00 individually or in the aggregate. Except in the case of grant agreements or intergovernmental agreements the limitation of $100,000.00 applies to all individual contracts of the firm and all contracts to the individual principals of the contracting firm associated with a specific project. In computing whether any contract shall exceed $100,000.00, the chief procurement officer shall include all individual contracts to a firm and any contracts to the principals of the contracting firm. These contracts in total shall not exceed $100,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 2, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1141. - Appointment of procurement advisory groups. 
The chief procurement officer may appoint procurement advisory groups to assist the chief procurement officer with respect to specifications or procurement in specific areas and with respect to any other matters within the authority of the chief procurement officer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 2, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1142. - Periodic reporting to city council. 
(a)  The chief procurement officer shall submit to the council, and to the municipal clerk, before the 15th of each month, a report listing for the previous month the following information: 
(1)  The titles of all requests for proposals and the method of source selections to be used; 
(2)  All contracts authorized by the council, the method of source selection used and the total dollar amount; 
(3)  All contracts authorized by the chief procurement officer pursuant to subsection 2-1140(2), the method of source selection, as well as all emergency procurements pursuant to section 2-1192. 
(4)  All change orders of contract modifications authorized by the council, the dollar amount, and the reason; 
(5)  All change orders or contract modifications authorized by the chief procurement officer pursuant to subsection 2-1292(a)(1), the dollar amount, and the reason; 
(6)  An explanation of any changes, and the costs involved, in the scope of services made between the time an award recommendation for a contract is made and the time that a resolution authorizing the contract is sent to the council for adoption. 
(b)  Each department shall submit to the committees of purview, at the beginning of each quarter, a report listing for the previous quarter: 
(1)  The status of construction contracts authorized by the council with a contract price of ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00) or more. The status report shall include a list of project milestones for each such contract, and shall indicate whether the contractors are meeting project milestones. For those contracts which are not achieving project milestones, the report shall include the reason for the delay and the actions to be taken to resolve the delay. 
(c)  The chief procurement officer shall submit to council, with all proposed legislation for contracts procured pursuant to section 2-1188, section 2-1189, or section 2-1193, the following information regarding the solicitation: 
(1)  An electronic link to the solicitation and any addenda related thereto; 
(2)  All offer or bid amounts or evaluation factors and final scores for the solicitation; 
(3)  The form(s) used by the chief procurement officer to determine offer or responsiveness to the solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 2, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2018-10(18-O-1178), § 1, 4-25-18 ) 
Secs. 2-1143—2-1160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPEALS AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 2-1161. - Authority to resolve protested solicitations and awards. 
(a)  Right to protest. Any actual offeror that has submitted a bid/proposal for a particular procurement and is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of the contract shall protest in writing to the chief procurement officer after the date that the specific bid or proposal is submitted. No protest will be accepted or considered prior to the date the specific bid or proposal is submitted; it will be considered untimely. All protests shall set forth in full detail the factual and legal bases for the protest and specific relief sought by the protestor. Protests arising from factual or legal bases that the protestor knew or should have known prior to the submission of the bid/proposal must be submitted within three days of the submission of the bid/proposal. Protests arising from factual or legal bases that the protestor knew or should have known subsequent to the date the bid/proposal was submitted must be submitted within ten days after the protestor knew or should have known of such bases, but in no event shall any protest be submitted more than ten days after the award of the contract. Untimely protests will not be considered by the chief procurement officer and will be simply denied as untimely. 
(b)  Posting of protest security. Any actual offeror submitting a written bid/proposal that files a protest must, at the time of filing, post security in the amount of one percent of the financial offer of the protestor or, in the event the bid/proposal does not involve a fixed financial offer either in the form of payment of monies to the city or payment of monies to the offeror, $100,000.00, to be tendered in the form of a bond or certified check. 
(c)  Application of protest security. If the chief procurement officer denies the protest, he/she shall assess against the protestor reasonable attorneys' fees and other administrative costs incurred by the city in reviewing and responding to the protest. If the city is represented by its law department, such fees and costs will be calculated at the hourly rate of each attorney participating in the review and response to the protest set forth in each attorney's most recent city paycheck times the number of hours worked by such participating attorneys on the protest, or if Georgia Law permits a greater hourly rate, such greater rate, plus all out of pocket costs of the city concerning the protest. If the city is represented by outside counsel, such fees and costs will be calculated at the billing rates of the firm's attorneys participating in the review and response to the protest, times the number of hours worked by such participating attorneys, plus all out of pocket costs of the firm concerning the protest. Within 15 days of denying the protest, the chief procurement officer, in consultation with the city's law department and outside counsel, if any, will calculate the city's cost in reviewing and responding to the protest and will apply the protester's bond or certified check to such costs. Any remaining balance of the bond or certified check will be returned to the protestor; provided, however, if the protester files an appeal of the city's denial of its protest pursuant to code section 2-1166, such certified check or bond will continue to be retained by the city to cover the costs of the city associated with such appeal. 
(d)  Decision on protest. If a protest is timely filed, the chief procurement officer shall inform the protestor of the decision in writing within ten days or, if the chief procurement officer requires more than ten days to render a decision, will advise the protestor within the initial ten days of the additional amount of time required to render a decision on the protest. 
(e)  Finality of decision. A decision under subsection (d) of this section is final and conclusive, unless fraudulent or the protestor, having the right to file under this division, files an administrative appeal with the procurement appeals hearing officer in accordance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 3, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1162. - Debarment or suspension from consideration for contract award. 
(a)  Authority to debar or suspend. The chief procurement officer, after consulting with the city attorney, is authorized to debar a person for cause from participation in any city procurements at any tier and consideration for award of contracts. The debarment shall be for a period of not more than five years. The period of time during which the debarment will be imposed is to be determined by the chief procurement officer based upon the severity of the causes for debarment. After consultation with the using agency and city attorney, the chief procurement officer is authorized to suspend a person from participation in any city procurement at any tier and consideration for award of contracts if there is probable cause for debarment. The suspension shall not be for a period exceeding the greater of: (1) three months; (2) the period during which administrative review of the suspension is pending; or (3) the period during which judicial review of an administrative decision that was adverse to the suspended firm is pending. 
(b)  Causes for debarment or suspension. The causes for debarment or suspension include: 
(1)  Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract or in the performance of such contract or subcontract. 
(2)  Conviction under state and federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously and directly affects responsibility as a city contractor. 
(3)  Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the solicitation and submission of bids or proposals. 
(4)  Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character which is regarded by the chief procurement officer to be so serious as to justify debarment action: 
a.  Deliberate failure to perform in accordance with the provisions or within the time limit provided in any city contract. 
b.  A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts, provided that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment. In the event that the contractor asserts in a city suspension or debarment proceeding that such recent failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts was caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor, the contractor must introduce documentation from the applicable contract/project in which it provided notice of such acts beyond its control and/or invoked its rights to equitable adjustment or other similar remedies under the applicable contract as a result of force majeure or other similar events; provided, however, that the city's determination on such issue will be independent from the contract/project at issue. It is insufficient in a city debarment proceeding for the contractor to raise this issue for the first time concerning a prior contract under which it failed to perform or performed unsatisfactorily. 
(5)  Violation of the ethical standards set forth in division 13 of this article. 
(6)  Submission to the city of a claim for additional compensation that is without merit, including, but not limited to claims seeking to recoup: 
a.  Costs incurred by the contractor but not included in its bid or proposal due to its own error; 
b.  Costs that it has already been paid or will be paid under the contract; 
c.  Costs asserted simply for the purpose of forcing the city to consider a settlement at a reduced amount; 
d.  Costs that the contractor has not certified pursuant to the contract documents; and 
e.  Costs that the contractor would not be entitled to recover under the contract documents, including, but not limited to attorneys fees and interest on unpaid sums. 
(7)  Knowing misrepresentation to the city of the use which a majority-owned contractor intends to make of a minority and female business enterprise (a business entity at least 51 percent of which is owned and controlled by one or more African Americans, Asian Pacific Americans, Hispanic Americans, or females, or a combination thereof, as defined in section 2-1443 and certified as such by the city), as a subcontractor, member of a mentor-protégé relationship, or a joint venture partner, in performing work under a contract with the city. 
(8)  Material misrepresentation of the composition of the ownership or work force of a business entity certified to the city as a minority and female business enterprise. 
(9)  Any other cause the chief procurement officer, in consultation with the using agency and city attorney, determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility, including, but not limited to, debarment by another governmental entity. 
(c)  Notice. The chief procurement officer shall issue a written notice of the decision to debar or suspend. The notice shall state the reasons for the action taken and the effective date of the debarment or suspension and shall inform the debarred or suspended person involved of the right to administrative review as provided in this division. 
(d)  Finality of decision. A decision under subsection (c) of this section is final and conclusive, unless fraudulent or any person adversely affected by the decision appeals administratively to the procurement appeals hearing officer in accordance with this division. 
(e)  City council initiated debarment. The city's council, by enactment of an appropriate resolution, may request that the chief procurement officer initiate an investigation into whether a particular person should be debarred and/or suspended and, after consulting with the city attorney, the chief procurement officer is authorized to debar or suspend such person for cause from participation in any city procurements at any tier and consideration for award of contracts. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 3, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1163. - Solicitations or awards in violation of law. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies where it is determined by administrative review that a solicitation or award of a contract is in violation of applicable law. For purposes of this section administrative review shall refer to a review by the chief procurement officer, in consultation with the city attorney, or a review by an appropriate procurement or office of contract compliance hearing officer. A determination by the chief procurement officer may be made independently and as a result of the chief procurement officer receiving a decision from an appeals officer that a solicitation or award of a contract is in violation of applicable law. 
(b)  Remedies prior to award. If, prior to award, the chief procurement officer, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that a solicitation or proposed award of a contract is in violation of law, the solicitation or proposed award shall be canceled or revised to comply with the law. 
(c)  Remedies after award. If, after an award, the chief procurement officer, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that a solicitation or award of a contract is in violation of applicable law, then: 
(1)  If the person awarded the contract has not acted fraudulently or in bad faith: 
a.  The contract may be ratified and affirmed, provided it is determined that doing so is in the best interest of the city; or 
b.  If services or work have not commenced under the contract, it may be terminated and the person awarded the contract shall be compensated for the actual expenses reasonably incurred in preparing to perform and in terminating its performance under the contract, plus a reasonable profit, prior to the termination; or 
c.  If services or work have commenced under the contract, it may be terminated and the person awarded the contract shall be compensated for the actual expenses reasonably incurred in preparing to perform and in terminating its performance under the contract, plus a reasonable profit, prior to the termination, less any amount previously paid to it under the contract. 
(2)  If the person awarded the contract has acted fraudulently or in bad faith: 
a.  The contract may be declared null and void; or 
b.  The contract may be ratified and affirmed if such action is in the best interests of the city, without prejudice to the city's right to such damages as may be appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 3, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1164. - Procurement appeals hearing officers. 
(a)  Appointment, qualifications and term . The mayor shall appoint three procurement appeals hearing officers who shall be confirmed by the city council and who shall serve on an alternating basis. The officers shall possess a law degree or five years of demonstrated public procurement experience. The officers shall also possess a bachelor's degree and public or private employment experience to examine facts and apply legal principles, including, but not limited to, experience with evidentiary and civil procedure issues, to controversies regarding the following subjects: procurement and disposal of goods and services, construction, professional and consultant services and information technology. No city employee or official shall be appointed who is a contractor or subcontractor or who owns any interest in any contracting or subcontracting firm or who does business with the city as a contractor. The officer shall serve a two-year term and shall not be eligible to serve more than two consecutive terms. 
(b)  Duties and compensation . Each officer shall hold hearings upon appeal by any contractor, and the hearings shall be held in any municipal building and shall be open to the public. Each officer shall be paid the rate of $100.00 per hour or, proportionately, for any portion of an hour that the officer serves, in an amount not to exceed $1000.00 per day. The hearing officer's compensation and required administrative services shall be furnished by city departments and agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 3, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2019-05(18-O-1780), § 1, 1-16-19 ) 
Sec. 2-1165. - Authority of procurement appeals hearing officers. 
Unless the matter is within the authority of the contract compliance hearing officer pursuant to section 2-1384, the procurement appeals hearing officers shall have the authority to review and determine any appeal by an aggrieved party from a determination by the chief procurement officer that is authorized in sections 2-1161 and 2-1162. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 3, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1166. - Appeals. 
(a)  Time for filing notice of appeal. For an appeal before a procurement appeals hearing officer under section 2-1165, the aggrieved person shall file a notice of appeal with the chief procurement officer with a copy to the head of the applicable using agency and city attorney within seven days of receipt of the notice of an adverse action by the chief procurement officer concerning the person's protest. 
(b)  Notice of hearing date; hearing. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal from the aggrieved party by the chief procurement officer, the chief procurement officer shall forward the notice to a procurement appeals hearing officer within three days of receipt of the notice. The duties of the procurement appeals hearing officer shall be as follows: 
(1)  The procurement appeals hearing officer shall set a hearing date not more than seven days from the date of receipt of the notice from the chief procurement officer. The officer shall cause notice of the hearing date, time and location to be served upon all parties, by registered mail. 
(2)  At the hearing, all parties shall be provided a fair and impartial hearing and shall be allowed to produce any and all admissible evidence in either party's possession concerning the appeal. 
(c)  Decision. The procurement appeals hearing officer shall, within seven days of the hearing, make a written decision on the appeal, which decision shall affirm or deny the decision by the chief procurement officer. The officer shall decide whether: 
(1)  The solicitation or award being appealed was in accordance with applicable law and the terms and conditions of the solicitation; or 
(2)  The debarment or suspension being appealed was in accordance with applicable law and in the best interest of the city and was fair. 
(d)  Notice of decision. The procurement appeals hearing officer shall issue written notice of the decision on the appeal to all parties within seven days of the hearing. The notice of the decision shall be sent to all parties by registered mail and shall set forth the reasons for the decision. 
(e)  Standard of review for factual issues. A determination of an issue of fact by the procurement appeals hearing officer shall be final and conclusive, unless arbitrary, capricious, fraudulent or clearly erroneous. 
(f)  Discontinuance of appeal. After a notice of appeal to the chief procurement officer has been filed, a protestor may not discontinue such appeal without prejudice, except as authorized by a procurement appeals hearing officer. 
(g)  Recovery of costs by the city. If at the procurement appeals hearing, the city prevails, the procurement appeals hearing officer shall assess against the protestor reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred by the city in preparing for and attending the hearing. If the city is represented by its law department, for each attorney participating in the appeal, such fees and costs will be calculated at the hourly rate of pay as set forth in each attorney's most recent city paycheck multiplied by the number of hours worked by such participating attorneys on the appeal, plus all out of pocket costs of the city concerning the appeal, such as copying costs, transcription fees, litigation services fees, etc. If the city is represented by outside counsel at the hearing, such fees and costs will be calculated at the billing rates of the firm's attorneys participating in the appeal, times the number of hours worked by such participating attorneys, plus all out of pocket costs of the firm concerning the appeal. If the protestor appeals the decision of the procurement appeals hearing officer to the superior court, the city shall continue to hold the bond or certified check of the protester pending the results of the appeal to superior court. If the protester is unsuccessful in the superior court, the city shall deduct from the bond or certified check all of its costs associated with its review and response to the protest, its preparation for and attendance at the procurement appeals hearing and its response to, preparation for and attendance at any hearing held in superior court concerning protest and subsequent appeals. The city's costs in responding to, preparing for and attending any hearing in the superior court will be calculated in the same manner as its costs in preparing for and attending a procurement appeals hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 3, 12-15-09) 
Secs. 2-1167—2-1186. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SOURCE SELECTION AND CONTRACT FORMATION 

Sec. 2-1187. - Methods of source selection. 
Unless otherwise authorized by law, all city contracts, except for the purchase, sale and disposition of real estate, shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding, pursuant to section 2-1188, except as provided in the following: 
(1)  Section 2-1189 (competitive sealed proposals); 
(2)  Section 2-1190 (small purchases); 
(3)  Section 2-1191 (sole source procurement); 
(4)  Section 2-1191.1 (special procurement); 
(5)  Section 2-1192 (emergency procurement); 
(6)  Section 2-1193 (competitive selection procedures for professional and consultant services); or 
(7)  Section 2-1332 (disposition of surplus supplies). 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1187.1 - State mandated immigration compliance requirements. 
(a)  Before an offer for the physical performance of services in response to solicitation under division 4 is considered, a potential offeror, through a signed, notarized contractor affidavit, must attest to the following: 
(1)  That the potential offeror has registered with, is authorized to use, and uses the Federal Work Authorization Program; and 
(2)  That the potential offeror's user identification number issued by the Federal Work Authorization Program and date of authorization to use the program are disclosed on the contractor affidavit; and 
(3)  That the potential offeror is obligated to continue to use the Federal Work Authorization Program throughout the performance of the contract; and 
(4)  That the potential offeror will contract for the physical performance of services in satisfaction of such contract only with subcontractors who present an affidavit to the contractor with the same information listed in section 2-1187.1(a) (1), (2), (3) and (4). 
(b)  Potential offerors may submit the contractor affidavit to the department of procurement not less than ten days prior to the due date for responses to the solicitation. Submission of the contractor affidavit after that date will not extend the time for submitting offers and the department of procurement is not required to review contractor affidavits submitted less than ten days prior to the due date for responses to the solicitation. 
(c)  The department of procurement will review the timely submitted contractor affidavits and provide potential offerors with the following: 
(1)  A written acknowledgement of receipt of the potential offeror' s contractor affidavit; 
(2)  A determination as to whether the contractor affidavit does or does not comply with the state law; and 
(3)  A determination as to whether the potential offeror is qualified as to the state immigration compliance mandates to have their offer evaluated. 
(d)  The acknowledgement and determinations as to compliance and qualification to submit an offer must be faxed or emailed to potential offerors not less than five days prior to the due date for responses to the solicitation. 
(e)  Potential offerors that are deemed non-compliant must submit a compliant contractor affidavit on the due date for responses to the solicitation of offers in order to be qualified for evaluation. 
(f)  If the due date for the contractor affidavit or the acknowledgement and determinations falls on a weekend or a city recognized holiday, the document shall be due on the next business day after the weekend or holiday. However, the department of procurement shall not be required to change the due date for responses to the solicitation to accommodate a later due date for the contractor affidavit or the acknowledgement and determinations. In no event will the due date for the contractor affidavit be later than the due date for responses to the solicitation. 
(g)  The determination of a potential offeror's compliance with the state's immigration compliance mandates shall not automatically deem that offeror's timely submitted offer to be responsive to any solicitation. Offerors must also be responsive to and compliant with other requirements set forth in the solicitation of offers, as well as all applicable laws. Untimely offers from compliant potential offerors shall not be eligible for award of the solicited contract. 
(h)  Potential offerors that submit with their offer an incomplete or incorrect contractor affidavit or fail to submit a compliant contractor affidavit after a determination of non-compliance will not be qualified for evaluation and their timely submission of an offer may not be considered for the award of the solicited contract. 
( Ord. No. 2017-12(15-O-1404), § 1, 3-29-17 ) 
Sec. 2-1188. - Competitive sealed bidding. 
(a)  Conditions for use. Contracts or purchase orders under this article shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding, except as otherwise provided in sections 2-1187 and divisions 15 and 17 of this article. 
(b)  Invitations for bids. An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include a purchase description and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. Notice of all such invitations for bids shall be forwarded to all members of the finance/executive committee. 
(c)  Public notice. 
(1)  General notice. An advertisement inviting bids shall be posted conspicuously at the department of procurement and advertised on an Internet website of the City of Atlanta, or a website designated by the City of Atlanta for such purpose and clearly indicated for that purpose. In addition, the advertisement will be posted on the State of Georgia's Procurement Registry. The department of procurement may also elect to place an advertisement inviting bids in a newspaper of general circulation and in any other medium permitted under this article. The advertisement shall be posted for 14 consecutive days preceding the date set for receipt of bids. Notice of bid security, if required, shall be included in the public notice. The public notice shall contain a general description of the supplies, services, construction or professional and consultant services to be procured and shall state the location of where appropriate solicitation documents may be obtained and the time and place of opening the documents. 
(2)  Additional notice in unusual or special circumstances. 
a.  Notice in trade or industry publications. When required supplies, services or construction are, in the determination of the chief procurement officer in consultation with the using agency, either unusual in nature or highly specialized, the chief procurement officer shall cause an advertisement to be placed in at least one trade journal or such other specialized industry publication of circulation in the city, whichever is appropriate and most likely to bring responses from qualified and available offerors. The advertisement shall be published once and at least 14 days preceding the date set for receipt of bids. The provisions of this paragraph concerning unusual or special circumstances shall be used in addition to, and not in lieu of, the provisions in subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
b.  Assistance of using agency. The chief procurement officer may rely upon the subject matter expertise and the assistance of personnel of the using agency who shall, prior to competitive solicitation, make a prompt written determination of the appropriate trade journal or specialized industry publication where the advertisement is to be placed. The written determination by the using agency shall be made sufficiently in advance such that notice and advertisement can be timely placed by the chief procurement officer in the next available issue of a journal or industry publication, which will be published at least 14 days preceding the date set for receipt of bids. The using agency shall provide the necessary funds from its budget for the costs and expenses associated with advertisement in trade journals or such other industry publications. 
c.  Contents of notice. Notice of bid security, if required, shall be included in the public notice for the trade journal or such other industry publication. The public notice shall contain a general description of the supplies, services or construction to be procured and shall state the date and location where solicitation documents may be obtained, and the time and place of opening of the bids. 
(d)  Receipt of competitive sealed bids . All bids must be delivered to and received by the chief procurement officer or designated department of procurement staff at the bid opening and timestamped no later than 2:00 p.m. Eastern Time. 
(e)  Clock calibration . Prior to all bid openings, the chief procurement officer or designated department of procurement staff shall coordinate the clock calibration used in the bid process with the National Bureau of Standards. 
(f)  Bid opening . The city's method of bid submission, either electronic or by other acceptable means, will be identified in the invitation for bids. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses and the bid tabulations shall be released publicly on the City of Atlanta's Procurement website. The name of each offeror, the amount of each bid and such other relevant information as the chief procurement officer deems appropriate shall be recorded and published. Only the name of each offeror for competitive sealed proposals shall be recorded and published. 
(g)  Bid acceptance . Bids shall be received by the chief procurement officer or designated department of procurement staff without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this article, provided that the bids are received by the chief procurement officer at the time, place and under the conditions contained in the invitation for bids. 
(h)  Bid evaluation. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids and the City's Code of Ordinances. Those criteria, including but not limited to discounts, transportation costs and total or life-cycle costs, that will affect the bid and price and be considered in the evaluation for the award shall be objectively measurable. The invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. 
(i)  Correction or withdrawal of bids. 
(1)  Before bid opening. Correction or withdrawal of bids may be allowed by the chief procurement officer before the scheduled time and date of bid opening. The offeror may withdraw the bid, without revealing the amount of the bid, by submitting a new sealed bid or providing written notice of withdrawal before bid opening. Notice of withdrawal shall be received by the chief procurement officer prior to bid opening. 
(2)  After bid opening. After bid opening, corrections in bids shall be permitted only to the extent that the offeror can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the bid price actually intended. After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interests of the city or fair competition shall be permitted. 
(3)  The chief procurement officer may also exercise all rights a bidder may have to correct its bid provided in this Code section and may communicate with any bidder concerning the correction or withdrawal of its bid. 
(4)  Withdrawal. In lieu of bid correction, a low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if: 
a.  The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document, but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or 
b.  The bidder submits evidence that clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made. 
All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids shall be supported by a written determination made by the chief procurement officer. 
(j)  Tie bids. If two or more offerors are tied in price while otherwise meeting all of the required conditions, the contract shall be awarded to an offeror whose principal place of business is within the city or, if not within the city, within the metropolitan Atlanta area or, if not within the city or metropolitan area, within the state. Where no offeror is located within the state, the chief procurement officer shall award the contract to the offeror whose principal place of business is the closest to the city. 
(k)  Award. The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by written notice to the most responsible and responsive offeror whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. In determining the most responsible and responsive offeror, the chief procurement officer, in consultation with the using agency, shall consider the following: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the offeror to perform the contract and provide the services/supplies required; 
(2)  The capability of the offeror to perform the contract and provide the services/supplies promptly or within the time specified without delay or interference; 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the offeror; 
(4)  The quality of performance of the offeror of previous contracts and provision of services/supplies; 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the offeror with laws and ordinances relating to the contract and provision of services/supplies; 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the offeror to perform the contract and provide the services/supplies; 
(7)  The compliance of the offeror with the requirements of an equal employment opportunity in contracting program as may be required by ordinance; 
(8)  When applicable, the compliance of the offeror with the requirements of a minority and female business enterprise participation program as may be required by ordinance; 
(9)  The compliance of the offeror with the requirements of a local preference program as may be required by ordinance; 
(10)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or services to the particular use required; and 
(11)  The price. If all bids exceed available funds as certified by the chief financial officer and the most responsible and responsive bid does not exceed such funds by more than five percent, the chief procurement officer is authorized, when time or economic considerations preclude resolicitation of a reduced scope, to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price, including changes in the bid requirements, with the most responsible and responsive offeror in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds. 
(l)  Multi-step sealed bidding. When it is considered impractical to initially prepare a purchase description to support an award based on price, an invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those offerors whose offers have been qualified under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation. 
(m)  Substitution, replacement by uncertified minority business enterprise or female business enterprise prohibited. An offeror may not substitute for or replace any minority business enterprise (MBE) or female business enterprise (FBE), as those terms are defined in section 2-1443, when that MBE or FBE has been designated in writing by the offeror as a subcontractor for the contract on which the offeror has submitted a bid, if the MBE or FBE submitted as a part of the bid is not a certified, legitimate MBE or FBE, as determined by the office of contract compliance. If the office of contract compliance determines that the MBE or FBE is not legitimate or certified, the bid of the contractor who submitted the bid shall be rejected. 
(n)  The office of contract compliance shall evaluate each such bid as to the offeror's compliance with subsections (k)(7) and (8) of this section and shall notify the chief procurement officer, in writing, whether the bid is responsive or nonresponsive. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2013-47(13-O-1277), § 1, 10-16-13 ; Ord. No. 2019-04(18-O-1779), § 1, 1-15-19 ) 
Sec. 2-1188.1. - Local preference. 
(a)  Applicability. This local preference program shall only apply to any city contract (referred to hereinafter as "Eligible local projects") procured under section 2-1188 competitive sealed bidding. It does not apply to procurements utilizing competitive sealed proposals under section 2-1189, small purchases under section 2-1190, sole source procurement under section 2-1191, emergency procurement under section 2-1192, competitive selection procedures for professional and consultant services under section 2-1193 and federally-funded projects. 
(b)  Statement of policy. The city has a significant interest in encouraging the creation of employment opportunities for its residents and for businesses located within the city. As a purchaser of goods and services, the city will benefit from expanded job and business opportunities for its residents and businesses through additional revenues generated by its activities. It is in the interest of the city and its residents to give preference on eligible local projects to those eligible offerors who have direct physical and economic relationships with the city. 
(c)  Certification as a local offeror. In order to be certified as a local offeror, an eligible offeror must submit a completed application to the department of procurement, and the applicant must be approved and certified by the department of procurement. An eligible offeror must submit a completed and signed written application to become a local offeror before it will be allowed to receive a bid preference on an eligible local project. In order to be approved as a local offeror and receive a bid preference on an eligible local project, the application for approval as a local offeror and all supporting documents must be received by the department of procurement at least 30 days prior to the date bids are received on such eligible local project. An eligible offeror who fails to submit an application for approval as a local offeror at least 30 days prior to the date bids are received on an eligible local project, and who otherwise meets the requirements for approval as a local offeror, will not be qualified for a bid preference on such eligible local project. 
(d)  Criteria. To be certified as a local offeror, the eligible offeror must satisfy no less than two of the following criteria: 
(1)  The eligible offeror's principal place of business is located in the city or that the eligible offeror has held a valid city business license for at least one year prior to the date of application. 
(2)  A majority of the full time employees, chief officers, and managers of the eligible offeror have regularly conducted work and business in the city for at least one year prior to the date of application. 
(3)  A majority of the employees based at the eligible offeror's location(s) in the city have been residents of the city for at least one year prior to the date of application. 
(4)  The services the eligible offeror offers to the city have been provided by the eligible offeror in the city for at least one year prior to the date of application. 
If the applicant is a joint venture or mentor-protégé team, each participant in the joint venture or mentor-protégé team must be approved independently as a local offeror in order for the joint venture or mentor-protégé team to receive the bid preference on eligible local projects. 
(e)  Term. The certification as a local offeror shall expire two years from the date of the approval of the application. Following the expiration date, a business is no longer a local offeror. An eligible offeror must submit a new application for certification as a local offeror to the department of procurement and establish that it continues to meet the requirements contained in paragraph (d) of this section in order to receive a bid preference on eligible local projects. 
(f)  Determining responsiveness of non-local offerors. The geographic location of an eligible offeror shall be one of the factors considered by the department of procurement in determining whether a bid on an eligible local project is responsive. A bid submitted by a non-local offeror shall be deemed non-responsive on the basis that the eligible offeror is a non-local offeror, unless: 
(1)  For eligible local projects valued at less than $500,000.00, the amount of the bid submitted by the non-local offeror is ten percent lower than the lowest responsible and responsive bid submitted by a local offeror; 
(2)  For eligible local projects valued at $500,000.00 or more, the amount of the bid submitted by the non-local offeror is five percent lower than the lowest responsible and responsive bid submitted by a local offeror; 
(3)  The bid submitted by the non-local offeror would be responsible and responsive but for the fact that the eligible offeror is a non-local offeror; and 
(4)  The amount of the bid submitted by the non-local offeror is lowest among bids submitted by other non-local offerors that would be responsible and responsive but for the fact that such other eligible offerors are non-local offerors. 
(g)  Continuing obligations of eligible offerors certified as local offerors. Eligible offerors certified as local offerors shall be under a continuing duty to immediately inform the department of procurement in writing of any changes in the eligible offeror's business if, as a result of such ;changes, the eligible offeror no longer satisfies the requirements of paragraph (d) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1189. - Competitive sealed proposals. 
(a)  Conditions for use. Under this article, when the chief procurement officer determines that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city, a contract may be procured by the use of the competitive sealed proposals method. 
(b)  Request for proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals. Notice of all such requests for proposals shall be forwarded to all members of the finance/executive committee. 
(c)  Public notice. When requested by the using agency, the chief procurement officer shall issue public notice for request for proposals from offerors as provided in subsection 2-1188(c). 
(d)  Selection. The chief procurement officer, in consultation with and upon recommendation of the head of the using agency, shall select from among the offerors no less than three offerors deemed to be the most responsible and responsive; provided, however, that if three or less offerors respond to the solicitation, this requirement will not apply. The selection shall be made in order of preference. From the date proposals are received by the chief procurement officer through the date the contract is awarded, no offeror may make substitutions, deletions, additions or other changes in the configuration or structure of the offeror's teams or members of offerors' teams. The selection criteria shall include, but not be limited to, those contained in subsection 2-1188(k) and the following: 
(1)  Previous experience demonstrating competence to perform the services involved in the solicitation; 
(2)  Past performance of previous contracts with respect to time of completion and quality of services; 
(3)  The fee or compensation demanded for the services; 
(4)  The ability to comply with applicable laws; 
(5)  The ability to comply with the schedule for the performance of the services, as required by the city; 
(6)  The financial ability to furnish the necessary bonds; 
(7)  The financial condition of the offeror; 
(8)  The ability to provide staffing of management personnel, satisfactory to the city; and 
(9)  The offeror's compliance with the requirements of equal employment opportunity (EEO) and, where applicable, equal business opportunity (EBO) programs, as may be required by ordinance. 
The office of contract compliance shall evaluate each proposal as to the offeror's compliance with the requirements of equal employment opportunity (EEO) and, where applicable, equal business opportunity (EBO) programs, as may be required by ordinance. The office of contract compliance shall evaluate each proponent's conformance to the city's EEO-ordinance and the city's EBO ordinance according to relative weights assigned by the chief procurement officer. The combined weights may not exceed 15 percent of the total evaluation points. 
When applicable, each request for proposal shall state with specificity the method by which EEO and EBO compliance is weighted to arrive at numerical evaluation points. Proposals that are noncompliant with the city's EEO or EBO requirements shall be deemed nonresponsive without further evaluation of any other solicitation evaluation factors. 
(e)  Evaluation factors. The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of evaluation factors. 
(f)  Discussion with responsible offerors and revisions to proposals. Discussions may be conducted with responsible and responsive offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for any purpose in the best interests of the city, including the purpose of clarification to ensure full understanding of and responsiveness to the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals, and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining the best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. 
(g)  Award. Award shall be made to the most responsible and responsive offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals, this section and in section 2-1188(k). 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1190. - Small purchases. 
(a)  General procedures. Any contract or purchase order for supplies, services and construction not exceeding $20,000.00 may be made in accordance with small purchase procedures adopted by the chief procurement officer in accordance with this article, provided that procurement requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this section. Insofar as it is practicable, no less than three businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations. Award shall be made to the business offering the lowest responsive quotation. The name of the business submitting a quotation and the date and amount of each quotation shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. 
(b)  Authority of using agency. Heads of all city departments may, in their discretion, make small purchases without the assistance of the chief procurement officer under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where the purchase does not exceed $50.00 and is paid out of the petty cash fund allocated to the department under a duly enacted appropriation; and 
(2)  Where the purchase does not exceed $20,000.00 and is paid for by a miscellaneous requisition directing the chief financial officer to make payment from funds previously allocated to such department. 
(c)  Limitations on small purchases made by city departments. When small purchases are made by heads of city departments pursuant to subsection (b) of this section the following requirements shall be met: 
(1)  The aggregate amount of all such small purchases for each department shall not exceed an amount to be annually set administratively by the mayor during the normal budget process upon the recommendation of the chief procurement officer, based upon the department's expenditures of the previous fiscal year, the department's estimated annual expenditures for the current fiscal year and other relevant factors; 
(2)  A copy of any purchase order or miscellaneous requisition shall be sent to the chief procurement officer at the time the purchase is made; and 
(3)  Purchases shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Certification of unencumbered appropriation. Except for emergency procurements under section 2-1192, the chief procurement officer shall not execute any contracts or purchase orders under this section until the chief financial officer shall have certified, after pre-audit, that there is to the credit of the using agency concerned a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance, in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of the order. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1191. - Sole source procurement. 
(a)  Under this article, a contract or purchase order for a supply service, construction item or professional or consultant service may be awarded without competition when the chief procurement officer determines in writing, after conducting a good-faith due diligence review of reasonable available sources, that are in the city's best interest, there is only one source for the required supply, service, construction item or professional or consultant service. The due diligence review shall include, but not be limited to, research of available sources and contact with professional and trade associations related to the required supply, service, construction item or professional or consultant service. The determination in writing shall also state the sources reviewed. 
(b)  The chief procurement officer shall conduct negotiations as to the terms of the sole source procurement. A record of sole source procurements shall be maintained that lists each contractor's name, the name and type of each contract, the item(s) procured under each contract and the identification number of each contract file. 
(c)  Under this article, a contract or purchase order for a supply service, construction item or professional or consultant service may be awarded without competition when the chief procurement officer determines in writing, after conducting a good-faith due diligence review of reasonable available sources, that are in the city's best interest, there is only one source for the required supply, service, construction item or professional or consultant service. The due diligence review shall include, but not be limited to, research of available sources and contact with professional and trade associations related to the required supply, service, construction item or professional or consultant service. The determination in writing shall also state the sources reviewed. Nothing in this section shall eliminate the chief procurement officer's obligation to present the recommendation of award of any contract procured under this section to city council for approval, prior to execution of the contract, when the value of the contract exceeds $100,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2019-06(18-O-1781), § 1, 1-16-19 ) 
Sec. 2-1191.1. - Special procurements. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the chief procurement officer may initiate a procurement above the small purchase amount specified in section 2-1190 where he/she determines that an unusual or unique situation exists that make the application of all requirements of competitive sealed bidding or competitive sealed proposals contrary to the public interest and such procurement does not technically qualify as a sole source procurement under Code section 2-1191. If determined as appropriate by the chief procurement officer, any special procurement under this section shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances; provided however, that the chief procurement officer may determine under appropriate circumstances that there is only one logical choice as to a contractor to provide the goods or services necessitated by the special procurement. A written determination of the basis for the procurement and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included by the chief procurement officer in the contract file. Nothing in this section shall eliminate the chief procurement officer's obligation to present the recommendation of award of any contract procured under this section to city council for approval, prior to execution of the contract, when the value of the contract exceeds $100,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1192. - Emergency procurement. 
(a)  When the chief procurement officer determines that an emergency exists, the chief procurement officer may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements for supplies, services, construction items or professional or consultant services. The chief procurement officer shall make such determination when there exists a threat to public health, welfare or safety under emergency conditions. The procuring agency shall endeavor to utilize existing contracts when addressing an emergency procurement, if appropriate. If using an existing contract is not appropriate or no existing contract provides the supplies, services, construction items or professional or consultant services needed for the emergency procurement then, the procuring agency shall conduct the emergency procurement with as much competition as is practicable under the circumstances. 
(b)  The following information shall be included in the emergency procurement contract file: 
(1)  An overview of the nature of the emergency, including relevant circumstances; and 
(2)  A description of the threat to the health or safety of individuals, property, or essential city function if immediate action is not taken and an estimation of the potential material loss or damage; and 
(3)  A summary of the contractor's qualifications, experience and background to provide the emergency service and the basis on which the contractor was selected over other qualified and responsive firms; and 
(4)  A description of the scope of work, as well as the costs, fees, or rates for the purchase; and 
(5)  A description of the work performed by the contractor to mitigate or eliminate the emergency, including a description of what consequences of what would have been if the emergency action had not been taken and the risk associated with inaction; 
(6)  Pricing information when the contract award amount is over $100,000.00 or 20 percent over pre-emergency pricing (if such information is available to the using agency), whichever is less. If no pre-emergency pricing information is available, then the using agency will provide current industry pricing, when practicable. 
(c)  If an emergency should arise after office hours which requires immediate action on the part of the using agency involved for the protection of the city or if a like situation arises on a Sunday or holiday and it is not possible or convenient to reach the chief procurement officer, any purchase necessary may be made by the official in charge of such using agency. The purchase shall be reported to the chief procurement officer within 24 hours. When the mayor declares a state of emergency and implements the Atlanta-Fulton County Emergency and Disaster Operations Plan, Annex 10A, additional supplies and equipment needed shall be procured in accordance with the plan, using the most practicable method which will ensure both expeditious procurement and effective control. 
(d)  Within three business days of executing the emergency contract, an authorizing agency must make the emergency contract information available for public inspection. The agency shall post the emergency contract on the department of procurement website. Additionally, the department of procurement shall report the emergency contract information to the committee of purview by the next committee cycle following the three business day deadline. 
The department will also disclose the document relating to the conflict of interest or the related party's disclosure information by the using agency. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2017-09(17-O-1048), § 1, 3-15-17 ; Ord. No. 2018(18-O-1224), § 1, 5-16-18 ) 
Sec. 2-1193. - Competitive selection procedures for professional and consultant services. 
(a)  Conditions for use. The chief procurement officer, upon the request or recommendation of the using agency, shall procure professional and consultant services, in accordance with this section, except as authorized under sections 2-1191 and 2-1192. 
(b)  Statement of qualifications. The chief procurement officer shall request and maintain statements of interest from persons interested in providing professional and consultant services that shall include a statement of qualifications and performance data for such persons. Each using agency shall encourage professional and consultant firms, which desire to provide services to the agency, to submit statements of qualifications to the chief procurement officer. The chief procurement officer may specify a uniform format for statements of qualifications. Persons may amend these statements at any time by filing a new statement. Any person placed on the qualifications list shall be removed if found in violation of any provision of this article, including, but not limited to, division 11, 12 or 13, or if such person is found in default under any contract with the city. 
(c)  Public notice. When requested by the using agency, the chief procurement officer shall issue public notice for requests for proposals from professional and consultant offerors as provided in subsections 2-1188(c) and 2-1189(c). 
(d)  Selection. The chief procurement officer, in consultation and upon the recommendation of the head of the using agency, shall select from among the offerors no less than three offerors (the "short-listed offerors") deemed to be the most responsible and responsive; provided, however, that if three or less offerors respond to the solicitation, this requirement will not apply. The selection of the short-listed offerors shall be made in order of preference. From the date proposals are received by the chief procurement officer through the date the contract is awarded, no offeror may make substitutions, deletions, additions or other changes in the configuration or structure of the offeror's teams or members of offeror's teams prior to award. The selection criteria shall include, but not be limited to, those contained in subsection 2-1188 (k) and the following: 
(1)  Previous experience demonstrating competence to perform work or services involved in the solicitation; 
(2)  Past performance of previous contracts with respect to time of completion and quality of work; 
(3)  The fee or compensation demanded for the services; 
(4)  The ability to comply with applicable laws; 
(5)  The ability to comply with the schedule of the commencement and completion of the services, as required by the city; 
(6)  The financial ability to furnish the necessary bonds; 
(7)  The financial condition of the offeror; and 
(8)  The ability to provide staffing of management personnel, satisfactory to the city. 
(9)  The offeror's compliance with the requirements of equal employment opportunity (EEO) and, where applicable, equal business opportunity (EBO), as may be required by ordinance. As part of the selection process, the office of contract compliance shall evaluate each proposal as to the offeror's compliance with the requirements of equal employment opportunity (EEO) and equal business opportunity (EBO) programs as may be required by ordinance. The office of contract compliance shall evaluate each proponent's conformance to the city's EEO ordinance and, where applicable, the city's EBO ordinance according to relative weights assigned by the chief procurement officer. The combined weights may not exceed 15 percent of the total evaluation points. Each request for proposal shall state with specificity the method by which EEO and EBO compliance is weighted to arrive at numerical evaluation points. Proposals that are noncompliant with the city's EEO or EBO requirements, where applicable, shall be deemed nonresponsive without further evaluation of any other solicitation evaluation factors. 
(e)  Negotiations and award. The chief procurement officer shall negotiate a contract with the most responsible and responsive short-listed offeror at compensation that the chief procurement officer determines in writing to be fair and reasonable to the city. In making this decision, the chief procurement officer shall take into account the estimated value, the scope, the complexity and the professional nature of the services to be rendered. Should the chief procurement officer be unable to negotiate a satisfactory contract with the offeror considered to be the most responsible and responsive at a price for the chief procurement officer determines to be fair and reasonable to the city, negotiations with that offeror shall be terminated. The chief procurement officer shall then undertake negotiations with the second most responsible and responsive short-listed offeror. If negotiations with the second most responsible and responsive short-listed offeror are unsuccessful, negotiations shall be terminated and the chief procurement officer shall then undertake negotiations with the third most responsible and responsive short-listed offeror. Should the chief procurement officer be unable to negotiate a contract with any of the short-listed offerors, the chief procurement officer and the using agency may select from the additional offerors that were not short-listed in order of their responsibility and responsiveness and the chief procurement officer may continue negotiations in accordance with this section until an agreement is reached. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1194. - Cancellation of invitations for bids or requests for proposals. 
An invitation for bids, a request for proposals or any other solicitation under this article may be canceled or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part, as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is in the best interest of the city. 
The reasons therefore shall be made part of the contract file. Each solicitation issued by the city shall state that the solicitation may be canceled and that any bid or proposal may be rejected in whole or in part for good cause when in the best interest of the city. Notice of cancellation shall be sent to all businesses solicited. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1195. - Responsibility of offerors. 
(a)  Determination of responsibility. Responsibility of the offeror under this article shall be ascertained for each city solicitation based upon full disclosure to the chief procurement officer at the time of the submission of a bid or proposal in accordance with the terms of the solicitation and the city's code of ordinances, unless the terms of such solicitation allow subsequent submittals by an offeror. 
(b)  Determination of nonresponsibility. If an offeror who otherwise would have been awarded a contract is found nonresponsible, a written determination of nonresponsibility setting forth the basis of the finding shall be prepared by the chief procurement officer. The unreasonable failure of an offeror to supply information in connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility may be grounds for a determination of nonresponsibility. A copy of the determination shall be sent to the nonresponsible offeror and shall inform the offeror of the right to protest under division 3 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1196. - Bid security for nonconstruction contracts. 
(a)  Required. Bid security shall be required for all competitive sealed bidding for contracts for supplies and services when the price is estimated by the chief procurement officer to exceed $20,000.00. Bid security shall be a bond provided by a surety company authorized to do business in the state by the Georgia Insurance Commissioner or the equivalent in cash, cashier's check or certified check. Nothing in this subsection prevents the requirement of such bonds on contracts for supplies and services under $20,000.00 when the chief procurement officer determines that the circumstances warrant such requirement. 
(b)  Amount of bid security. Bid security shall be in an amount equal to at least five percent of the amount of the bid. Unsuccessful offerors shall be entitled to the return of the bid security. Upon failure of a successful offeror to enter into a contract within ten days after the chief procurement officer tenders the proposed contract, the offeror shall forfeit the bid security. 
(c)  Rejection of bids for noncompliance with supplying bid security. When the invitation for bids requires security, the bid shall be rejected if the chief procurement officer determines that the bid fails to comply in a substantial manner with the security requirements. 
(d)  Withdrawal of bids. If an offeror is permitted to withdraw a bid before award, as provided in subsection 2-1189(g), no action shall be had against the offeror or bid security. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1197. - Performance and payment bonds for nonconstruction contracts. 
(a)  Required, amounts. Under this article, when a contract for supplies or services is awarded in excess of $20,000.00 or when a contract for professional or consultant services is awarded and the chief procurement officer determines that the circumstances so warrant, the following bonds or security shall be delivered to the city and shall become binding on the parties upon the execution of the contract: 
(1)  A performance bond satisfactory to the city, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state by the Georgia Insurance Commissioner or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the city, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract; and 
(2)  A payment bond satisfactory to the city, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state by the Georgia Insurance Commissioner or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the city, for the protection of all persons supplying labor and material to the contractor or subcontractor for the performance of the work provided for in the contract, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract. 
(b)  Reduction or waiver of bond. The chief procurement officer is authorized to reduce or waive performance and payment bonds for contracts for supplies and services for $20,000.00 or less, when the chief procurement officer makes a written determination that it is in the best interests of the city to do so. Nothing in this section prevents the requirement of such bonds on supply or service contracts under $20,000.00 when the chief procurement officer determines that the circumstances warrant. 
(c)  Authority to require additional bonds. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the city to require other security in addition to those bonds or in circumstances other than those specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(d)  Right to institute suit on payment bond; jurisdiction and time limits for suits upon payment bonds. The right to institute suit and jurisdiction and time limits for suits upon payment bonds provided under this section will be governed by the provisions of Title 13, Chapter 10, Article 1, p. 4 of the Georgia Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1198. - Insurance. 
(a)  Generally. Under this article, the chief procurement officer, in consultation with the chief financial officer, shall, at least annually, determine the minimum insurance requirements of the city and evaluate current insurance policies to determine whether minimum insurance requirements continue to be met. The chief procurement officer, with the approval of the commissioner of administrative services and in consultation with the chief financial officer, shall develop procedures for the purchase of insurance for the city, in accordance with this article. Insurance requirements for the city shall be considered for the following purposes: 
(1)  Bonds, covenants or conditions of indebtedness of the city. 
(2)  Any employee benefit program. 
(3)  Public liability insurance for contractors doing business with the city. 
(4)  Any other purpose for which insurance is required or expedient, as determined by the chief procurement officer, after consultation with the chief financial officer. 
(b)  Public liability insurance for contracts. The chief procurement officer is authorized to establish standard ranges for limits of liability in public liability insurance coverage, as appropriate, for all contracts let by the city where work thereunder will expose the general public to the risks of bodily injury and property damage. If the chief procurement officer determines that it is appropriate to the type of work under the contract and maximizes competition in the bidding or proposal process, lower limits of liability may be required. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1199. - Prequalification of offerors. 
(a)  Generally. Under this article, the chief procurement officer, in consultation with the using agency may determine that it is in the best interests of the city to prequalify offerors for particular types of supplies, services, construction and professional and consultant services. Prequalification standards may be imposed by the chief procurement officer that must be met by any offeror in order to qualify to respond to an invitation for bids or a request for proposals. Offerors shall be required to submit information to the chief procurement officer to allow a determination of whether an offeror has met such prequalification standards. When prequalification is required, only those offerors who submit the required prequalification information and who are actually prequalified to submit a bid or proposal for a particular solicitation shall be allowed to submit bids or proposals. 
(b)  Public notice. Public notice of prequalification shall be given in the same manner as provided in subsections 2-1188(c) and 2-1189(c). 
(c)  Procedures for prequalifying offerors. The chief procurement officer and using agency for which the solicitation is being performed shall review all information submitted by offerors, and, if necessary, additional information may be required. If the chief procurement officer, in consultation with the using agency and any other affected city agency, determines that the offeror meets all of the prequalification standards established under this article, the chief procurement officer shall prequalify the offeror as qualified to submit a bid or proposal for the particular solicitation for which the prequalification was performed. The offeror shall be notified in writing of prequalification. 
(d)  Failure to prequalify. If an offeror is found not to meet the prequalification standards established under this article, a written determination setting forth the basis for such finding shall be prepared by the chief procurement officer and delivered to the offeror. 
(e)  Prequalified contractors for municipal public roads contracts. Any offeror prequalified pursuant to this section may be awarded a contract for municipal public roads projects, as such projects are defined in Title 32 of the Official Code of Georgia. 
(1)  Public notice as provided in section 2-1188(c) of this Division shall be required to solicit prequalified offerors. 
(2)  The request for prequalified offerors shall not require offerors to include cost or pricing data, pursuant to section 2-1201. 
(3)  Contracts awarded to prequalified offerors shall require the performance of such services and performance standards as described in the request for qualified offerors. 
(4)  An invitation for bids shall be requested from all prequalified contractors for the purpose of soliciting cost and pricing for an individual municipal public roads project, which shall be awarded to the lowest reliable bid received from a prequalified contractor. Public notice shall not be required when requesting bids from prequalified contractors. 
(5)  Performance and payment bonds shall be required in an amount equal to the value of a municipal public roads project awarded pursuant to subsection (e)(3) above. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2015-56(15-O-1515), § 1, 11-25-15 ) 
Sec. 2-1200. - Equal employment opportunity clause. 
(a)  Required. Unless otherwise authorized by law, all contracts and purchase orders entered into by the city shall incorporate an equal employment opportunity (EEO) clause, as set forth in section 2-1414. Compliance with this section shall be considered met when the EEO clause is set forth in an exhibit attached to the contract and appropriate language incorporating the exhibit into the contract is set forth therein. 
(b)  Notice. The EEO clause shall be included as a specification and shall appear on all invitations for bids, requests for proposals and all other solicitations, contracts and purchase orders prepared and issued by the department of procurement. 
(c)  Federal guidelines adopted. The federal guidelines, relating to nondiscrimination in employment by government contractors and subcontractors promulgated by Executive Order No. 11246 of September 29, 1965, as amended with respect to sex by Executive Order No. 11375 of October 13, 1967, sections 202, 203 and 204 of part II of such orders, are adopted by the city insofar as legally possible, and persons entering into contracts with the city, unless otherwise authorized by law, shall comply with the guidelines. 
(d)  Failure to comply with the EEO clause. The city shall reject any bid or proposal and shall not enter into any contract or purchase order with any person who fails to comply with the equal employment opportunity requirements of this section, and with the requirements of divisions 11 and 12 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1201. - Cost or pricing data. 
(a)  Submissions relating to award of contracts. 
(1)  Required. A prospective contractor shall submit cost or pricing data when the contract is expected to exceed $20,000.00 and is to be awarded under sections 2-1189, 2-1191 or 2-1193. 
(2)  Exceptions. The submission of cost or pricing data relating to the award of a contract is not required when: 
a.  The contract price is based on adequate price competition as determined by the chief procurement officer; 
b.  The contract price is set by law or regulation; or 
c.  It is determined in writing by the chief procurement officer that the requirements of subsection (a)(1) of this section may be waived and 
(b)  Submissions relating to change orders or contract modifications. 
(1)  Required. A contractor shall submit cost or pricing data prior to the pricing of any change order or contract modification, including adjustments to contracts awarded by competitive sealed bidding, whether or not cost or pricing data was required in connection with the initial solicitation, when the modification involves increases that are expected to exceed $20,000.00. 
(2)  Exceptions. The submission of cost or pricing data relating to the pricing of a change order or contract modification is not required when: 
a.  Unrelated and separately priced adjustments for which cost or pricing data would not be required are consolidated for administrative convenience; or 
b.  It is determined in writing by the chief procurement officer that the requirements of subsection (b)(1) of this section may be waived and the determination states the reasons for such waiver. 
(c)  Verification required. A contractor required to submit cost or pricing data in accordance with this section shall verify that, to the best of the contractor's knowledge and belief, the cost or pricing data submitted was accurate, complete and current as of the date it was submitted. 
(d)  Price adjustment provision required. Any contract award, change order or contract modification under which the submission and verification of cost or pricing data are required shall contain a provision stating that the price to the city, including a profit or fee, shall be adjusted to exclude any costs found by the city to have been increased because the contractor furnished cost or pricing data was inaccurate, incomplete or not current as of the date it was submitted. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1202. - Cost or price analysis. 
Under this article, if a contract is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from a federal agency, a cost analysis or a price analysis, as appropriate, shall be conducted prior to award of the contract. A written record of such cost analysis or price analysis shall be made a part of the contract file. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1203. - Types of contracts. 
Subject to the limitations of this article, any type of contract which is appropriate to the procurement and which will promote the best interests of the city may be used, provided that the use of a cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost contract or a cost-plus-a-percentage-of-construction-cost contract is prohibited. A cost reimbursement contract may be used only when the chief procurement officer determines in writing that such contract is likely to be less costly to the city than any other type or that it is a professional or consultant service contract. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1204. - Cost reimbursement provisions. 
Under this article, cost reimbursement provisions shall obligate the city to reimburse only reasonable costs, allocable to the contractor, either directly or indirectly, that are accounted for in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. If a contract is being funded in whole or in part by assistance from a federal agency, reimbursement to contractors for incurred costs or cost estimates included in negotiated prices shall be subject to appropriate codified federal cost principles. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1205. - Multi-term contracts. 
(a)  Conditions for use. Under this article, unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for supplies or services may be renewed if deemed to be in the best interests of the city, provided the renewal terms are included in the solicitation. The chief procurement officer may recommend renewal of a contract, subject to council approval, beyond the first term of the contract. Such contract shall be renewed if the renewal is approved by the city council and the city council appropriates funds therefor. 
(b)  Determination prior to use. Prior to the utilization of a multi-term contract, the chief procurement officer shall determine in writing that: 
(1)  Estimated supply and service requirements are covered by the period of the contract and are reasonably firm and continuing; and 
(2)  Such contract will serve the best interests of the city by encouraging effective competition or otherwise promoting economy in city procurement. 
(c)  Cancellation due to unavailability of funds in succeeding fiscal periods. All multi-term contracts shall contain a clause stating that when funds are not appropriated to support continuation of performance in a subsequent contract period, the contract shall be canceled. 
(d)  Renewal of contract. At least 120 days prior to the expiration of any term of a multi-term contract, the using agency shall submit to the chief procurement officer, in writing, a report of the performance of the contract and the agency's recommendations as to the renewal of the contract. The chief procurement officer, after consultation with the head of the using agency and after review of the report, shall recommend renewal of the contract if renewal is in the best interests of the city and all other requirements of this section have been met. Any renewal of a contract shall be expressly authorized by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1206. - Extension and expiration of contracts. 
(a)  Extension. Under this article, the chief procurement officer may extend a contract once for 90 days after the date of expiration under the contract, when the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The chief procurement officer determines in writing that the extension of the contract is in the best interests of the city and would encourage effective competition; 
(2)  The city council, by duly enacted legislation, appropriates funds for the extension; and 
(3)  The chief financial officer verifies the availability of funds. 
When the chief procurement officer grants the extension of a contract under this section, he shall provide notice of the extension to city council. 
(b)  Expiration. The chief procurement officer shall provide written notice of the expiration date of contracts to the using agency and to the municipal clerk at least 90 days prior to the expiration date of the contracts. Within 30 days of receiving such notice from the chief procurement officer, the using agency shall advise him/her in writing whether such contract needs to be extended for the additional 90-day period. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1207. - Approval of accounting system. 
Under this article, except for firm fixed-price contracts, no contract type shall be used unless it has been determined in writing by the chief procurement officer, after consultation with the chief financial officer, that: 
(1)  The proposed contractor's accounting system will permit timely development of all necessary cost data in the form required by the specified contract type contemplated; and 
(2)  The proposed contractor's accounting system is adequate to allocate costs in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1208. - City's right to inspect plant, place of business or work site. 
Under this article, the city may, at reasonable times, inspect the part of the plant, place of business or work site of a contractor or subcontractor that is pertinent to the performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1209. - City's right to audit records. 
(a)  Audit of cost or pricing data. The city may, at reasonable times and places, audit the books and records of any person who has submitted cost or pricing data pursuant to section 2-1201 to the extent that such books, documents, papers and records are pertinent to such cost or pricing data. Any person who receives a contract, change order or contract modification for which cost or pricing data is required shall maintain such books, documents, papers and records that are pertinent to such cost or pricing data for three years from the date of final payment under the contract, unless a shorter period is authorized in writing. 
(b)  Contract audit. The city shall be entitled to audit the books and records of a contractor or subcontractor under any negotiated contract or subcontract, other than a firm fixed-price contract to the extent that such books, documents, papers and records relate to the performance of such contract or subcontract. Such books and records shall be maintained by the contractor for a period of three years from the date of final payment under the prime contract and by the subcontractor for a period of three years from the date of final payment under the subcontract, unless a shorter period is authorized in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1210. - Prohibition against and reporting of anti-competitive practices. 
Under this article, collusion and other anticompetitive practices among offerors are prohibited by city, state and federal laws, and the city, therefore, establishes the following: 
(1)  Certification of independent price determination. All offerors shall identify a person having authority to sign for the offeror who shall certify, in writing, as follows: 
"I certify that this offer is made without prior understanding, agreement, or connection with any corporation, firm, or person submitting an offer for the same supplies, services, construction, or professional or consultant services, and is in all respects fair and without collusion or fraud. I understand collusive bidding is a violation of city, state and federal law and can result in fines, prison sentences, and civil damages awards. I agree to abide by all conditions of this solicitation and offer and certify that I am authorized to sign for this offeror." 
Compliance with this subsection shall be considered met if the certification of independent price determination, as provided in this subsection, is set forth in an exhibit attached to the offer and appropriate language incorporating the exhibit into the offer is set forth therein. 
(2)  Reporting of anticompetitive practices. When for any reason collusion or other anticompetitive practices are suspected among any offerors, a notice from the using agency or other city department with knowledge of the relevant facts shall be transmitted to the city attorney for investigation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1211. - Clause for ensuring payment. 
(a)  Required. Under this article, before final payment to a contractor is made by the city, the contractor shall certify to the city in writing, in a form satisfactory to the city, that all subcontractors, materialmen suppliers and similar firms or persons involved in the city contract have been paid in full at the time of final payment to the contractor by the city or will be paid in full utilizing the monies constituting final payment to the contractor. 
(b)  Contract clause. Every city contract, purchase order or solicitation shall set forth the requirement in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1212. - Encumbrances required for contracts. 
(a)  Application. This section shall apply to all departments, bureaus, agencies and offices of the city. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no city official, employee or appointee shall incur any liability on behalf of the city under contracts of any kind, including but not limited to purchase orders, unless sufficient funds have been encumbered or otherwise made available for such liability. 
(b)  Verification of funds availability and encumbrances for contracts. The chief procurement officer and the chief financial officer shall encumber funds for department, bureau, agency or office contracts, at the appropriate fund, account and center level, with an established dollar amount which is within the approved line item budget for such department, bureau, agency or offices, unless funds are otherwise made available. Each department, bureau, agency and office head shall be responsible for maintaining appropriate internal expenditure and order controls to ensure that the authorized contract amounts and appropriations are not exceeded. No encumbrances shall be made if funds are not available for such purposes, unless the chief financial officer deems the expenditure critical and identifies supplemental appropriations. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1213. - Prohibition against contracting with predatory or high cost lenders. 
(a)  The city and those authorized to act on its behalf shall not enter into any contract with any person or business entity that is a predatory or a high cost lender, or an affiliate thereof, as defined in Code section 58-102. 
(b)  Every city contract and purchase order shall contain a provision requiring that the person or business entity with which the city is contracting certify, under penalty of perjury, that neither the person, or business entity, nor any of its affiliates is a high cost lender or a predatory lender, as provided by Code section 58-102. All contractors shall identify a person having authority to sign for the contractor who shall certify, in writing, as follows: 
I certify, under penalty of perjury, that this offer is made by a person or business entity that is neither a high cost lender nor a predatory lender, nor is the contractor an affiliate of a high cost lender or a predatory lender, as defined by City of Atlanta Code Section 58-102. I further certify that I am an agent duly authorized to sign this certification on behalf of the contracting party. 
(c)  Any person or business entity that provides a false affidavit shall be subject to any or all of the following penalties: 
(1)  Withholding of ten percent of all future payments under the involved contract until it is determined that the person or business entity is in compliance with this section. 
(2)  Withholding of all future payments under the involved contract until it is determined that the person or business entity is in compliance with this section. 
(3)  Cancellation of the involved contract. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall affect the validity of any contract entered into in connection with any debt obligations issued by or on behalf of the city, regardless of whether the contract was awarded in compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 4, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1214. - Management of conflicts in source selection. 
(a)  For the procurement of contracts pursuant to the methods of source selection listed in section 2-1187, except for small purchases pursuant to 2-1190, and cooperative purchases pursuant to section 2-1602 and 1606 the chief procurement officer shall require an offeror or contractor to disclose all organizational and personal relationships which may give rise to a conflict of interest if the offeror is awarded the contract. Relationships requiring disclosure include personal and financial relationships, as defined below: 
(1)  Personal relationships: Executives, board members and partners in firms submitting offers must disclose familial relationships with employees, officers and elected officials of the City of Atlanta. Familial relationships shall include spouse, domestic partner registered under section 94-133, mother, father, sister, brother, and natural or adopted children of an official or employee; and 
(2)  Financial relationships: offerors must disclose any interest held with a city employee or official, or family members of a city employee or official, which may yield, directly or indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit to the offeror or the offeror's family members. 
The chief procurement officer may require disclosure of additional types of relationships or conflicts of interests if, in his/her sole discretion, such disclosure is in the best interests of the city. 
(b)  Emergency contracts. An offeror or contractor requested to perform services pursuant to an emergency procurement, pursuant to section 2-1192, must provide the disclosures provided in subsection (a), above, prior to commencing any work for the city and prior to executing an emergency contract for such emergency services; provided, however, that should the emergency conditions make such disclosures impracticable under the circumstances, the disclosures shall be made in an expeditious manner but no later than three calendar days after the execution of an emergency contract or the commencement of emergency work, whichever is sooner. 
(c)  As early in the procurement process as possible and prior to award of a contract, the chief procurement officer shall review the disclosures submitted as required herein for: 
(1)  The three lowest responsive and responsible offeror(s) in a solicitation for competitive sealed bids pursuant to section 2-1188; 
(2)  The top three responsive and responsible offerors in a solicitation for competitive sealed proposals pursuant to section 2-1189; and 
(3)  Any offeror or contractor for a sole source procurement pursuant to section 2-1191, a special procurement pursuant to section 2-1191.1, an emergency procurement pursuant to 2-1192, and a cooperative purchase pursuant to 2-1602 and 1606. 
(d)  Upon review of the disclosures required above, the chief procurement officer shall make a written determination as to the existence of a personal or organizational conflict and the means by which such conflict may be mitigated or avoided. The written determination shall be maintained in the contract file. The chief procurement officer shall award, recommend award of, or execute the contract according to the solicitation or selection criteria unless a conflict of interest is determined to exist that cannot be mitigated or avoided. 
(e)  Before determining to withhold award or execution of a contract based on conflict of interest considerations, the chief procurement officer shall notify the contractor or offeror, provide the reasons therefor, and allow the contractor or offeror a reasonable opportunity to respond. If the chief procurement officer finds that it is in the best interest of the city to award the contract notwithstanding a conflict of interest, the offeror shall submit a request for waiver. The waiver request and decision (the chief procurement officer's written conflict mitigation determination) shall be included in the contract file. 
(1)  For contracts requiring city council approval, the chief procurement officer shall provide the offeror's or contractor's waiver request and the chief procurement officer's written determination documents to the city council in his/her recommendation of award of such contracts (redacting any proprietary information as appropriate), and in the monthly contracts report provided to the council president, all members of council, and the municipal clerk. 
(2)  For contracts that do not require city council approval, offerors' or contractor's waiver requests and the chief procurement officer's written determination documents for such contracts shall be reported in the monthly contracts report provided to the council president, all members of council, and the municipal clerk. 
(f)  In recommending city council approval of the award or execution of a contract, the chief procurement officer shall certify to the city council that he or she has received from the successful offeror a disclosure of its organizational and personal relationships and that award of the contract is appropriate under this section. In all instances in which the recommended offeror has disclosed an organizational or personal relationship, the chief procurement officer's certification shall also include an acknowledgment from the ethics officer that he/she has reviewed the disclosure and the chief procurement officer's determination. 
(g)  Nothing in this section is intended to waive any ethical obligations which are imposed upon employees and officials of the city in article VII of the Atlanta City Code of Ordinances. 
(h)  Continuing obligations of contractors. Any offeror or contractor required to provide the disclosures provided in this section shall provide a new and updated (if appropriate) disclosure form to the chief procurement officer prior to and as a condition of any renewal of a contract pursuant to section 2-2-1205. Furthermore, a contractor has a continuing obligation to provide disclosures required in this section to the city during the term of any contract in the event of any changes to any responses, information or disclosures provided pursuant to this section in connection with the initial award or execution of a contract. 
( Ord. No. 2013-61(13-O-1299), § 2, 11-27-13 ; Ord. No. 2017-23(17-O-1182), § 1, 5-1-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-78(17-O-1690), § 2, 11-29-17 ) 
Secs. 2-1215—2-1235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 2-1236. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Brand name or equal specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers to describe the standard of quality, performance and other salient characteristics needed to meet city requirements and which provides for the submission of equivalent products. 
Brand name specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers. 
Specification means any description of the physical or functional characteristics or of the nature of a supply, service or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing or preparing a supply, service or construction item for delivery. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 5, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1237. - Duties of chief procurement officer. 
For purposes of this division, the chief procurement officer shall cause to be prepared by using agencies specifications for supplies, services and construction required. The chief procurement officer shall issue, revise, maintain and monitor specifications for supplies, services and construction required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 5, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1238. - Relationship with using agencies. 
Under this article, the chief procurement officer shall obtain expert advice and assistance from personnel of using agencies in the development of specifications and in the development of an approved list of supplies, services or construction items described by model or catalogue numbers, which, prior to competitive solicitation, the city has determined will meet the applicable specification requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 5, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1239. - Maximum practicable competition. 
All specifications under this article shall be drafted so as to promote overall economy for the purposes intended and to encourage maximum free and open competition in satisfying the city's needs and shall not be unduly restrictive. The policy enunciated in this division applies to all specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 5, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1240. - Brand name specification. 
(a)  Use. Under this article, brand name specification may be used only when the chief procurement officer makes a written determination that only the identified brand name item will satisfy the city's needs. 
(b)  Competition. The chief procurement officer shall seek to identify sources from which the designated brand name item can be obtained and shall solicit such sources to achieve whatever degree of price competition is practicable. If only one source can supply the requirement, the procurement shall be made under section 2-1191. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 5, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1241. - Brand name or equal specification. 
(a)  Use. Under this article, brand name or equal specification may be used when the chief procurement officer determines in writing that: 
(1)  No other design or performance specification or qualified products list is available; 
(2)  Time does not permit the preparation of another form of purchase description, not including a brand name specification; 
(3)  The nature of the product or the nature of the city's requirements makes use of a brand name or equal specification suitable for the procurement; or 
(4)  Use of a brand name or equal specification is in the city's best interest; 
provided that the chief procurement officer determines that the essential characteristics of the brand name included in the specifications are commonly known in the industry or trade. Brand name or equal specifications shall include a description of the particular design, function or performance characteristics that are required. 
(b)  Designation of several brand names. Brand name or equal specifications shall seek to designate three or as many different brands as are practicable, as "or equal" references, and shall further state that substantially equivalent products to those designated will be considered for award. 
(c)  Nonrestrictive use of brand name or equal specifications. When a brand name or equal specification is used in a solicitation, the solicitation shall contain explanatory language that the use of a brand name is for the purpose of describing the standard of quality, performance and characteristics desired and is not intended to limit or restrict competition. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 5, 12-15-09) 
Secs. 2-1242—2-1265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PROCUREMENT OF CONSTRUCTION, ARCHITECT-ENGINEER AND LAND SURVEYING SERVICES 

Sec. 2-1266. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Architect-engineer and land surveying services means those professional services within the scope of the practice of architecture, professional engineering, land surveying, landscape architecture and interior design pertaining to construction, as defined by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 6, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1267. - Responsibility for selection of methods of construction-related services. 
Under this article, the using agency, at the time the construction project is being developed, shall provide the chief procurement officer and the office charged with monitoring capital projects with information for the scheduling of the project and, if necessary, for the method of selection of architect-engineer and land surveying services, construction services and construction management of the project. In determining which method to use for the selection of architect-engineering and land surveying services, construction services and construction management, the chief procurement officer shall consider the city's requirements, its resources and the potential contractor's capabilities. The methods chosen shall be those which are most advantageous to the city and which will result in the most timely, economical and successful completion of the construction project. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 6, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1268. - Contract administration. 
Under this article, the chief procurement officer, with the assistance of the using agency and other appropriate city agencies, shall establish the standards for a contract administration system designed to ensure that a contractor is performing in accordance with the solicitation under which the contract is awarded and the terms and conditions of the contract. Such system shall require the inclusion of receiving reports from all appropriate agencies in the contract file. Subsequent to the execution of the contract the using agency shall initiate and co-ordinate the preconstruction/work conference with all necessary city agencies, and thereafter issue a notice to proceed to the contractor with copies to the department of procurement, office of contract compliance and the department of finance/accounts payable manager. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 6, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1269. - Bid security for construction contracts. 
(a)  Required. Under this article, bid security shall be required for all competitive sealed bidding for construction contracts when the price is estimated by the chief procurement officer to exceed $20,000.00. Bid security shall be a bond provided by a surety company authorized to do business in the state by the Georgia Insurance Commissioner or shall be the equivalent in cash or a certified check or shall be otherwise supplied in a form satisfactory to the city. Nothing in this subsection prevents the requirement of such bonds on construction contracts under $20,000.00 when the circumstances warrant. 
(b)  Amount. Bid security shall be in an amount equal to at least five percent of the amount of the bid. Unsuccessful offerors shall be entitled to the return of the bid security. Upon failure of a successful offeror to enter into a contract within ten days after the city tenders the proposed contract, the offeror shall forfeit the bid security. 
(c)  Rejection of bids for noncompliance. When the invitation for bids requires security, the bid shall be rejected if the chief procurement officer determines that it fails to comply in a substantial manner with the security requirements. 
(d)  Withdrawal of bids. After the bids are opened, they shall be irrevocable for the period specified in the invitation for bids, except as provided in subsection 2-1188(i). If an offeror is permitted to withdraw a bid before award, no action shall be had against the offeror or bid security. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 6, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1270. - Contract performance and payment bonds for construction contracts. 
(a)  Required, amounts. When a construction contract is awarded in excess of $20,000.00, the following bonds or security shall be delivered to the city and shall become binding on the parties upon the execution of the contract: 
(1)  A performance bond satisfactory to the city, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state by the Georgia Insurance Commissioner or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the city, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract; and 
(2)  A payment bond satisfactory to the city, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state by the Georgia Insurance Commissioner or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the city, for the protection of all persons supplying labor and material to the contractor or subcontractors for the performance of the work provided for in the contract, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract. 
(b)  Reduction or waiver of bond. The chief procurement officer is authorized to reduce or waive performance and payment bonds for contracts for $20,000.00 or less, when a written determination is made that it is in the best interests of the city to do so. Nothing in this subsection prevents the requirement of such bonds on construction contracts for $20,000.00 or less when the chief procurement officer determines that the circumstances warrant. 
(c)  Authority to require additional bonds. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the chief procurement officer to require other security in addition to those bonds or in circumstances other than those specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(d)  Right to institute suit on payment bond; jurisdiction and time limits for suits upon payment bonds. The right to institute suit and jurisdiction and time limits for suits upon payment bonds provided under this section will be governed by the provisions of Title 13, Chapter, 10, Article 1, P. 4 of the Georgia Code. 
[(e)  Reserved. ] 
(f)  Retention. 
(1)  Maximum amount withheld. In any contract for construction which provides for progress payments in installments based upon an estimated percentage of completion with a percentage of the contract's proceeds to be retained by the city pending completion of the contract, the retained amount of each progress payment or installment shall be no more than ten percent. 
(2)  Release of retained funds. Funds held by the city as retainage under the contract shall be released to the contractor as specified in the contract. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 6, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1271. - Bond forms and copies. 
(a)  Forms. The form of payment and performance bonds under this division shall be required by the chief procurement officer, in consultation with the city attorney. The chief procurement officer shall designate the bond forms to be used for a particular contract. 
(b)  Copies. Any person may request and obtain from the city a copy of the bond form upon payment of the cost of reproduction and postage. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 6, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1272. - Procurement of architect-engineer and land surveying services. 
Architect-engineer and land surveying services shall be procured as provided in section 2-1193, except as provided in sections 2-1191 and 2-1192. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 6, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1273. - Wage requirements for construction contracts. 
(a)  Generally. Under this article, unless otherwise required or if federally assisted, when a construction project exceeds the sum of $10,000.00, the prevailing wages paid shall correspond as nearly as practicable to the prevailing wages required in the federal Davis Bacon Act. Such scale of wages to be paid shall be posted by the contractor in a prominent and easily accessible place at the site of work. 
(b)  Availability of wage schedule for offerors. The chief procurement officer shall make available to potential offerors a schedule of prevailing wages. Such schedule shall be established on January 1 of each year for bids to be opened in the months of February, March and April; on April 1 for bids to be opened in the months of May, June and July; on July 1 for bids to be opened in the months of August, September and October; and on October 1 for bids to be opened in the months of November, December and January. 
(c)  Statement in invitation for bids. As applicable, the chief procurement officer shall include a statement of the general requirements of this section in each invitation for bids. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 6, 12-15-09) 
Secs. 2-1274—2-1290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CONTRACT CLAUSES AND THEIR ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 2-1291. - Responsibilities and rights of parties to contract. 
Each city contract for goods or services shall include provisions necessary to define the responsibilities and rights of the parties to the contract. The chief procurement officer, after consultation with the city attorney, shall issue appropriate contract clauses addressing at least the following subjects, to the extent appropriate for the particular contract: 
(1)  The unilateral right of the city to order changes in writing to the requirements for goods or services within the general scope of the contract; 
(2)  The unilateral right of the city to order in writing a temporary suspension or delay to the provision of goods or services that does not alter the scope of the contract; 
(3)  Responsibilities for performance and payment associated with variations occurring between estimated quantities of goods or services in a contract and actual quantities; 
(4)  Defective pricing; 
(5)  Liquidated damages and service level credits; 
(6)  Specified excuses for delay or nonperformance; 
(7)  Termination of the contract for default; 
(8)  Termination of the contract, in whole or in part, for the convenience of the city; 
(9)  Site conditions differing from those indicated in the contract or ordinarily encountered in similar situations; and 
(10)  An acknowledgement by all parties contracting with the city as follows: 
"Contractor acknowledges that this contract and any changes to it by amendment, modification, change order or other similar document may have required or may require the legislative authorization of the City's Council and approval of the Mayor. Under Georgia law, Contractor is deemed to possess knowledge concerning the City's ability to assume contractual obligations and the consequences of Contractor's provision of goods or services to the City under an unauthorized contract, amendment, modification, change order or other similar document, including the possibility that the Contractor may be precluded from recovering payment for such unauthorized goods or services. Accordingly, Contractor agrees that if it provides goods or services to the City under a contract that has not received proper legislative authorization or if the Contractor provides goods or services to the City in excess of the any contractually authorized goods or services, as required by the City's Charter and Code, the City may withhold payment for any unauthorized goods or services provided by Contractor. Contractor assumes all risk of non-payment for the provision of any unauthorized goods or services to the City, and it waives all claims to payment or to other remedies for the provision of any unauthorized goods or services to the City, however characterized, including, without limitation, all remedies at law or equity." 
This acknowledgement shall be a mandatory provision in all city contracts for goods and services, except revenue producing contracts. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 7, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1292. - Emergencies resulting in potential increased costs; contract modifications and change orders. 
(a)  Authority of chief procurement officer. The chief procurement officer may execute contract modifications or change orders that involve an increase to the financial amount of the contract in the following two cases: 
(1)  When the chief procurement officer, in consultation with the chief financial officer and the using agency, determines in writing that the total cumulative cost of all contract modifications or change orders do not exceed ten percent of the total "not to exceed" cost originally authorized for the contract and the following conditions are met: 
a.  The chief procurement officer, in consultation with the chief financial officer and the using agency, makes a written determination that the contract modification or change order cannot be delayed pending approval of the mayor and city council without substantial delay and cost to the city. In the event that such written determination is made, all members of city council will be provided a copy of such written determination prior to the execution of the contract modification or change order; and 
b.  The chief financial officer verifies the availability of funds therefore; and 
(2)  When appropriate legislation is adopted by the city council and approved by the mayor authorizing the contract modification or change order and appropriating funds therefore and the chief financial officer verifies the availability of such funds. 
(b)  Modifications exceeding ten percent. When the cumulative dollar amount for all contract modifications and change orders exceeds ten percent of the total "not to exceed" cost authorized for the contract, all subsequent contract modifications or change orders that involve additional cost to the city shall be approved by the city council and mayor. 
(c)  [ Determination of cumulative dollar amount. ] In determining whether the cumulative dollar amount for all contract modifications and change orders exceeds ten percent of the contract amount of a multi-term contract, contract amounts authorized during each term of the multi-term contract shall be cumulated and compared to the cumulative dollar amount for all contract modifications and change orders issued since the inception of the multi-term contract. 
(d)  Unilateral change orders, change orders, contract modifications, miscellaneous modifications or similar documents involving no additional cost to the city. Unilateral change orders, change orders, contract modifications, miscellaneous modifications or similar documents involving no additional cost to the city, including, but not limited to, documents changing contract performance periods or milestones, reallocating monies among contract line items, adding work or services within the general scope of the contract to be paid out of allowance items originally authorized in the contract, deleting scope from the contract, may be executed by the chief procurement officer, the head of the affected using agency or any of their designees. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 7, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1293. - Price adjustments. 
Adjustments in price in contracts shall be computed in one or more of the following ways: 
(1)  By agreement on a fixed price adjustment before commencement of the pertinent performance or as soon thereafter as practicable; 
(2)  By unit prices specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon; 
(3)  By the costs attributable to the events or situations under such clauses with adjustment of profit or fee, all as specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon; and 
(4)  In such other manner as the contracting parties may mutually agree upon. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 7, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1294. - Patents. 
Under this article, if a contract involving research, development, experimental or demonstration work is funded by the city, the contract shall include provisions giving notice to the contractor that the city shall have the right to any discovery, invention or patent arising out of the contract and requiring the contractor to include a similar provision in all subcontracts involving research, development, experimental or demonstration work. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 7, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1295. - Copyrights and rights in data. 
Under this article, if a contract is being funded by the city, the contract shall include a provision giving the contractor notice that the city shall have the right to any plans, drawings, specifications, computer programs, technical reports, operating manuals and similar work products developed and paid for under the contract. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 7, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1296. - Provision of subcontracting data. 
(a)  Any actual offeror awarded a contract under section 2-1188, section 2-1188.1, section 21189, section 2-1191, section 2-1191.1, or section 2-1192 on or after January 1, 2010 shall be required to submit, on an annual basis, information on its use of all subcontractors on all contracts held by the actual offeror to the office of contract compliance as follows, on a form prescribed by the chief procurement officer. This form shall be due to the chief procurement officer at the time of final execution of the awarded contract and, thereafter, by March 31 of each following calendar years, containing such information for the prior calendar year. However, no information shall be required to be provided under this section prior to March 31, 2011. Such information shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  The actual offeror's name, address, phone number, federal tax identification number, a primary contact, City of Atlanta contract names or numbers awarded to the actual offeror, and City of Atlanta contract amounts awarded to the actual offeror; 
(2)  All subcontracts with a value exceeding $1,000.00 entered into or maintained by the actual offeror on all contracts within the state of Georgia within the past year; and 
(3)  With respect to each such subcontract, the subcontractor's name, address, contact person, phone number, type of work, the approximate total value of the subcontract, the approximate amount paid to the subcontractor to date, and whether the subcontract was pursuant to a public project or a private project. 
(b)  Any actual offeror that submits a bid or proposal in response to a solicitation under section 2-1188, section 2-1188.1, section 2-1189, section 2-1191, section 2-1191.1, or section 2-1192 is encouraged to submit, along with its bid or proposal documents, the information described in subsection (a). An actual offeror that submitted such information in compliance with subsection (a) on or before the previous March 31 should not submit this information along with its bid or proposal documents. 
(c)  Penalties for noncompliance. An actual offeror who fails to comply with subsection (a), and whose failure to comply continues for a period of 60 calendar days after the contractor receives written notice of such noncompliance from the chief procurement officer, shall be subject to any or all of the following penalties: 
(1)  Withholding of ten percent of all future payments on all contracts actual offeror has with the city until the chief procurement officer determines that the contractor is in compliance with this section. 
(2)  Refusal of all future contracts or subcontracts with the city for a minimum of one year and a maximum of five years from the date upon which this penalty is imposed pursuant to the provisions contained in division 16 herein. 
(d)  Waiver of penalties. The chief procurement officer shall have the authority, in his or her sole discretion, to waive for good cause the requirements of subsection (a) or any penalties set forth in subsection (d). 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 7, 12-15-09) 
Secs. 2-1297—2-1325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SUPPLY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-1326. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Excess supplies means any supplies other than expendable supplies having a remaining useful life but which are no longer required by the using agency in possession of the supplies. 
Expendable supplies means all tangible supplies other than nonexpendable supplies. 
Nonexpendable supplies means all tangible supplies having an original acquisition cost of over $100.00 per unit and a probable useful life of more than one year. 
Supplies means supplies owned by the city. 
Surplus supplies means any supplies, other than expendable supplies, no longer having any use to the city. This includes obsolete supplies, scrap materials and nonexpendable supplies that have completed their useful life cycle. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 8, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1327. - Duties of chief procurement officer; policies and procedures; requirements of using agencies. 
(a)  Duties of chief procurement officer. Under this division, the chief procurement officer shall be responsible for: 
(1)  The sale, lease or disposal of surplus supplies by public auction, competitive sealed bidding or other appropriate method in the best interests of the city, provided that no employee of the owning or disposing using agency shall be entitled to purchase such supplies; and 
(2)  The transfer of excess supplies to using agencies of the city. 
(b)  Policies and procedures. Consistent with this article, the chief procurement officer shall adopt operational procedures relating to supplies owned by the city during their entire life cycle. These procedures shall be set forth in a purchasing and real estate manual and shall promote the objectives of city supply management, which include preventing waste, continuing utilization of supplies and obtaining a fair return of value upon disposal of supplies. The procedures adopted shall provide for inspection, testing, warehousing, inventory and effective transfer and disposition of supplies. 
(c)  Requirements of using agencies. No using agency shall transfer, sell, trade in or otherwise dispose of supplies owned by the city without written authorization of the chief procurement officer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 8, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1328. - Quality assurance, inspection and testing. 
Under this article, the chief procurement officer, in consultation with the using agency, shall ascertain or verify that supplies, services, construction or professional and consultant services procured for the city conform to specifications. The chief procurement officer may establish inspection or testing facilities, employ inspection personnel, enter into arrangements for the joint or cooperative use of inspection and testing facilities and contract with others for inspection and testing work as needed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 8, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1329. - Inventory management. 
Under this article, the chief procurement officer, in conjunction with the director, bureau of general services, as appropriate, shall exercise general supervision of all inventory of supplies, whether warehoused or in use, belonging to the city or any of its agencies. The using agency, however, shall maintain an inventory of supplies under its control. All warehouses and similar storage areas shall be inventoried at least annually by each using agency, a written report of which shall be submitted to the commissioner of administrative services. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 8, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1330. - Warehousing and storage. 
Under this article, the chief procurement officer, in conjunction with the director, bureau of general services, as appropriate, shall exercise general supervision of any receiving, storage and distribution facilities and services of the city maintained and operated by the department of procurement or using agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 8, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1331. - Excess supplies. 
Under this article, using agencies shall notify the chief procurement officer, as necessary, of all excess supplies. The chief procurement officer shall transfer excess supplies to other city agencies as determined by need and in accordance with operational procedures adopted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 8, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1332. - Disposition of surplus supplies. 
(a)  Generally. Unless otherwise provided in this article, the chief procurement officer shall dispose of any supplies owned by the city, upon the recommendation of and after consultation with the using agency, as provided in this division. Surplus supplies that have an estimated value in excess of $500.00 shall be offered through competitive sealed bids and public auction. Surplus supplies that have an estimated value of $500.00 or less may be offered by established markets, posted prices or by any other means advantageous to the city. The chief procurement officer shall determine the estimated value of the surplus property to be sold. Notwithstanding this subsection, the chief procurement officer may exchange or trade in surplus supplies with another property owner if such exchange or trade is deemed to be in the best interests of the city. 
(b)  Competitive sealed bidding. 
(1)  Solicitation and opening. When making sales of surplus supplies by competitive sealed bidding, notice of the sale shall be given by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation at least once no less than 15 nor more than 60 days before the date set for receipt of bids. Notice may also be given by mailing an invitation for sale bids to prospective offerors, including those offerors on lists maintained for this purpose, and by making invitation for sale bids publicly available. The invitation for sale bids shall list the supplies offered for sale, designate their location and how they may be inspected and state the terms and conditions of sale and instructions to offerors, including the place, date and time for bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly. 
(2)  Award. Award shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the invitation for sale bids to the highest responsible offeror, provided that the price offered by such offeror is acceptable to the chief procurement officer. If such price is not acceptable, the chief procurement officer may reject the bids in whole or in part and negotiate the sale, provided the negotiated sale price is higher than the highest responsive and responsible offeror's price, or the chief procurement officer may resolicit bids. 
(c)  Auctions. Supplies may be sold at public auction. Notice of such auction shall be given by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation at least once no less than 15 nor more than 60 days before the day of the auction. When appropriate, an experienced auctioneer should be used to cry the sale and assist in preparation of the sale. The notice shall contain a general description of the property to be sold, all the terms and conditions of the sale, that a deposit may be required in order to participate in the bidding, that the purchaser must remove within a stated time all surplus supplies purchased and that the city retains the right to reject any and all bids. 
(d)  Established markets, posted prices and trade-in. Surplus supplies which have an estimated value of $500.00 or less may be sold in established markets where such supplies, including but not limited to livestock and produce, are regularly sold in wholesale lots and prices are set by open competition. Surplus supplies may be sold at posted prices as determined by the chief procurement officer, provided that such prices are based on fair market value and the sale is conducted pursuant to procedures established under this division. Surplus supplies may be traded in only when the chief procurement officer determines that the trade-in value is expected to exceed the value estimated to be obtained through the sale or other disposition of such supplies. 
(e)  Payment for surplus supplies. Only United States postal money orders, certified checks and cashier's checks shall be accepted for sales of surplus property, except cash or a personal check may be accepted for petty cash sales of less than $100.00. A copy of all sales notices or invoices shall be sent to the chief financial officer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 8, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1333. - Disposition of proceeds of sale, lease or disposal. 
Upon completion of sale, lease or disposal of surplus or excess property owned by the city as provided in this division, the chief procurement officer shall notify the chief financial officer in writing, which notice shall contain, as a minimum, a description of the property sold, the inventory control number, the amount for which the article was sold and the using agency in which the property was used. The chief financial officer shall make the necessary corrections to the inventory of the city. The chief procurement officer shall pay the proceeds of such sale, lease or disposal of property owned by the city to the chief financial officer, as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 8, 12-15-09) 
Secs. 2-1334—2-1355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - SMALL BUSINESS ENTERPRISE OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-1356. - Short title. 
This division shall be known as the "City of Atlanta's Small Business Opportunity Program." 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1357. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this, division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Affiliates: OCC shall consider all affiliates of a business enterprise in determining whether the business enterprise qualifies for SBE status. In general, concerns and entities are affiliates of each other when one controls or has the power to control the other, or a third party or parties controls or has the power to control both. It does not matter whether control is exercised, so long as the power to control exists. The determination whether two or more business enterprises are affiliates shall follow the guidelines regarding affiliation as set forth in 13 C.F.R. § 121.103, as amended. 
Atlanta Region shall mean the geographical area consisting of Barrow, Bartow, Carroll, Cherokee, Clayton, Cobb, Coweta, DeKalb, Douglas, Fayette, Forsyth, Fulton, Gwinnett, Henry, Newton, Paulding, Pickens, Rockdale, Spalding, and Walton counties. 
Bid shall mean a quotation, proposal, sealed bid or offer to perform or provide labor, materials, supplies or services to the city for a price on an eligible project, or for an eligible project that generates revenue for the city. 
Bidder shall mean any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, or corporation that submits a bid to the city. 
City shall mean the City of Atlanta. 
Commercially useful function: For the purpose of determining whether a business enterprise is performing a commercially useful function, upon a challenge to the SBE status pursuant to section 2-1365, OCC shall consider all of the facts in the record, viewed as a whole, including without limitation the following: 
(1)  A SBE performs a commercially useful function when it is responsible for execution of the work of the contract and is carrying out its responsibilities by actually performing, managing, and supervising the work involved. 
(2)  To perform a commercially useful function, the SBE must be responsible, with respect to material and supplies used on the contract, for negotiating price, determining quality and quantity, ordering the material, and installing (where applicable) and paying for the material itself. 
(3)  A SBE does not perform a commercially useful function if its role is limited to that of an extra participant in a transaction, contract, or project through which funds are passed in order to obtain the appearance of SBE participation. 
Contractor shall mean a prime contractor or vendor on a city contract. 
Control or controlled: For the purpose of determining whether the owner or owners of a potential SBE (as used in this definition, "SBE-owner", which shall denote one or more owners) controls the potential SBE, upon a challenge to the SBE status pursuant to section 2-1365, OCC shall consider all of the facts in the record, viewed as a whole, including without limitation the following: 
(1)  For a SBE-owner to be deemed to control the potential SBE, the potential SBE must be independent. An independent business enterprise is a business whose viability does not depend on its relationship with another firm or firms. 
(a)  In determining whether a potential SBE is independent, OCC will scrutinize the SBE's relationships with other firms, in such areas as personnel, facilities, equipment, financial and/or bonding support, and other resources. 
(b)  OCC will consider whether present or recent employer/employee relationships between the SBE-owner and other firms or persons associated with other firms compromise the independence of the potential SBE. 
(c)  OCC will examine the potential SBE's relationships with prime contractors to determine whether a pattern of exclusive or primary dealings with a prime contractor compromises the independence of the potential SBE. 
(d)  In considering factors related to the independence of a potential SBE, OCC will consider the consistency of relationships between the potential SBE and other firms with normal industry practice. 
(2)  A potential SBE must not be subject to any formal or informal restrictions which limit the customary discretion of the SBE-owner. There can be no restrictions through corporate charter provisions, by-law provisions, contracts or any other formal or informal devices (e.g., cumulative voting rights, voting powers attached to different classes of stock, employment contracts, requirements for concurrence by persons other than the SBE-owner, conditions precedent or subsequent, executory agreements, voting trusts, restrictions on or assignments of voting rights) that prevent the SBE-owner, without the cooperation or vote of any other individual, from making any business decision of the business enterprise. This paragraph does not preclude a spousal co-signature on documents. 
(3)  The SBE-owner must possess the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of the business enterprise and to make day-to-day as well as long-term decisions on matters of management, policy and operations. 
(a)  A SBE-owner must hold the highest officer position in the company (e.g., chief executive officer or president). 
(b)  In a corporation, the SBE-owner must control the board of directors. 
(c)  In a partnership, the SBE-owner must serve as a general partner, with control over all partnership decisions. 
(4)  Individuals who are not the SBE-owner may be involved in an SBE as owners, managers, employees, stockholders, officers, and/or directors. Such individuals must not, however, possess or exercise the power to control the business enterprise, or be disproportionately responsible for the operation of the business enterprise. 
(5)  The SBE-owner may delegate various areas of the management, policymaking, or daily operations of the business enterprise to other participants in the firm. Such delegations of authority must be revocable, and the SBE-owner must retain the power to hire and fire any person to whom such authority is delegated. The managerial role of the SBE-owner in the business enterprise's overall affairs must be such that OCC can reasonably conclude that the SBE-owner actually exercises control over the business enterprise's operations, management, and policy. 
(6)  The SBE-owner must have an overall understanding of, and managerial and technical competence and experience directly related to the type of business in which the business enterprise is engaged and the business enterprise's operations. The SBE-owner is not required to have experience or expertise in every critical area of the business enterprise's operations, or to have greater experience or expertise in a given field than managers or key employees. The SBE-owner must have the ability to intelligently and critically evaluate information presented by other participants in the business enterprise's activities and to use this information to make independent decisions concerning the business enterprise's daily operations, management, and policymaking. Generally, expertise limited to office management, administration, or bookkeeping functions unrelated to the principal business activities of the business enterprise is insufficient to demonstrate control. 
(7)  If state or local law requires the owner of a particular type of firm to have a particular license or other credential, then the SBE-owner of that type of firm must possess the required license or credential in order to be deemed in control. If state or local law does not require an owner to have such a license or credential, OCC will not deny certification solely on the ground that the SBE-owner lacks the license or credential. However, OCC may take into account the absence of the license or credential as one factor in determining whether the SBE-owner actually controls the firm. 
(8)  OCC may consider differences in remuneration between the SBE-owner and other participants in the business enterprise in determining whether the SBE-owner controls the business enterprise. 
Such consideration shall be in the context of the duties of the persons involved, normal industry practices, the business enterprise's policy and practice concerning reinvestment of income, and any other explanations for the differences proffered by the business enterprise. OCC may determine that a business enterprise is controlled by its SBE-owner although the SBE-owner's remuneration is lower than that of some other participants in the business enterprise. In a case where someone other than the SBE-owner formerly controlled the business enterprise, and the SBE-owner now controls it, OCC may consider a difference between the remuneration of the former and current owner of the business enterprise as a factor in determining who controls the business enterprise, particularly when the former owner remains involved with the business enterprise and continues to receive greater compensation than the current SBE-owner. 
(9)  In order to be viewed as controlling a business enterprise, an SBE-owner cannot engage in outside employment or other business interests that conflict with the management of the business enterprise or prevent the SBE-owner from devoting sufficient time and attention to the affairs of the business enterprise to control its activities. For example, absentee ownership of a business and part- time work in a fulltime firm are not viewed as constituting control. However, an SBE-owner could be viewed as controlling a part-time business that operates only on evenings and/or weekends, if the SBE-owner controls the business enterprise when it is operating. 
(10)  An SBE-owner may control a business enterprise even though one or more of the SBE-owner's immediate family members participate in the business enterprise as a manager, employee, owner, or in another capacity. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, OCC must make a judgment about the control the SBE-owner exercises vis-a-vis other persons involved in the business enterprise as it does in other situations, without regard to whether or not the other persons are immediate family members. If OCC cannot determine that the SBE-owner—as distinct from the family as a whole-controls the business enterprise, then the SBE-owner has failed to carry her/his burden of proof concerning control, even though s/he may participate significantly in the business enterprise's activities. 
Day or days shall refer to calendar days. 
Eligible project shall mean: Any city contract as described in section 2-1188 and section 2-1189 or as identified by the director of the office of contract compliance, excluding sole source procurement under section 2-1191, special procurement under section 2-1191.1, emergency procurement under section 2-1192, and contracts governed by 49 CFR Parts 23 and 26. 
Joint venture shall mean an association of two or more persons, partnerships, corporations, or any combination of them, established to carry on a single business activity that is limited in scope and duration. The agreement establishing the joint venture, partnership or other multi-entity relationship shall be in writing. Further, participation in a joint venture shall be based on the sharing of real economic interest in the venture and shall include proportionate control over management, interest in capital acquired by the joint venture and interest in earnings. 
Office of contract compliance (OCC) shall mean the Mayor's Office of Contract Compliance in the City of Atlanta. 
Small business enterprise (SBE) shall mean a firm located in the Atlanta Region which is an independent and continuing enterprise for profit, performing a commercially useful function, for which the gross revenues or number of employees, inclusive of any Affiliates as defined by 13 C.F.R. Sec. 121.103, does not exceed the size standards as defined pursuant to 13 C.F.R. § 121.201 (as further explained in 13 C.F.R. §§ 121.104 through 121.107), and which has: (1) filed a letter or other documentation from the United States Small Business Administration with OCC that establishes that the firm qualifies as an 8(a) firm or HUBZone firm with the United States Small Business Administration; (2) obtained certification as a disadvantaged business enterprise ("DBE") in the State of Georgia, including any agency or department of the State of Georgia, or the United States Department of Transportation; or (3) submitted evidence to OCC on a form to be prescribed by OCC affirming under penalty of perjury that the business does not exceed the size standards referenced in this definition. 
SBE status shall mean whether a firm meets the qualification criteria of a small business enterprise, as set forth in this division. 
Self-certification shall refer to the provision in the previous version of this Ordinance (Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) which required affirmative representation that a business meets the qualification criteria of a small business enterprise, as set forth in this division, on a form to be prescribed by OCC and filed with OCC affirming under penalty of perjury that the business qualifies as an SBE. Self-certification applies only to SBEs which are self-certified under the prior Ordinance (Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance. Any self-certified SBE must comply with the certification requirements of this Ordinance once the SBE's self-certification expires. 
Supplier shall mean a warehouser or manufacturer of materials, supplies or equipment which contracts directly with a bidder to provide such materials, supplies or equipment on an eligible project which involves a trade or service. For purposes of measuring the total contract dollars awarded or paid to suppliers on eligible projects, only amounts paid to suppliers of goods customarily and ordinarily used based upon standard industry or trade practices shall be counted. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2015-63(15-O-1556), §§ 7—9, 12-16-15 ) 
Sec. 2-1358. - Statement of policy. 
In conjunction with the City of Atlanta's Equal Business Opportunity Program, it is the purpose of this small business opportunity program to promote the economic welfare of the people of the City of Atlanta, to promote full and equal business opportunity for all persons doing business with the City of Atlanta, to promote commerce by assisting SBEs to actively participate in the city's procurement process, and to ensure the City of Atlanta utilizes programs that provide it with the best possible resources. In order to encourage competition, the foundation of the free enterprise system, the City of Atlanta's policy will ensure that a fair proportion of the total purchases and contracts or subcontracts for property, commodities, and services come from small businesses so long as the property, commodities and services of small businesses are competitive as to price and quality. The City of Atlanta has set a goal of 35 percent for the small business opportunity program. This is lower than the availability of SBEs in the marketplace. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2015-63(15-O-1556), § 10, 12-16-15 ) 
Sec. 2-1359. - Duties of the office of contract compliance. 
Under this division, OCC shall have the following authority and duties for the implementation of the small business opportunity program under this division: 
(1)  Administration and enforcement of this division. 
(2)  Establishment of written procedures, informal guidelines, and forms as may be necessary to effectuate this division. 
(3)  Monitoring compliance with the requirements of this division. 
(4)  Certification of businesses as SBEs in accordance with the standards set forth in this division. 
(5)  Development of a database of certified SBE's to be maintained as a public record of certified SBEs. 
(6)  Investigation of alleged violations of this division, and the issuance of written statements following any determination of such investigation, stating the reasons therefore and any penalty to be imposed. 
(7)  Collaborating with the various city departments to ensure maximum outreach to SBEs. 
(8)  Determination of whether any of the penalties set forth in section [2-1373] should be applied to a business. 
(9)  Attendance at pre-bid, pre-proposal, pre-construction and pre-work conferences. 
(10)  Provision to business entities of all forms, applications, documents and papers necessary to comply with this division. 
(11)  Provision of information to potential bidders, upon request by the potential bidder, which shall include names and contact information of certified SBEs, to reinforce and support outreach efforts by potential bidders. 
(12)  Notification by certified mail that a bidder who has bid on and who otherwise would have been awarded a contract has the right to appeal a determination of noncompliance with this division, said appeal to be determined by a contract compliance hearing officer, as provided in section [2-1367], within seven calendar days of receipt of the notice of noncompliance. 
(13)  Notification by certified mail that a challenge has been made to an applicant's SBE status, said challenge to be determined by OCC. 
(14)  Notification by certified mail that OCC has upheld a challenge to an applicant's SBE status and that the SBE status has been revoked, noting that the SBE has the right to appeal such determination, said appeal to be determined by a contract compliance hearing officer, as provided in section [2-1367] within seven calendar days of receipt of the notice of decertification. 
(15)  Notification to the chief procurement officer of any determination of noncompliance with this division, and of any appeal from any such determination. 
(16)  Monitoring, for data gathering and informational purposes, utilization of SBEs on eligible projects. 
(17)  Maintenance of documents, forms, records or data regarding this program as provided in this division, including: (a) documents, forms, records or data regarding the dollar amounts subcontracted to or expended for services performed by subcontractors and suppliers on eligible projects, including the SBE status of each subcontractor and supplier; and (b) documents, forms, records or data regarding certified SBEs. 
(18)  Development and implementation of outreach and assistance programs to promote equal contracting opportunities for all businesses that wish to do business with the city, regardless of SBE status. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2015-63(15-O-1556), § 11, 12-16-15 ) 
Sec. 2-1360. - Small business assistance. 
The office of contract compliance may act as a resource for information on small business enterprises. The office of contract compliance may also undertake to raise the consciousness of SBEs about city business opportunities and provide information on taking advantage of the program benefits. Further, the office of contract compliance may provide the following assistance to small business enterprises: 
(1)  Access to training—Technical assistance. The office of contract compliance may act as a resource for technical assistance. The office may collect, organize and disseminate information regarding available technical assistance providers in the Atlanta Market Area. 
(2)  Capital—Financing assistance. The office of contract compliance may act as a resource for financial assistance. The office may collect, organize and disseminate information regarding available capital or financing sources; and may coordinate the development of programs with existing service providers in the Atlanta Region. 
(3)  Bonding assistance. The office of contract compliance may provide SBEs with information regarding bonding including, providing a list of qualified service providers that supply bonding services; and may coordinate the development of programs with existing service providers in the Atlanta Region. 
(4)  Access to markets. The office of contract compliance may work to facilitate access to markets for SBEs. The office of contract compliance may work with the Atlanta Development Authority and other development entities to connect eligible businesses to city, state and federal programs that promote investment and encourage employment, including but not limited to, the various hub zone, enterprise zone, and tax allocation districts. The office of contract compliance may monitor SBE involvement in procurement opportunities generated by the Atlanta Development Authority. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1361. - City-maintained records and reports. 
The effectiveness of this program will be measured by a review of data indicating prime, subcontractor and supplier awards to SBEs. Program effectiveness measurements will also include efforts by the City of Atlanta staff to provide prime contracting opportunities for SBEs. In order to ensure the effective tracking of these efforts, the following shall be done: 
(1)  Each contractor shall continuously maintain, compile, and provide to the office of contract compliance, annual information relating to its use of SBEs on the city project. This information shall include without limitation the following information for each of the SBE subcontractors and suppliers utilized by the contractor on the city project: a description of the categories of contracts awarded to SBEs; the dollar value of contracts awarded to SBEs; and contact information for the SBEs. Additionally, the contractor shall provide information regarding its progress toward attaining the SBE goal on the city project. 
(2)  Within 30 days after the end of a contract in which there was an SBE goal, each contractor shall provide the office of contract compliance with a report that summarizes the information provided pursuant to subsection 2-1361 (1) above, including without limitation: the identity of and contact information for each SBE to whom the contractor has awarded a subcontract or supplier agreement; the type of work performed or supplies provided by each subcontractor/supplier; the dollar value of each of the subcontracts/supplier agreements; and the total percentage of the value of the city contract subcontracted to SBE subcontractors and/or suppliers. 
(3)  The office of contract compliance will submit annual SBE development reports to the council. These reports shall include an analysis of the total dollar value of city contracts/subcontracts awarded to SBEs during the preceding year, categorized by prime contracting dollars, subcontracting dollars, and supplier dollars. The percentage of the total dollar value of these contracts that was awarded to SBEs during the preceding year shall also be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1362. - Small business enterprise program goals and counting procedures. 
(a)  The director of the office of contract compliance will set an SBE subcontracting goal of up to 35 percent for each specific prime contract with subcontracting and/or supplier possibilities subject to the small business enterprise program, but shall have the authority to reduce or eliminate such SBE goal on a contract-by contract basis based upon the type of contract, the type of subcontracting work that will be required, and the availability of SBE's therefore. This goal is based on the statistical data cited in section 2-1358. Every bidder on an eligible project shall be required to submit, with its Bid submission, the names, address, certification numbers, if applicable, of certified SBEs or firms that have applied for SBE certification at the time of the bid submission, and any other information required by the office of contract compliance as set forth in the project's solicitation documents. 
(b)  Sheltered market. The director of the office of contract compliance in consultation with the chief procurement officer will designate certain procurements as sheltered market procurement opportunities. 
(1)  Contracts between $20,000.00 and $100,000.00. Under the sheltered market program, any contract or purchase order for supplies, services and construction (except those contracts pertaining to municipal street systems as described by O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq. and purchases under subsection 2-1190(b) of the procurement code) made in accordance with the small purchase procedures of subsection 2-1190(a) of the procurement code shall, where practicable, include at least one SBE among the three businesses solicited to submit quotations. The director of the office of contract compliance and chief procurement officer may agree to exclude any procurement in this category from the sheltered market at their joint discretion. 
(2)  Contracts between $100,000.00 and $25,000,000.00. In addition, the director of the office of contract compliance and chief procurement officer may agree, with consultation and agreement with the commissioner of the user agency or his or her designee, to designate any contract between $100,000.00 and $25,000,000.00 for competition by and between SBEs only, except for those contracts pertaining to municipal street systems, as described in O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq., pertaining to public works construction as described in O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq. or other projects for which a sheltered market would conflict with state law. The sheltered market designation shall be made only when there is a reasonable expectation that bids will be obtained from at least three responsible SBEs and that the award will be made at a fair market price. 
(3)  Partial sheltered market procurements. A sheltered market procurement of a single acquisition or a class of acquisitions may be total or partial. The director of the office of contract compliance and the chief procurement officer may designate a portion of an acquisition as a sheltered market procurement, except for construction. 
(4)  To obtain a sheltered market procurement, an SBE must perform at least a given percentage of the contract. This provision limits the amount of subcontracting an SBE may enter into with other firms when performing these types of contracts. The provisions are as follow: 
a.  Construction: For general and heavy construction contractors, at least 15 percent of the cost of the contract, not including the cost of materials, must be performed by the SBE prime contractor with its own employees. For special trade construction, such as plumbing, electrical, or tile work, this requirement is 25 percent. 
b.  Manufacturing: At least 50 percent of the cost of manufacturing, not including the cost of materials, must be performed by the SBE prime contractor 
c.  Services: At least 50 percent of the contract cost for personnel must be performed by the SBE prime contractor's own employees. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1363. - Certification as a small business enterprise. 
(a)  In order to qualify as an SBE, a business must submit (1) a letter or other documentation from the United States Small Business Administration with OCC that establishes that the firm qualifies as an 8(a) firm or HUBZone firm with the United States Small Business Administration, or (2) a letter or other documentation from the State of Georgia or United States Department of Transportation with OCC that establishes that the firm qualifies as a DBE; or (3) evidence on a form prescribed by OCC, affirming under penalty of perjury that the business qualifies as an SBE as defined in section 2-1357. To the extent that any business qualified as an SBE under the self-certification procedure set forth in prior section 2-1363(a)(2), that business shall remain a certified SBE until the certification expires pursuant to section 2-1364, and thereafter shall be required to seek recertification under section 2-1364 in order to remain "certified". 
(b)  The OCC has the right to audit the certification of any business providing a certification under subsection (a) in order to determine whether the business meets the criteria of a small business enterprise set forth in section 2-1357. If the OCC determines that a business submitted a false certification of its SBE status, the OCC may decertify the business by sending a notice of decertification, and the business may be subject to the penalties set forth in section 2-1366. The SBE may appeal the initial notice of decertification within seven days of the receipt of the initial notice of decertification following the procedures set forth in section 2-1367. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2015-63(15-O-1556), § 12, 12-16-15 ) 
Sec. 2-1364. - Recertification. 
Once certified as an SBE with OCC, the certification is valid for a period of two years from the date of certification. Prior to the expiration of the two-year period and pursuant to regulations issued by OCC, a business that desires to continue to qualify as an SBE must demonstrate its continued eligibility as an SBE under this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2015-63(15-O-1556), § 13, 12-16-15 ) 
Sec. 2-1365. - Challenge to the status of a small business enterprise. 
(a)  Any person, firm, or business can challenge the status of an SBE by filing a challenge on the prescribed form by the OCC with the OCC, subject to potential penalties set forth below. 
(b)  Prior to taking formal action, the city staff shall provide the challenged SBE with written notice of the challenge. During the pendency of the proceeding, the SBE firm's certification shall remain valid. The office of contract compliance staff shall then investigate and prepare a recommendation regarding the challenged SBE status for review and approval by the director of the office of contract compliance. If approved by the director of the office of contract compliance, the office of contract compliance shall issue an initial notice of decertification to the SBE owner by certified mail. The SBE may appeal the initial notice of decertification within seven days of the receipt of the initial notice of decertification following the procedures set forth in section 2-1367. If the SBE owner fails to appeal the initial notice of decertification within the time period set forth in this section, or if the contract compliance hearing officer affirms the office of contract compliance's determination, the decertification shall be final and take effect immediately. 
(c)  If the office of contract compliance decertifies an SBE proposed to work, or currently working on a contract, the decertified SBE's participation on the contract may no longer be counted toward fulfillment of the city's SBE goals. If the contractor no longer meets the city's SBE goals after the decertification of the former SBE, the contractor shall be required, within 30 days after notification by the office of contract compliance, to demonstrate good faith efforts to substitute the decertified SBE. Failure to demonstrate good faith efforts to substitute a decertified SBE will result in the bidder being declared non-responsive, if done prior to the award of the contract, or the contractor being held in default of the contact, if done after the award of the contract. 
(d)  A protest to the status of an SBE will not cause any delays or otherwise affect any pending procurements or the ability of the city to award a particular contract. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1366. - Penalties for false certification. 
(a)  If the OCC determines that a business submitted a false certification of its SBE status, the OCC, in consultation with the chief procurement officer and the city attorney, shall consider suspension or debarment of the business pursuant to the provisions contained in division 16 herein. 
(b)  If a determination is made to suspend or debar the business, OCC shall provide a written notice of the suspension, which shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the contractor. Such notice shall state that: 
(1)  If there is a suspension, the period of the suspension. 
(2)  Bids or proposals will not be solicited from the suspended or debarred contractor, and, if they are received, they will not be considered during the period of suspension. 
(3)  Set forth with particularity the actions of the business that constitute the reasons for disqualification or debarment. 
(c)  Debarment. The business shall be debarred pursuant to the provisions contained in division 16 herein if it is determined that the false certification was made knowingly, willfully or fraudulently. 
(d)  If the OCC determines that a business submitted a false certification of its SBE status, the OCC, in consultation with the chief procurement officer and the city attorney, shall consider referring the matter to appropriate federal, state, or local authorities for consideration of possible criminal violations. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1367. - Appeals. 
(a)  Determination of noncompliance. A responsible bidder that is determined to be nonresponsive to the requirements of this division, and that otherwise would have been awarded a contract, as determined in consultation with the chief procurement officer, shall receive a written determination by the director of the office of contract compliance, via certified mail, setting forth the reasons for the determination of non-responsiveness. 
(b)  Decertification of an SBE Upon a decertification of an SBE, the office of contract compliance shall notify the affected party in writing, via certified mail, setting forth the reasons for the decertification. 
(c)  Time for filing notice of appeal. Any business that has been decertified as an SBE, or against whom a final determination of non-responsiveness to the requirements of this division has been made by the office of contract compliance officer, may appeal the final determination of non-responsiveness or decertification of SBE status by filing a notice of appeal with the director of the office of contract compliance in writing within seven calendar days of receipt of the notice of the final determination of noncompliance or decertification. 
(d)  Posting of appeal security. Any bidder that files an appeal to a final determination of non-responsiveness by the office of contract compliance must, at the time of filing, post security in the amount of one percent of the financial offer of the appellant or, in the event the bid/proposal does not involve a fixed financial offer either in the form of payment of monies to the city or payment of monies to the bidder, $100,000.00, to be tendered in the form of a bond or certified check. If the contract compliance hearing officer upholds the determination of the office of contract compliance, he or she shall assess against the appellant reasonable attorneys' fees and other administrative costs incurred by the city in reviewing and responding to the appeal. If the city is represented by its law department, such fees and costs will be calculated at the hourly rate of each attorney participating in the review and response to the appeal set forth in each attorney's most recent city paycheck times the number of hours worked by such participating attorneys on the appeal. If the city is represented by outside counsel, such fees and costs will be calculated at the billing rates of the firm's attorneys, plus all out of pocket costs of the firm concerning the appeal. Within 15 days of ruling against the appellant, the contract compliance hearing officer, in consultation with the city's law department and outside counsel, if any, will calculate the city's cost in reviewing and responding to the appeal and will apply the appellant's bond or certified check to the costs. Any remaining balance of the bond or certified check will be returned to the appellant. 
(e)  Notice of hearing date and hearing. Within three calendar days of receipt of a notice of appeal from an aggrieved party, excluding official holidays, the contract compliance officer shall forward the notice to the contract compliance hearing officer. 
(f)  Exhaustion of administrative remedies. A protestor shall be required to exhaust its administrative remedies before filing suit in any state or federal court based on a determination of non-responsiveness or decertification of SBE status by the office of contract compliance rendered pursuant to the city's small business opportunity ordinance. 
(g)  Duties of contract compliance hearing officer. The duties of the contract compliance hearing officer shall be as follows: 
(1)  The contract compliance hearing officer shall have exclusive jurisdiction to determine all appeals arising under this division. 
(2)  The contract compliance hearing officer shall set a hearing date not more than seven calendar days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal from the director of the office of contract compliance, excluding official holidays. The hearing officer shall cause notice of the hearing to be served upon all parties by certified U.S. mail. Such notice shall set forth with particularity the decision being appealed by the aggrieved business and shall include the hearing date, time and place. 
(3)  At the hearing, all parties shall be provided a fair and impartial hearing and shall be allowed to produce any and all evidence in either party's possession concerning the final determination of non-responsiveness with the requirements of this division, or the decertification as an SBE. 
(h)  Decision. Within seven calendar days after conclusion of the hearing, excluding official holidays, the contract compliance hearing officer shall make a written decision on the appeal, which decision shall affirm, alter or reverse the final determination of non-responsiveness or the decertification of SBE status by the office of contract compliance. The hearing officer shall decide whether the final determination of non-responsiveness or the decertification being appealed was in accordance with the law in existence at the time that the bidder was found to be non-responsive, at the time that the decertification was made, or at the time the penalties were imposed. 
(i)  Notice of decision. Within seven calendar days after conclusion of the hearing, excluding official holidays, the contract compliance hearing officer shall issue written notice of the decision on the appeal to all parties. The notice of the decision shall be sent to all parties by certified U.S. mail and shall set forth the reasons for the decision. 
(j)  Appeal. The decision of the hearing officer shall be binding on all parties, subject to the right of appeal as provided by O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1368. - Small business enterprise directory. 
The city will create an SBE directory that lists SBEs categorized by types of firms to facilitate identifying businesses with capabilities relevant to a particular specification. Each business listing will contain the business name, contact person, address, phone number, legal structure of the business, and details concerning the company's business specialties. North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) Codes will be identified for each company. The office of contract compliance will continuously update and maintain the directory on the computer and on hard copy. In compiling this directory, the office of contract compliance will identify as many SBEs as possible that perform the types of work or provide the types of supplies needed by the city. The city will maintain and have available an updated SBE directory and source list(s) for each bid/proposal solicitation to facilitate identifying SBEs working in areas relevant to general contracting requirements and to particular solicitations. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1369. - Procedures to ensure that SBEs have an equitable opportunity to compete for contracts and subcontracts. 
(a)  Procedures to ensure opportunities. The City of Atlanta may utilize the following measures to ensure maximum practicable opportunities for SBE participation on city contracts: 
(1)  Assist SBE in obtaining insurance and surety bonds where necessary in the performance of contracts, including but not limited to: 
a.  Packaging contracts so that dollar amounts do not require bonding; 
b.  Encouraging prime contractors to waive bonding or assist SBE subcontractors in obtaining bonding; 
c.  Encouraging staged bonding where feasible, when bonding is carried over from one project stage to the next; and 
d.  Relaxing bonding requirements for projects less than $25,000.00; 
(2)  Encourage the formation of joint ventures between SBEs pursuant to section 2-1369.1. The office of contract compliance will also assist prime contractors in identifying interested SBEs for subcontracts; 
(3)  Provide information on the City of Atlanta's organization and contractual needs and offer instructions on bid specifications, procurement policy, procedures, and general bidding requirements; 
(4)  Provide specifications and requests for proposals to the SBE community in a timely manner to allow SBEs adequate time to develop responsible and responsive bids. In instances where the cost of obtaining specifications or requests for proposal is prohibitive, copies of the material will be made available at no charge to SBE development agencies; 
(5)  Establish prorated payment and delivery schedules where feasible, to minimize cash flow problems faced by small firms. The city will provide guidance to SBE contractors regarding maintenance of positive flow in order that current obligations can be met; 
(6)  Hold pre-bid conferences to explain SBE requirements as well as forms that must be submitted with a bid; 
(7)  Permit bidders to review and evaluate successful bid documents of similar procurements and use debriefing sessions to explain why certain bids were unsuccessful; 
(8)  Provide projected procurement information and contracting schedules through the office of contract compliance and other outreach efforts; 
(9)  Conduct internal information workshops to inform and acquaint the city staff with the goals and objectives of the City of Atlanta's Small Business Opportunity Program, and to sensitize them to the challenges faced by SBEs; 
(10)  Maintain records showing specific efforts to identify and award contracts to SBEs and establish a monitoring system to ensure that all contractors, subcontractors, consultants, and vendors comply with contract specifications related to SBE utilization; and 
(11)  Inform SBEs of bid notices and specifications related to their capability by placing bid notices in major local newspapers and other periodicals. Bid notices may also be sent to local trade associations, technical assistance agencies, economic development groups, and SBEs with capabilities that may be relevant to the bid notice as identified by the City of Atlanta's SBE data bank. Bid specifications may be made available to SBE contractor associations and technical assistance agencies. Lists of potential firms bidding as primes may also be made available to SBEs. 
(b)  Direct assistance to SBEs. In addition to the procedures set forth in subsection 2-1369(a), the office of contract compliance may also undertake special measures to assist SBEs in overcoming barriers to participation on city contracts. This assistance will be offered directly by the city, as well as by city-referral to other assistance agencies with established, comprehensive, and continuous SBE development programs. Businesses providing management and technical assistance will be identified through a questionnaire, through personal experience with these businesses, and through requests for assistance. The office of contract compliance may offer the following direct assistance to SBEs: 
(1)  Provide counseling and training sessions for SBEs. City staff will be available to interested business representatives to explain (in detail) instructions for preparation of bid specifications, the city's procurement policies, procedures and general bid requirements. The SBE program officer will coordinate and follow-up all requests for assistance to insure that all necessary information was provided. 
(2)  Provide coordination and referral to existing business development organizations. 
(3)  Sponsor intensive workshops and training sessions on identified SBE problem areas, i.e., pricing and estimating, joint venture formation, accounting principles, marketing, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1369.1. - Requirements for joint ventures. 
(a)  Based upon the scope of work and market availability, and on whether bonding requirements would make it unreasonably burdensome for an SBE to bid on given project, the office of contract compliance shall determine on a project-by-project basis, in consultation with the commissioner of the user agency or his or her designee, whether good faith efforts to enter into a joint venture with an SBE shall be required for a given project. Only projects valued over $5,000,000.00 are eligible for consideration under this section. On such projects in which good faith efforts to enter into a joint venture relationship with an SBE is required, no bid shall be accepted unless submitted by a joint venture, unless the office of contract compliance has determined that good faith efforts to enter into a joint venture have been demonstrated. The office of contract compliance shall determine whether good faith efforts to enter into a joint venture have been adequately demonstrated based on a review of relevant facts, documents and circumstances. 
(b)  As to each joint venture under this section, a written joint venture agreement must be completed by all parties to the joint venture and executed before a notary public, which clearly delineates the rights and responsibilities of each member or partner, complies with any requirements of the office of contract compliance as set forth in bid documents or otherwise, and provides that the joint venture shall continue for, at a minimum, the duration of the project. 
(c)  The office of contract compliance shall review and approve all contractual agreements regarding the terms and provisions of each joint venture relationship prior to the award of a contract, including agreements pertaining to: 
(1)  The initial capital investment of each venture partner; 
(2)  The proportional allocation of profits and losses to each venture partner; no SBE venture partner's liability should ever exceed said partners percentage of revenue earned while a participant in the joint venture. 
(3)  The sharing of the right to control the ownership and management of the joint venture; 
(4)  Actual participation of the venture partners on the project; 
(5)  The method of and responsibility for accounting; 
(6)  The method by which disputes are resolved; and 
(7)  Any additional or further information required by the office of contract compliance as set forth in bid documents or otherwise. 
Joint ventures may submit agreements for pre-approval no later than 14 calendar days prior to the date set for receipt of bids on a project. Otherwise, agreements must be submitted on or before the date set for receipt of bids on an eligible project. A bid submitted by a joint venture that does not include a satisfactory written joint venture agreement in accordance with the requirements of this section shall be deemed non-responsive and rejected. 
(d)  The joint venture, and each member of the joint venture, shall provide the office of contract compliance access to review all records pertaining to joint venture agreements before and after the award of a contract in order to reasonably assess compliance with this subdivision. 
(e)  For any project that also qualifies for implementation of the requirements set forth under section 2-1450, OCC is directed to utilize the requirements in section 2-1450 before utilizing the requirements in this section. 
(f)  Penalties for noncompliance. Any responsible bidder who fails to comply with this section shall be subject to any or all of the penalties contained in section 2-1373. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1370. - Methods by which the city will require contractors and subcontractors to comply with applicable SBE requirements. 
The city's staff is available to assist contractors and subcontractors in implementing this program. As a standard procedure, such assistance includes: 
(1)  Clearly setting forth the City of Atlanta's SBE goals in all the City of Atlanta solicitations; 
(2)  Attending pre-proposal/bid conferences to explain the city's SBE program; 
(3)  Identifying SBEs in the City of Atlanta's database and providing a list of available SBEs upon request, 
(4)  Providing plan holder lists and pre-bid sign-in sheets made available to interested SBEs upon request. 
(5)  Remaining available to assist bidders in developing their SBE programs. 
(6)  Monitoring SBE participation levels on projects throughout the duration of a contract. Contractors violating contract provisions regarding SBE participation are subject to the sanctions set forth in section 2-1373 below. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1371. - Procedures to require that participating SBEs are identified by name by competitors for contracts. 
The city shall indicate, in solicitations for contracts that provide opportunities for SBE participation, goals for the use of SBE firms. Solicitations shall require all bidders to submit a written assurance of meeting the goals in their bids or proposals. Bids must also include a proposed schedule of SBE participation that lists the names of SBE subcontractors, a description of the work each is to perform, and the dollar value of each proposed SBE subcontract. If the SBE participation does not meet the SBE contract goals, the bidders must submit sufficient information and evidence demonstrating that the bidder made good faith efforts to meet the goals. 
Bidders are required to submit this information with their bids and bidders are so informed at the time of solicitation. Agreements between a bidder and a SBE in which the SBE promises not to provide subcontracting quotations to other bidders shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1372. - Means to ensure that competitors make good faith efforts to meet SBE contract goals. 
(a)  For all contracts for which SBE contract goals have been established, the bidder shall be required to submit SBE participation information to the City of Atlanta. The award of the contract will be conditioned upon satisfaction of the requirements established by the city. The bidder shall submit, with its bid submission, the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and certification number, if applicable, of the SBE firm(s) that will participate in the contract; 
(2)  The description of the work each named SBE will perform; and 
(3)  The dollar amount of participation by each named SBE firm. 
(b)  If the SBE participation submitted by the bidder does not meet the SBE contract goals, the bidder must submit with its bid submission evidence demonstrating that "good faith efforts" were made to meet the goals. The city will review documents submitted at the time of bid, and make its determination of good faith efforts based on those submitted documents. Additional submissions will not be permitted. To demonstrate sufficient "good faith efforts" to meet the SBE contract goal, a bidder/proposer shall document the steps it has taken to obtain SBE participation. Such documentation may include evidence of the following: 
(1)  Attendance at a pre-bid meeting, if any, scheduled by the city to inform SBEs of subcontracting opportunities under a given solicitation; 
(2)  Advertisement in general circulation media, trade association publications, and other media for at least 15 days before bids or proposals are due; 
(3)  Written notification to SBEs that their interest in the contract is solicited; 
(4)  Efforts made to select portions of the work proposed to be performed by SBEs in order to increase the likelihood of achieving the stated goal; 
(5)  Good faith efforts to negotiate with SBEs for specific subcontracts, including without limitation: 
a.  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of SBEs that were contacted; 
b.  A description of the information provided to SBEs regarding the plans and specifications for portions of the work to be performed; 
c.  A statement of why additional agreements with SBE were not reached; 
d.  Concerning each SBE, the SBE contacted but rejected as unqualified, and the reasons for the bidder's conclusion; and 
e.  Efforts made to assist the SBEs contacted that needed assistance in obtaining bonding or insurance required by the competitor or the city. 
(c)  To determine whether a competitor that has failed to meet SBE goals may be awarded the contract, the city will determine whether the efforts the bidder made to obtain SBE participation were "good faith efforts." Efforts that are merely pro forma are not "good faith efforts" to meet the goals. In order to award a contract to a bidder that has failed to meet SBE contract goals, the office of contract compliance will determine whether the bidder actively and aggressively made efforts to meet the city's SBE goals. A bidder making a good faith effort would consider a number of factors in negotiating with subcontractors, including SBE subcontractors, and would take a firm's price and capabilities as well as contract goals into consideration. However, the fact that there may be some additional costs involved in finding and using SBEs is not in itself sufficient reason for a bidder's failure to meet the contract SBE goal, as long as such costs are reasonable. Also, the ability or desire of a prime contractor to perform the work of a contract with its own organization does not relieve the bidder of the responsibility to make good faith efforts. Prime contractors are not, however, required to accept higher quotes from SBEs if the price difference is excessive or unreasonable. In determining whether a bidder has made good faith efforts, the office of contract compliance will take into account the performance of other bidders in meeting the contract. For example, when the apparent successful bidder fails to meet the contract goal, but others meet it, the office of contract compliance may reasonably raise the question of whether, with additional reasonable efforts, the apparent successful bidder could have met the goal. If the apparent successful bidder fails to meet the goal but meets or exceeds the average SBE participation obtained by other bidders, the city may view this, in conjunction with other factors, as evidence of the apparent successful bidder having made good faith efforts. Competitors that fail to meet SBE goals and fail to demonstrate "good faith efforts" shall be deemed non-responsive to the city's SBE requirements and shall not be eligible to be awarded the contract. 
(d)  To ensure that all obligations under contracts awarded to SBEs are met, the city shall review the contractor's SBE involvement efforts during the performance of the contract. The contractor shall bring to the attention of the city any situation in which regularly scheduled progress payments are not made to SBE subcontractors. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1373. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
A contractor who fails to comply with any portion of this division, and whose failure to comply continues for a period of 30 calendar days after the contractor receives written notice of such noncompliance from the director of the office [of] contract compliance, shall be subject to any or all of the following penalties: 
(1)  Withholding of ten percent of all future payments for the eligible project until the office of contract compliance determines that the contractor is in compliance with this division. 
(2)  Cancellation of the eligible project. 
(3)  Refusal of all future contracts or subcontracts with the city for a minimum of one year and a maximum of five years from the date upon which this penalty is imposed pursuant to the provisions contained in Division 16 herein. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1374. - Outreach to SBEs. 
The City of Atlanta considers information dissemination and communication with SBEs as an integral part of the city's SBE program. As a part of its outreach program, the office of contract compliance will solicit input from representatives of SBEs, trade associations and community organizations. This input will serve several important functions, including: 
(1)  Providing information to identify additional SBE firms; 
(2)  Assisting in refining SBE program goals and procedures; and 
(3)  Providing an independent assessment of the effectiveness of the city's SBE program. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1375. - Prime contracting guidelines. 
(a)  As early in the acquisition planning process as practicable, but no later than 30 days before the issuance of a solicitation, a procuring agency must coordinate with OCC when a procurement is valued over $5,000,000.00 in order to determine potential measures to be taken to maximize participation of SBEs in the procurement. 
(b)  If OCC believes that a proposed procurement will render SBE prime contract participation unlikely, then OCC shall recommend to the procuring agency alternative procurement methods which would increase SBE prime contract participation. Such alternatives may include: 
(1)  breaking up the procurement into smaller discrete procurements; 
(2)  breaking out one or more discrete components; and 
(3)  reserving one or more awards for sub-contracting procedures as set forth in section 2-1369. 
(c)  Where methods under subsection (b) are not feasible, OCC will work with the procuring agency to recommend a strategy that preserves SBE prime contract participation to the maximum extent practicable. OCC will also work to recommend that SBE participation is maximized through teaming arrangements and subcontracting opportunities as set forth in section 2-1369. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to mandate increased participation of SBEs where such increased participation would significantly affect the ability of a user agency to complete a given project. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1376. - Severability. 
If any provision of this division or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or applications, and are to this end declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1377. - Sunset 
This division 9 shall sunset on December 31, 2020. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 9, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2013-44(13-O-1267), § 2, 9-25-13 ; Ord. No. 2014-15(14-O-1147), § 2, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-37(14-O-1380), § 2, 8-27-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-01(14-O-1620), § 2, 1-14-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-30(15-O-1266), § 2, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-63(15-O-1556), § 14, 12-16-15 ) 
Secs. 2-1378—2-1380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - OFFICE OF CONTRACT COMPLIANCE 

Sec. 2-1381. - Statement of equal employment opportunity policy. 
The city declares that discrimination because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability is inconsistent with the Constitution, laws and policies of the United States, state and city, and the city establishes its policy to prohibit discrimination by contractors who do business with the city against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 10, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1382. - Established. 
There is established an office of contract compliance, headed by a contract compliance officer, within the executive branch of city government and within the unclassified section of the civil service system. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 10, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1383. - Authority and duties. 
The office of contract compliance is authorized to administer and enforce the equal employment opportunity program and the minority and female business enterprise program of the city, in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 10, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1384. - Contract compliance hearing officer. 
(a)  Appointment and term. The mayor shall appoint a contract compliance hearing officer and an alternate hearing officer, to be confirmed by the city council. No employee or elected official of the city shall be appointed who is a contractor or subcontractor or who owns any interest in any contracting or subcontracting firm or who does business with the city as a contractor. The officer shall serve for a two-year term and shall not be eligible to serve more than two consecutive terms. 
(b)  Authority. Unless an action has been initiated previously in the courts for essentially the same cause of action, the contract compliance hearing officer shall have the authority to review and determine: 
(1)  Any appeal by a contractor, bidder or offeror from a determination of noncompliance with the equal employment opportunity in purchasing and contracting requirements in division 11 of this article made by the contract compliance officer; 
(2)  Any appeal by a contractor, bidder or offeror from the refusal of the contract compliance officer to place the contractor, bidder or offeror on the list of precertified businesses, pursuant to section 2-1416; 
(3)  Any appeal from a denial of certification of a business as an African American business enterprise (AABE), Asian Pacific American business enterprise (APABE), Hispanic American business enterprise (HABE), or female business enterprise (FBE) by the contract compliance officer under division 12 of this article; and 
(4)  Any appeal by a contractor, bidder or offeror from a determination of noncompliance with the requirements regarding minority and female business enterprises in division 12 of this article, when applicable, made by the contract compliance officer. 
(c)  Duties and compensation. A contract compliance hearing officer shall hold hearings upon appeal by any contractor, bidder or offeror. The hearings shall be held in any municipal building and shall be open to the public. Each hearing officer shall be paid the sum of $300.00 per day or for any portion of the day that the hearing officer serves. Administrative services, as may be required by the officer, shall be furnished by the departments and agencies of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 10, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1385. - Appeals. 
(a)  Determination of noncompliance or refusal to precertify. Upon a determination of noncompliance by a contractor, bidder or offeror with the equal employment opportunity in purchasing and contracting requirements of division 11 of this article or a refusal to precertify the contractor, bidder or offeror by the contract compliance officer, the contract compliance officer shall notify such contractor, bidder or offeror in writing by registered mail, setting forth the reasons for the determination or refusal. 
(b)  Time for filing notice of appeal. The contractor, bidder or offeror (aggrieved party) may appeal the determination of noncompliance or refusal to precertify by filing a notice of appeal with the contract compliance officer in writing within seven days of receipt of the notice of determination of noncompliance or refusal to precertify. 
(c)  Notice of hearing date and hearing. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal from the aggrieved party by the contract compliance officer, the contract compliance officer, within three days of receipt of the notice, shall forward the notice to the contract compliance hearing officer. The duties of the contract compliance hearing officer shall be as follows: 
(1)  The contract compliance hearing officer shall set a hearing date not more than seven days from the date of receipt of the notice from the contract compliance officer. The hearing officer shall cause notice of the hearing to be served upon all parties, by registered mail. Such notice shall set forth with particularity the charges filed by the aggrieved party and shall include the hearing date, time and place. 
(2)  At the hearing, all parties shall be provided a fair and impartial hearing and shall be allowed to produce any and all evidence in either party's possession concerning the alleged violation. 
(d)  Decision. The contract compliance hearing officer shall, within seven days of the hearing, make a written decision on the appeal, which decision shall affirm, alter or deny the determination of noncompliance or refusal to precertify by the contract compliance officer. The hearing officer shall decide whether the determination of noncompliance or refusal to precertify was in accordance with the law and the terms and conditions of the solicitation before the contract is awarded or penalties are imposed. If the hearing officer finds for the aggrieved party, the contractor, bidder or offeror shall be added to the precertification list, as provided in section 2-1416, or permitted to submit a bid or offer in response to the solicitation. If the hearing officer affirms the decision of the contract compliance officer, the contract compliance officer shall make recommendations and findings of the final disposition to the mayor or the mayor's designee. 
(e)  Notice of decision. The contract compliance hearing officer shall issue written notice of the decision on the appeal to all parties within seven days of the hearing. The notice of the decision shall be sent to all parties by registered mail and shall set forth the reasons for the decision. 
(f)  Standard of review for factual issues. A determination of an issue of fact by the contract compliance hearing officer shall be final and conclusive, unless arbitrary, capricious, fraudulent or clearly erroneous. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 10, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1386. - Intergovernmental cooperation. 
If specific discriminatory practices are found to exist in the administration and enforcement of the equal employment opportunity program and the minority and female business enterprise program of the city, in addition to the sanctions that may be imposed as provided for by the terms of the contract, the city may forward all pertinent information to the appropriate federal and state agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 10, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1387. - Nondiscrimination among firms doing business with city. 
It is the policy of the city to encourage equal employment opportunity at all levels among firms, corporations and partnerships which do business with the city. Although it is not required, the city has an expectation that women and minorities are internally integrated as officers and directors of corporations or as partners of partnerships. The city prefers to do business with firms or institutions which include representation of minorities and women at all levels, and it is in the furtherance of that policy that the city encourages firms doing business with the city to integrate fully. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 10, 12-15-09) 
Secs. 2-1388—2-1410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY 

Sec. 2-1411. - Applicability of division. 
This division shall apply to all city contracts and purchase orders exceeding $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 11, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1412. - Duties of office of contract compliance. 
The office of contract compliance shall have the following functions and duties: 
(1)  Administration and enforcement of the equal employment opportunity in purchasing and contracting sections of this Code. 
(2)  The establishment of procedures to effectuate the equal employment opportunity in purchasing and contracting sections of this Code. 
(3)  The determination in writing, with reasons thereof, of whether potential contractors are in compliance with the equal employment opportunity in purchasing and contracting sections of this Code before the award of any public bid or the execution of any city contract or purchase order. 
(4)  Approval of affirmative action programs submitted by potential contractors. 
(5)  Holding of preaward conferences with potential contractors and subcontractors, for the purpose of ensuring that the office charged with zoning compliance has all available information on which to make determinations of compliance. 
(6)  Investigation of alleged violations of this article and the issuance of written determinations following such investigations, stating the reason therefor. 
(7)  Maintenance of an equal opportunity contractors precertification list, to be made available as a public record. 
(8)  Maintenance of statistical data showing the demographic characteristics of the available pool of labor skills on which the city relies for determinations of compliance by contractors with this division, to be made available as a public record. 
(9)  Provision of all necessary forms, applications, documents and papers necessary to comply with this division. 
(10)  Determination of whether a potential contractor and subcontractors, if any, have met the requirements of section 2-1413. If bids are submitted, this determination must be made within 15 days by the contract compliance officer unless the contractor has submitted insufficient information for making the determination. 
(11)  Review of cases where a contractor fails to implement previously made contract compliance agreements to determine whether there should be further efforts or alternative approaches, including but not limited to contacts with industry, related labor unions and requests for the assistance of any pertinent federal agency for further negotiations. 
(12)  Determination of whether any penalty set forth in section 2-1417 is appropriate. 
(13)  Notification to an affected party by registered mail that the party has the right to appeal a determination of noncompliance with this division or refusal to precertify, pursuant to section 2-1385. Such appeal shall be sent to the contract compliance officer within seven days of receipt of the notice of noncompliance or refusal to precertify. 
(14)  Notification of the chief procurement officer of a determination of noncompliance with this division or a refusal to precertify a contractor, bidder or offeror and the filing of any appeal from such determination or refusal. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 11, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1413. - Requirements for execution of city contracts. 
No contract shall be executed on behalf of the city unless at least one of the following requirements is met: 
(1)  Reflection of local labor pool demographics with work force of 15 or more employees. The contractor has demonstrated that the contractor's work force, if consisting of 15 or more employees, reflects the demographic characteristics of the available pool of labor skills normally utilized by the contractor, according to the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) and Office of Federal Contract Compliance Program (OFCCP) guidelines, as they may be amended, and that each subcontractor with 15 or more employees has met one of the requirements of this section. If a contractor or subcontractor has a city-area workforce of 15 or more employees, the contractor or subcontractor shall meet this requirement if the contractor's or subcontractor's city-area work force reflects local demographic characteristics of the available pool of labor skills. 
(2)  Affirmative action program. The contractor has demonstrated good faith efforts to comply with the contractual requirement of sections 2-1200 and 2-1414. Such good faith is to be demonstrated by an existing affirmative action program, including but not limited to training programs, advertising, recruitment efforts and goals and timetables, to be approved by the contract compliance officer. The contractor must demonstrate that each subcontractor has met one of the requirements of this section. An affirmative action program shall be approved if it is pursuant to an order of a federal court with jurisdiction over the contractor's employment practices or if it meets the standard of the EEOC and OFCCP guidelines, as they may be amended, provided that certification by the EEOC or OFCCP shall be accepted as fulfillment of this subsection only when issued within 30 days of the submission of the contractor's program to the city. 
(3)  Emergency or sole source contract. The contract has been determined by the mayor, the mayor's designee or the chief procurement officer to be an emergency procurement, pursuant to section 2-1192, or to be available only through a sole source, pursuant to section 2-1191. 
(4)  Fourteen or less employees. The contractor and all subcontractors, if any, have work forces of 14 or less employees. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 11, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1414. - Equal employment opportunity clause. 
The equal employment opportunity (EEO) clause required in all city contracts, pursuant to section 2-1200, shall read as follows: 
"During the performance of this agreement, said contractor agrees as follows: 
(a)  The contractor shall not discriminate against any employee, or applicant for employment, because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or political affiliation. As used here, the words "shall not discriminate" shall mean and include without limitation the following: 
Recruited, whether by advertising or other means; compensated, whether in the form of rates of pay, or other forms of compensation; selected for training, including apprenticeship; promoted; upgraded; demoted; downgraded; transferred; laid off; and terminated. 
The contractor agrees to and shall post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notices to be provided by the contracting officers setting forth the provisions of the EEO clause. 
(b)  The contractor shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees, placed by or on behalf of the contractor, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or political affiliation. 
(c)  The contractor shall send to each labor union or representative of workers with which the contractor may have a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding a notice advising the labor union or workers' representative of the contractor's commitments under the equal employment opportunity program of the City of Atlanta and under the Code of Ordinances and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment. The contractor shall register all workers in the skilled trades who are below the journeyman level with the U.S. Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training. 
(d)  The contractor shall furnish all information and reports required by the contract compliance officer pursuant to the Code of Ordinances, and shall permit access to the books, records, and accounts of the contractor during normal business hours by the contract compliance officer for the purpose of investigation so as to ascertain compliance with the program. 
(e)  The contractor shall take such action with respect to any subcontractor as the city may direct as a means of enforcing the provisions of paragraphs (a) through (h) herein, including penalties and sanctions for noncompliance; provided, however, that in the event the contractor becomes involved in or is threatened with litigation as a result of such direction by the city, the city will enter into such litigation as is necessary to protect the interest of the city and to effectuate the equal employment opportunity program of the city; and, in the case of contracts receiving federal assistance, the contractor or the city may request the United States to enter into such litigation to protect the interests of the United States. 
(f)  The contractor and its subcontractors, if any, shall file compliance reports at reasonable times and intervals with the city in the form and to the extent prescribed by the contract compliance officer. Compliance reports filed at such times directed shall contain information as to employment practices, policies, programs and statistics of the contractor and its subcontractors. 
(g)  The contractor shall include the provisions of paragraphs (a) through (h) of this equal employment opportunity clause in every subcontract or purchase order so that such provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor. 
(h)  A finding, as hereinafter provided, that a refusal by the contractor or subcontractor to comply with any portion of this program, as herein provided and described, may subject the offending party to any or all of the following penalties: 
(1)  Withholding from the contractor in violation all future payments under the involved contract until it is determined that the contractor or subcontractor is in compliance with the provisions of the contract; 
(2)  Refusal of all future bids for any contract with the City of Atlanta or any of its departments or divisions until such time as the contractor or subcontractor demonstrates that there has been established and there shall be carried out all of the provisions of the program as provided in the Code of Ordinances; 
(3)  Cancellation of the public contract; 
(4)  In a case in which there is substantial or material violation of the compliance procedure herein set forth or as may be provided for by the contract, appropriate proceedings may be brought to enforce those provisions, including the enjoining, within applicable law, of contractors, subcontractors or other organizations, individuals or groups who prevent or seek to prevent directly or indirectly compliance with the policy as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 11, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1415. - Notice to and requirements of bidders and offerors. 
(a)  Notice. The chief procurement officer shall include, as a part of any contract specifications published for the use of prospective bidders and offerors, a notice that all bidders or offerors will be required to comply with sections 2-1200 and 2-1414. 
(b)  Requirements. Each bidder or offeror shall submit any information required by this article in duplicate to the contract compliance officer and the chief procurement officer. Each bidder or offeror shall file, as part of the documents of such contract, employment information in such form as may be required by the contract compliance officer and shall ensure that each subcontractor also files such information. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 11, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1416. - Precertification. 
(a)  Precertification list. The contract compliance officer shall place upon the precertification list the names of all suppliers who, upon application, meet equal employment opportunity standards and criteria as set forth in section 2-1413(1) and (2). When placed upon the precertification list, a contractor shall be deemed in compliance with this division and eligible to enter into a contract for a period of 12 months subsequent to the date of being placed on the precertification list, if the contract has met the requirements of section 2-1413(1), or, if the contractor has met the requirements of section 2-1413(2), for a period of time less than 12 months subsequent to the date of being placed on the precertification list, to be determined by the contract compliance officer. Such listing may be renewed by application of the contractor. 
(b)  Notice to contractor. The contract compliance officer shall notify any contractor, within 30 days after application for listing as permitted in subsection (a) of this section, whether or not the contractor has complied with this division and has met the criteria for being an equal employment opportunity contractor. The mayor or the mayor's designee shall have the authority to grant to the contract compliance officer, upon application, an extension of seven days in which to make such notification. A contractor may appeal the decision of the contract compliance officer as provided for in section 2-1385. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 11, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1417. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
(a)  Penalties. The finding of refusal or failure by a contractor or subcontractor to comply with any portions of this division may subject the offending party to any or all of the following penalties: 
(1)  Withholding from the contractor in violation all future payments under the involved contract until it is determined that the contractor or subcontractor is in compliance with the provisions of the contract. 
(2)  Refusal of all future bids for any contract with the city or any of its departments or divisions until such time as the contractor or subcontractor demonstrates that there has been established and there shall be carried out all of the provisions of the program as provided in this division. 
(3)  Removal from the precertification list. 
(4)  Cancellation of the contract. 
(b)  Procedures. 
(1)  If there is substantial or material violation of the compliance procedure set forth in this division or as may be provided for by the contract, appropriate proceedings may be brought by the city to enforce those provisions, including the enjoining, within applicable law, of contractors, subcontractors or other organizations, individuals or groups who prevent or seek to prevent, directly or indirectly, compliance with the policy provided in this division. 
(2)  If the contract compliance officer determines that the contractor has violated or has failed to comply with the equal employment opportunity requirements of the contract, after affording such contractor a reasonable time to correct such situation and where negotiations have been of no avail, such officer shall make a finding of noncompliance and shall transmit the findings and recommendations thereon to the mayor or the mayor's designee and to the contract compliance hearing officer, who shall hold a hearing thereon if requested by the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 11, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1418. - Project site reports. 
Under this article, when a construction contract exceeds $10,000.00, a project site report, on forms provided by the contract compliance officer, shall be completed and submitted by the contractor and subcontractor not more than 45 days from the beginning of the work on the site. Such project site reports shall include such information as to employment practices and statistics of the contractor and subcontractor and shall be in such form as the contract compliance officer may prescribe. If the term of the contract exceeds 90 days, such project site report shall be submitted once each 45 days or more frequently if the contract compliance officer determines that such a submittal is necessary for a continuing evaluation of the work force composition. Subcontractors shall complete and submit such project site reports to the contractor for transmittal to the city. Post-award reports shall be viewed as one means of determining contract compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 11, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1419. - Compliance determinations as to certain leases of real property. 
The execution of a lease of real property owned by the city shall constitute a final and conclusive determination of compliance for such lease with this article, and no further action or determination shall be made for such lease when the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  Such real property, at the time of execution, is leased by the city to a person other than a governmental entity; 
(2)  The provisions of the lease agreement do not require the expenditure by the city of any general funds of the city; 
(3)  Such lease will be used by the lessee for the purpose of ensuring the availability of construction funds from a private lender; 
(4)  The acquisition of improvements upon the property so leased will increase employment; 
(5)  The contractor is in compliance with section 2-1413 at the time of execution of the lease; and 
(6)  The mayor or the mayor's designee has certified the existence of the circumstances listed in subsections (1) through (5) of this section in writing before or after the date of execution of the lease. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 11, 12-15-09) 
Secs. 2-1420—2-1440. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - EQUAL BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-1441. - Short title. 
This subdivision shall be known as the "City of Atlanta's Equal Business Opportunity Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1442. - Adoption of the findings and conclusions of the Executive Summary of Dr. Ian Ayres and of the 2015 Disparity Report by Keen Independent Research, LLC. 
The city adopts the findings and conclusions of the Executive Summary of Dr. Ian Ayres (referred to in this division 12 as the "Disparity Report" or the "2009 Disparity Report"). The city further adopts the findings and conclusions of the 2015 disparity report prepared by Keen Independent Research, LLC (referred to in this division 12 as the "2015 Disparity Report"). 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2015-63(15-O-1556), § 2, 12-16-15 ) 
Sec. 2-1443. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
African American shall mean persons having origins in any black racial group of Africa. 
African American Business Enterprise (AABE) shall mean a business which is an independent and continuing enterprise for profit, performing a commercially useful function, which is owned and controlled by one or more African Americans. 
African American Business Enterprise (AABE) small business enterprise shall mean an AABE that is also certified as an SBE under section 2-1363. 
Asian Pacific American shall mean persons having origins in any of the original people of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent. 
Asian Pacific American Business Enterprise (APABE) shall mean a business which is an independent and continuing enterprise for profit, performing a commercially useful function, which is owned and controlled by one or more Asian Pacific Americans. 
Asian Pacific American Business Enterprise (APABE) small business enterprise shall mean an APABE that is also certified as an SBE under section 2-1363. 
Atlanta Region shall mean the geographical area consisting of Barrow, Bartow, Carroll, Cherokee, Clayton, Cobb, Coweta, DeKalb, Douglas, Fayette, Forsyth, Fulton, Gwinnett, Henry, Newton, Paulding, Pickens, Rockdale, Spalding, and Walton counties. 
Bid shall mean a quotation, proposal, sealed bid or offer to perform or provide labor, materials, supplies or services to the city for a price on an eligible project, or for an eligible project that generates revenue for the city. 
Bidder shall mean any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, or corporation that submits a bid to the city, or a vendor or contractor that has entered a contract with the city regarding an eligible project. 
Certification or recertification shall mean official recognition and approval by the office of contract compliance that a business meets the qualification criteria of an AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE, as set forth in this subdivision. Certification or recertification relates to qualifications regarding ownership, control, and the applicant's economic disadvantage, not the quality of the service or product. 
Certified AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE shall mean an AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE which meets the requirements of section 2-1453 of this subdivision, and which has been approved by the office of contract compliance. 
City shall mean the City of Atlanta. 
Commercially useful function. For the purpose of determining whether a business enterprise is performing a commercially useful function, OCC shall consider all of the facts in the record, viewed as a whole, including without limitation the following: 
(1)  An MFBE performs a commercially useful function when it is responsible for execution of the work of the contract and is carrying out its responsibilities by actually performing, managing, and supervising the work involved. 
(2)  To perform a commercially useful function, the MFBE must be responsible, with respect to material and supplies used on the contract, for negotiating price, determining quality and quantity, ordering the material, and installing (where applicable) and paying for the material itself. 
(3)  To determine whether an MFBE is performing a commercially useful function, OCC will evaluate the amount of work subcontracted by the MFBE, industry practices regarding subcontracting, whether the amount the MFBE is to be paid under the contract is commensurate with the work it's actually performing, the MFBE credit claimed for its performance of the work, and other relevant factors. 
(4)  An MFBE does not perform a commercially useful function if its role is limited to that of an extra participant in a transaction, contract, or project through which funds are passed in order to obtain the appearance of MFBE participation. In determining whether an MFBE is such an extra participant, OCC will examine similar transactions, particularly those in which MFBEs do not participate. 
Control or controlled for the purpose of determining whether the owner or owners of a potential MFBE (as used in this definition, "MFBE-owner," which shall denote one or more owners) controls the potential MFBE, OCC shall consider all of the facts in the record, viewed as a whole, including without limitation the following: 
(1)  For an MFBE-owner to be deemed to control the potential MFBE, the potential MFBE must be independent. An independent business enterprise is a business whose viability does not depend on its relationship with another firm or firms. 
(a)  In determining whether a potential MFBE is independent, OCC will scrutinize relationships with other firms, in such areas as personnel, facilities, equipment, financial and/or bonding support, and other resources. 
(b)  OCC will consider whether present or recent employer/employee relationships between the MFBE-owner and other firms or persons associated with other firms compromise the independence of the potential MFBE firm. 
(c)  OCC will examine the potential MFBE's relationships with prime contractors to determine whether a pattern of exclusive or primary dealings with a prime contractor compromises the independence of the potential MFBE firm. 
(d)  In considering factors related to the independence of a potential MFBE firm, OCC will consider the consistency of relationships between the potential MFBE and other firms with normal industry practice. 
(2)  A potential MFBE firm must not be subject to any formal or informal restrictions which limit the customary discretion of the MFBE-owner. There can be no restrictions through corporate charter provisions, by-law provisions, contracts or any other formal or informal devices (e.g., cumulative voting rights, voting powers attached to different classes of stock, employment contracts, requirements for concurrence by persons other than the MFBE-owner, conditions precedent or subsequent, executory agreements, voting trusts, restrictions on or assignments of voting rights) that prevent the MFBE-owner, without the cooperation or vote of any other individual, from making any business decision of the business enterprise. This paragraph does not preclude a spousal co-signature on documents. 
(3)  The MFBE-owner must possess the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of the business enterprise and to make day-to-day as well as long-term decisions on matters of management, policy and operations. 
(a)  An MFBE-owner must hold the highest officer position in the company (e.g., chief executive officer or president). 
(b)  In a corporation, the MFBE-owner must control the board of directors. 
(c)  In a partnership, the MFBE-owner must serve as a general partner, with control over all partnership decisions. 
(4)  Individuals who are not the MFBE-owner may be involved in an MFBE as owners, managers, employees, stockholders, officers, and/or directors. Such individuals must not, however, possess or exercise the power to control the business enterprise, or be disproportionately responsible for the operation of the business enterprise. 
(5)  The MFBE owners of the business enterprise may delegate various areas of the management, policymaking, or daily operations of the business enterprise to other participants in the firm, regardless of whether these participants are African American, Asian Pacific American, Hispanic American, or female. Such delegations of authority must be revocable, and the MFBE-owner must retain the power to hire and fire any person to whom such authority is delegated. The managerial role of the MFBE-owner in the business enterprise's overall affairs must be such that OCC can reasonably conclude that the MFBE-owner actually exercises control over the business enterprise's operations, management, and policy. 
(6)  The MFBE-owner must have an overall understanding of, and managerial and technical competence and experience directly related to, the type of business in which the business enterprise is engaged and the business enterprise's operations. The MFBE-owner is not required to have experience or expertise in every critical area of the business enterprise's operations, or to have greater experience or expertise in a given field than managers or key employees. The MFBE-owner must have the ability to intelligently and critically evaluate information presented by other participants in the business enterprise's activities and to use this information to make independent decisions concerning the business enterprise's daily operations, management, and policymaking. Generally, expertise limited to office management, administration, or bookkeeping functions unrelated to the principal business activities of the business enterprise is insufficient to demonstrate control. 
(7)  If state or local law requires the owner of a particular type of firm to have a particular license or other credential, then the MFBE-owner of that type of firm must possess the required license or credential in order to be deemed in control. If state or local law does not require an owner to have such a license or credential, OCC will not deny certification solely on the ground that the MFBE-owner lacks the license or credential. However, OCC may take into account the absence of the license or credential as one factor in determining whether the MFBE-owner actually controls the firm. 
(8)  OCC may consider differences in remuneration between the MFBE-owner and other participants in the business enterprise in determining whether the MFBE-owner controls the business enterprise. Such consideration shall be in the context of the duties of the persons involved, normal industry practices, the business enterprise's policy and practice concerning reinvestment of income, and any other explanations for the differences proffered by the business enterprise. OCC may determine that a business enterprise is controlled by its MFBE-owner although the MFBE-owner's remuneration is lower than that of some other participants in the business enterprise. In a case where someone other than the MFBE-owner formerly controlled the business enterprise, and the MFBE-owner now controls it, OCC may consider a difference between the remuneration of the former and current owner of the business enterprise as a factor in determining who controls the business enterprise, particularly when the former owner remains involved with the business enterprise and continues to receive greater compensation than the current MFBE-owner. 
(9)  In order to be viewed as controlling a business enterprise, an MFBE-owner cannot engage in outside employment or other business interests that conflict with the management of the business enterprise or prevent the MFBE-owner from devoting sufficient time and attention to the affairs of the business enterprise to control its activities. For example, absentee ownership of a business and part-time work in a fulltime firm are not viewed as constituting control. However, an MFBE-owner could be viewed as controlling a part-time business that operates only on evenings and/or weekends, if the MFBE-owner controls the business enterprise when it is operating. 
(10)  An MFBE-owner may control a business enterprise even though one or more of the MFBE-owner's immediate family members (who themselves are not African American, Asian Pacific American, Hispanic American, or female) participate in the business enterprise as a manager, employee, owner, or in another capacity. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, OCC must make a judgment about the control the MFBE-owner exercises vis-a-vis other persons involved in the business enterprise as it does in other situations, without regard to whether or not the other persons are immediate family members. 
If OCC cannot determine that the MFBE-owner, as distinct from the family as a whole, controls the business enterprise, then the MFBE-owner has failed to carry her/his burden of proof concerning control, even though s/he may participate significantly in the business enterprise's activities. 
Eligible project for AABEs shall mean any city contract as described in section 2-1188 and section 2-1189, excluding sole source procurement under section 2-1191, special procurement under section 2-1191.1, emergency procurement under section 2-1192, and contracts governed by 49 CFR Parts 23 and 26, as amended, that involves a procurement within a given NAICS Code within which the 2009 Disparity Report as supplemented by the 2015 Disparity Report found an underutilization of AABEs. 
Eligible project for AABE small business enterprises shall mean any city contract as described in section 2-1188 and section 2-1189, excluding sole source procurement under section 2-1191, special procurement under section 2-1191.1, emergency procurement under section 2-1192, and contracts governed by 49 CFR Parts 23 and 26, that involves a procurement within a given NAICS Code within which the 2009 Disparity Report as supplemented by the 2015 Disparity Report found an underutilization of AABE small business enterprises. 
Eligible project for APABEs shall mean any city contract as described in section 2-1188 and section 2-1189, excluding sole source procurement under section 2-1191, special procurement under section 2-1191.1, emergency procurement under section 2-1192, and contracts governed by 49 CFR Parts 23 and 26, that involves a procurement within a given NAICS Code within which the 2009 Disparity Report as supplemented by the 2015 Disparity Report found an underutilization of APABEs. 
Eligible project for APABE small business enterprises shall mean any city contract as described in section 2-1188 and section 2-1189, excluding sole source procurement under section 2-1191, special procurement under section 2-1191.1, emergency procurement under section 2-1192, and contracts governed by 49 CFR Parts 23 and 26, that involves a procurement within a given NAICS Code within which the 2009 Disparity Report as supplemented by the 2015 Disparity Report found an underutilization of APABE small business enterprises. 
Eligible project for HABEs shall mean any city contract as described in section 2-1188 and section 2-1189, excluding sole source procurement under section 2-1191, special procurement under section 2-1191.1, emergency procurement under section 2-1192, and contracts governed by 49 CFR Parts 23 and 26, that involves a procurement within a given NAICS Code within which the 2009 Disparity Report as supplemented by the 2015 Disparity Report found an underutilization of HABEs. 
Eligible project for HABE small business enterprises shall mean any city contract as described in section 2-1188 and section 2-1189, excluding sole source procurement under section 2-1191, special procurement under section 2-1191.1, emergency procurement under section 2-1192, and contracts governed by 49 CFR Parts 23 and 26, that involves a procurement within a given NAICS Code within which the 2009 Disparity Report as supplemented by the 2015 Disparity Report found an underutilization of HABE small business enterprises. 
Eligible project for FBEs shall mean any city contract as described in section 2-1188 and section 2-1189, excluding sole source procurement under section 2-1191, special procurement under section 2-1191.1, emergency procurement under section 2-1192, and contracts governed by 49 CFR Parts 23 and 26, that involves a procurement within a given NAICS Code within which the 2009 Disparity Report as supplemented by the 2015 Disparity Report found an underutilization of FBEs. 
Eligible project for FBE small business enterprises shall mean any city contract as described in section 2-1188 and section 2-1189, excluding sole source procurement under section 2-1191, special procurement under section 2-1191.1, emergency procurement under section 2-1192, and contracts governed by 49 CFR Parts 23 and 26, that involves a procurement within a given NAICS Code within which the 2009 Disparity Report as supplemented by the 2015 Disparity Report found an underutilization of FBE small business enterprises. 
Female business enterprise (FBE) shall mean a business which is an independent and continuing enterprise for profit, performing a commercially useful function, which is owned and controlled by one or more females. 
Female business enterprise (FBE) small business enterprise shall mean an HABE that is also certified as an SBE under section 2-1363. 
Hispanic American shall mean persons of Spanish or Portuguese culture with origins in Mexico, South or Central America or the Caribbean Islands, regardless of race. 
Hispanic American business enterprise (HABE) shall mean a business which is an independent and continuing enterprise for profit, performing a commercially useful function, which is owned and controlled by one or more Hispanic Americans. 
Hispanic American business enterprise (HABE) small business enterprise shall mean an HABE that is also certified as an SBE under section 2-1363. 
Joint venture shall mean an association of two or more persons, partnerships, corporations, or any combination of them, established to carry on a single business activity that is limited in scope and duration. The agreement establishing the joint venture, partnership or other multi-entity relationship shall be in writing. Further, participation in a joint venture shall be based on the sharing of real economic interest in the venture and shall include proportionate control over management, interest in capital acquired by the joint venture and interest in earnings. 
Minority and female business enterprise (MFBE) shall mean a business which is an independent and continuing operation for profit, performing a commercially useful function, and which is owned and controlled by one or more African Americans, Asian Pacific Americans, Hispanic Americans, or females, or a combination thereof. 
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) Code shall mean the standard code that classifies industries by the type of activity in which such industries are primarily engaged. 
Office of contract compliance (OCC) shall mean the Mayor's Office of Contract Compliance in the City of Atlanta. 
Owned or ownership. In determining whether a potential MFBE is owned by one or more African Americans, Asian Pacific Americans, Hispanic Americans, or females, OCC will consider all of the facts in the record, viewed as a whole, including without limitation the following: 
(1)  OCC shall deem the owner of a business enterprise to be whoever possesses at least 51 percent of the business enterprise. There may be more than one owner. 
(a)  In the case of a corporation, such individual(s) must possess at least 51 percent of each class of voting stock outstanding and 51 percent of the aggregate of all stock outstanding. 
(b)  In the case of a partnership, such individual(s) must possess at least 51 percent of each class of partnership interest. Such ownership must be reflected in the business enterprise's partnership agreement. 
(c)  In the case of a limited liability company, such individual(s) must possess at least 51 percent of each class of member interest. 
(2)  All securities which constitute ownership of an entity for purposes of establishing it as an AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE must be held directly by African American, Asian Pacific American, Hispanic American, or female individuals or by AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, or FBEs. No securities held in trust or by any guardian for a minor shall be considered held by African Americans, Asian Pacific Americans, Hispanic Americans, or females in determining the ownership or control of a corporation. 
(3)  Ownership shall be measured as though not subject to the community property interest of a spouse if both spouses certify that only one spouse owns the business and if such assertion is supported by the totality of the evidence considered by the office of contract compliance. 
(4)  OCC must find that the individual(s) ownership is real, substantial, and continuing, going beyond pro forma ownership of the business enterprise as reflected in ownership documents. The individual(s) must enjoy the customary incidents of ownership, and share in the risks and profits commensurate with their ownership interests, as demonstrated by the substance, not merely the form, of arrangements. 
Satisfactorily completed or satisfactory completion shall mean when all of the tasks called for in the subcontract have been accomplished and documented as required by the city. When the city has made an incremental acceptance of a portion of a prime contract, the work on a subcontractor covered by the acceptance is deemed to be satisfactorily completed. 
Supplier shall mean a warehouser or manufacturer of materials, supplies or equipment which contracts directly with a bidder to provide such materials, supplies or equipment on an eligible project which involves a trade or service. For purposes of measuring the total contract dollars awarded or paid to suppliers on eligible projects, only amounts paid to suppliers of goods customarily and ordinarily used based upon standard industry or trade practices shall be counted. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2015-63(15-O-1556), § 3, 12-16-15 ) 
Sec. 2-1444. - Findings. 
Based on the factual predicate established by and set forth in the 2009 Disparity Report and 2015 Disparity Report incorporated in this division 12 and all other evidence of record, the City finds substantial barriers to full participation of minorities and women in certain areas of the private marketplace in the Atlanta Region and in certain areas of contracting with the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2015-63(15-O-1556), § 4, 12-16-15 ) 
Sec. 2-1445. - Statement of policy. 
It is the policy of the City of Atlanta to promote full and equal business opportunity for all persons doing business with the city. The city must ensure that firms seeking to participate in contracting and procurement activities with the city are not prevented from doing so on the basis of the race or gender of their owners. The city is committed to ensuring that it is not a passive participant in any private scheme of discrimination. To ensure that businesses are not discriminated against with regard to prime contracting, subcontracting or other partnering opportunities with the city, the city has developed an equal business opportunity program. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1446. - Applicability and implementation. 
This subdivision shall apply to all eligible projects for AABEs, eligible projects for AABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for APABEs, eligible projects for APABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for HABEs, eligible projects for HABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for FBEs, and eligible projects for FBE small business enterprises as each phrase is defined in section 2-1443, and shall be implemented by the office of contract compliance. The office of contract compliance shall be prohibited from applying the programs or provisions contained in section 2-1448(d), section 2-1449, or section 2-1450 to contracts or procurements that do not fall within the definition of eligible projects for AABEs, eligible projects for AABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for APABEs, eligible projects for APABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for HABEs, eligible projects for HABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for FBEs, and eligible projects for FBE small business enterprises. In addition: 
(1)  With respect to an eligible project for AABEs, the programs or provisions contained in section 2-1448(d), section 2-1449, or section 2-1450 shall not be available to APABEs, HABEs, or FBEs unless the contract or procurement also qualifies as an eligible project for APABEs, eligible project for HABEs, or eligible project for FBEs, respectively. 
(2)  With respect to an eligible project for AABE small business enterprises, the programs or provisions contained in section 2-1448(d), section 2-1449, or section 2-1450 shall not be available to APABE small business enterprises, HABE small business enterprises, or FBE small business enterprises unless the contract or procurement also qualifies as an eligible project for APABE small business enterprises, eligible project for HABE small business enterprises, or eligible project for FBE small business enterprises, respectively. 
(3)  With respect to an eligible project for APABEs, the programs or provisions contained in section 2-1448(d), section 2-1449, or section 2-1450 shall not be available to AABEs, HABEs, or FBEs unless the contract or procurement also qualifies as an eligible project for AABEs, eligible project for HABEs, or eligible project for FBEs, respectively. 
(4)  With respect to an eligible project for APABE small business enterprises, the programs or provisions contained in section 2-1448(d), section 2-1449, or section 2-1450 shall not be available to AABE small business enterprises, HABE small business enterprises, or FBE small business enterprises unless the contract or procurement also qualifies as an eligible project for AABE small business enterprises, eligible project for HABE small business enterprises, or eligible project for FBE small business enterprises, respectively. 
(5)  With respect to an eligible project for HABEs, the programs or provisions contained in section 2-1448(d), section 2-1449, or section 2-1450 shall not be available to AABEs, APABEs, or FBEs unless the contract or procurement also qualifies as an eligible project for AABEs, eligible project for APABEs, or eligible project for FBEs, respectively. 
(6)  With respect to an eligible project for HABE small business enterprises, the programs or provisions contained in section 2-1448(d), section 2-1449, or section 2-1450 shall not be available to AABE small business enterprises, APABE small business enterprises, or FBE small business enterprises unless the contract or procurement also qualifies as an eligible project for AABE small business enterprises, eligible project for APABE small business enterprises, or eligible project for FBE small business enterprises, respectively. 
(7)  With respect to an eligible project for FBEs, the programs or provisions contained in section 2-1448(d), section 2-1449, or section 2-1450 shall not be available to AABEs, APABEs, or HABEs unless the contract or procurement also qualifies as an eligible project for AABEs, eligible project for APABEs, or eligible project for HABEs, respectively. 
(8)  With respect to an eligible project for FBE small business enterprises, the programs or provisions contained in section 2-1448(d), section 2-1449, or section 2-1450 shall not be available to AABE small business enterprises, APABE small business enterprises, or HABE small business enterprises unless the contract or procurement also qualifies as an eligible project for AABE small business enterprises, eligible project for APABE small business enterprises, or eligible project for HABE small business enterprises, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1447. - Duties of office of contract compliance. 
Under this subdivision, the office of contract compliance shall have the following authority and duties for the encouragement of non-discrimination in city contracting and the implementation of the equal business opportunity program under this subdivision: 
(1)  Administration and enforcement of this subdivision. 
(2)  Establishment of written procedures, informal guidelines, and forms as may be necessary to effectuate this subdivision. 
(3)  Monitoring compliance with the requirements of this subdivision. 
(4)  Certification of businesses as AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, and FBEs in accordance with the standards set forth in this subdivision. 
(5)  Development of databases to be maintained as a public record of certified AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, and FBEs. 
(6)  Ensuring compliance with requirements for mentor-protégé or joint venture arrangements under section 2-1449 and section 2-1450, as applicable. 
(7)  Investigation of alleged violations of this subdivision, and the issuance of written statements following any determination of such investigation, stating the reasons therefore and any penalty to be imposed. 
(8)  Determination of whether any of the penalties set forth in section 2-1452 should be applied to a business. 
(9)  Attendance at pre-bid, pre-proposal, pre-construction and pre-work conferences. 
(10)  Provision to business entities of all forms, applications, documents and papers necessary to comply with this subdivision. 
(11)  Provision of information to potential bidders which shall include names and contact information of certified MFBEs for each eligible project, to reinforce and support outreach efforts by potential bidders. 
(12)  Notification by certified mail that a bidder who has bid on and who otherwise would have been awarded a contract has the right to appeal a determination of non-responsiveness regarding the requirements of this subdivision, said appeal to be determined by a contract compliance hearing officer, as provided in section 2-1454, within seven calendar days of receipt of the notice of noncompliance. 
(13)  Notification by certified mail that an applicant who has been denied certification as an AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE, has the right to appeal such determination, said appeal to be determined by a contract compliance hearing officer, as provided in section 2-1454, within seven calendar days of receipt of the notice of such determination. 
(14)  Notification to the chief procurement officer of any determination of non-responsiveness regarding the requirements of this subdivision, and of any appeal from any such determination. 
(15)  Monitoring, for data gathering and informational purposes, utilization of MFBEs on eligible projects. 
(16)  Maintenance of documents, forms, records or data regarding this program as provided in this subdivision, including: (a) documents, forms, records or data regarding the dollar amounts subcontracted to or expended for services performed by subcontractors and suppliers on eligible projects, including the race and gender ownership of each subcontractor and supplier; and (b) documents, forms, records or data regarding certified AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, and FBEs. 
(17)  Development and implementation of outreach and assistance programs to promote equal contracting opportunities for all businesses that wish to do business with the city, in accordance with section 2-1455. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1448. - Equal business opportunity subcontracting program. 
(a)  Program requirements. 
(1)  All bidders are required to make efforts to ensure that businesses are not discriminated against on the basis of their race, ethnicity or gender, and to demonstrate compliance with these program requirements at or prior to the time of bid opening, or upon request by OCC. Bidders are required to ensure that prospective subcontractors, vendors, suppliers and other potential participants are not denied opportunities to compete for work on a city contract on the basis of their race, ethnicity, or gender, and must afford all firms, including those owned by racial or ethnic minorities and women, opportunities to participate in the performance of the business of the city to the extent of their availability, capacity and willingness to compete. 
(2)  Bidders shall prohibit discrimination against any person or business on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, disability, age, national origin, political affiliation, gender identity, or racial profiling. Bidders shall develop a written policy statement that shall be approved by the office of contract compliance and distributed to all employees. Bidders shall conduct their contracting and purchasing programs so as to prohibit any discrimination and to resolve all allegations of discrimination. Bidders shall include a clause in its subcontracts that require the subcontractor to adopt and distribute a written non-discrimination policy that is the same as that of the contractor. The office of contract compliance shall review and investigate all allegations of discrimination which claim that prohibited forms of discrimination have occurred. Allegations of discrimination that are determined to have merit may be subject to penalties decided upon by the office of contract compliance in consultation with the initiating department. 
(3)  OCC will review information submitted by bidders pertaining to efforts to promote opportunities for diverse businesses, including MFBEs, to compete for business as subcontractors and/or suppliers. A bidder is eligible for award of a city contract upon a finding by OCC that the bidder has engaged in, and provided with its bid submission documentation of, efforts to ensure that its process of soliciting, evaluating and awarding subcontracts, placing orders, and partnering with other companies has been non-discriminatory. 
(b)  Determination of non-discrimination during bid process. No bidder shall be awarded a city contract as described in section 2-1188 and section 2-1189, excluding sole source procurement under section 2-1191, special procurement under section 2-1191.1, emergency procurement under section 2-1192, and contracts governed by 49 CFR Parts 23 and 26, unless the office of contract compliance determines that the bidder has satisfied the non-discrimination requirement of this section 2-1448(a). Accordingly, each bidder shall submit with each bid the following: 
(1)  Covenant of non-discrimination. Each bidder shall submit with her/his bid a covenant of non-discrimination in such form as directed in the solicitation document by the office of contract compliance. 
(2)  Outreach efforts documentation. Each bidder shall submit with her/his bid written documentation demonstrating the bidder's outreach efforts to identify, contact, contract with, or utilize businesses, including certified MFBEs and SBEs, as subcontractors or suppliers on the contract. The office of contract compliance shall set forth in the solicitation document the documents that a bidder may submit to demonstrate its outreach efforts, and such documentation may include, without limitation, evidence of the following: 
a.  The bidder contacted the office of contract compliance, other private sector and government entities, or local MFBE and SBE organizations, to identify available businesses to work on the contract, including certified MFBEs and SBEs, regardless of race, gender or ethnicity. 
b.  The bidder placed notices of opportunities for qualified businesses to perform subcontracting work on the contract in newspapers, trade journals, and other relevant publications, including publications specifically targeted to MFBEs and SBEs, or communicated such notices of opportunities via the Internet or by other available media or means. 
c.  The bidder submitted invitations to bid for work on the contract to qualified businesses, including certified MFBEs and SBEs, regardless of race, gender or ethnicity. 
d.  The bidder included in such notices and invitations a full disclosure of the criteria upon which bids, proposals or quotes would be evaluated, and also included contact information for inquiries, submissions, or requests to review any necessary bid documents. 
e.  The bidder promptly responded to inquiries, provided necessary physical access and time for interested businesses to fully review all necessary bid documents, and otherwise provided information, access and time necessary to allow all interested businesses to prepare bids and quotes, regardless of race, gender or ethnicity. 
f.  The bidder considered, or hired, or otherwise utilized qualified and available businesses, including certified MFBEs and SBEs, regardless of race, gender or ethnicity. 
g.  For each business which contacted or was contacted by the bidder regarding subcontracting or other services on the contract, but was not contracted with or otherwise utilized on the contract, the bidder shall provide a written statement setting forth the dates of such contacts, the nature of such contacts, and the reasons why an agreement was not reached regarding work to be performed on the project. The bidder shall maintain all written documents reflecting such contacts, including bids, quotes and proposals. 
(3)  Subcontractor project plan. Each bidder shall submit with her/his bid a completed and signed subcontractor project plan, in a form approved and provided by the office of contract compliance, which lists the name, address, telephone number and contact person of each subcontractor or other business to be used in the contract, the NAICS Code and the type of work or service each business will perform, the dollar value of the work and the scope of work, the ownership of each business by race and gender, if applicable the AABE, APABE, HABE, FBE, or SBE certification number of each business, and any other information requested by the office of contract compliance. In order for the office of contract compliance to officially consider a firm to be an MFBE, the MFBE firm must be certified by or have a certification application pending with the office of contract compliance prior to the bidder's submission of the bid. The subcontractor project plan shall not be changed or altered after approval of the plan and award of the contract without the written approval of the director of the office of contract compliance. A written letter to the director of the office of contract compliance requesting approval to change the subcontractor project plan must be submitted prior to any change in the plan or termination of an MFBE's contract. 
(c)  OCC review of all bidder submissions. The office of contract compliance shall determine whether a bidder has satisfied the requirements of section 2-1448(a) and (b) based on its review of the covenant of non-discrimination, the outreach efforts documentation, the subcontractor project plan, and its review of other relevant facts and circumstances, including complaints received as part of the bid process. 
(1)  Receipt of complaint of discrimination in the bid process. The office of contract compliance shall accept complaints of alleged discrimination during the bid process regarding any participant in the bid process. Where the complaint of discrimination is specific to the procurement which is under consideration by the city, the office of contract compliance may investigate said complaint, determine its validity, and determine whether the actions complained of impact the bidder's responsiveness on the specific procurement. Allegations of discrimination based on events, incidents or occurrences which are unrelated to the specific procurement will be placed in the bidder's file maintained in the vendor relations database and handled in accordance with the procedure established in the city's vendor relations subdivision, section 2-1465, et seq. 
(2)  Determination of violation of EBO process. Where the office of contract compliance investigates a complaint of discrimination that is related to the specific bid process, the details of that investigation, including findings, shall be recorded and maintained in the vendor relations database, pursuant to section 2-1471. 
(3)  Office of contract compliance determination of non-compliance. When, based upon the totality of the circumstances, the office of contract compliance determines that a bidder fails to satisfy the requirements of section 2-1448(a) of a city bid solicitation, the director of the office of contract compliance shall present a written determination of noncompliance to the Chief Procurement Officer which states the determination and lists the reasons for the determination. A bid that does not comply with the requirements set forth in section 2-1448(a) shall be deemed non-responsive and rejected. 
(4)  Office of contract compliance determination of non-responsiveness. The covenant of non-discrimination, the outreach efforts documentation, the subcontractor project plan, and any other information required by OCC in the solicitation document pursuant to section 2-1448(b) must be completed in their entirety by each bidder and submitted with the other required bid documents in order for the bid to be considered as a responsive bid. Failure to timely submit these forms, fully completed, will result in the bid being considered as a non-responsive bid, and therefore, excluded from consideration. 
(d)  OCC review of bidder submissions on eligible projects for AABEs, eligible projects for APABEs, eligible projects for HABEs, and eligible projects for FBEs. In addition to the review described in section 2-1448(c), the office of contract compliance will conduct additional reviews of procurements that involve eligible projects for AABEs, eligible projects for APABEs, eligible projects for HABEs, or eligible projects for FBEs. In reviewing the documents submitted by a bidder on eligible projects for AABEs, eligible projects for APABEs, eligible projects for HABEs, or eligible projects for FBEs to determine whether the bidder has satisfied the good faith efforts requirement to subcontract with AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, or FBEs (as the case may be), the office of contract compliance will consider, among other things, the total project dollars subcontracted to or expended for services performed by other businesses, including certified AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, or FBEs, whether such businesses perform commercially useful functions in the work of the contract based upon standard industry trade practices, whether any amounts paid to supplier businesses are for goods customarily and ordinarily used based upon standard industry trade practices, and the availability of certified AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, or FBEs (as the case may be) within the relevant NAICS Codes for such contract. To assist prime contractors in this effort, the office of contract compliance shall set forth in the solicitation documents for the eligible project the availability of businesses, including certified AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, and FBEs within the relevant NAICS Codes for such eligible project. 
(1)  Database. The city will maintain a database identifying AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, or FBEs, that will include the types of services provided by the business enterprise and contact information for the business enterprise. A list from the database will be made available to bidders to assist them in their efforts to meet the requirements of the equal business opportunity subcontracting program. The list prepared from the database will specify which firms the City of Atlanta has determined to be certified minority and female business enterprises, in accordance with the City of Atlanta definitions for MFBEs. This list is not exhaustive. 
(2)  Minority and female business enterprise utilization. To ensure that the equal business opportunity subcontracting program achieves its purpose, the office of contract compliance will verify the AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE certification status of each firm claiming such designation. Only certified AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, or FBEs (as the case may be) may be designated in reports as AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, or FBEs (as the case may be) for purposes of city projects. The percentage of AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, or FBEs (as the case may be) utilized by a bidder will be calculated by dividing the AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE's price for providing direct labor or a bona fide service by the bidder's total dollars as identified in the bid. 
(3)  Equal business opportunity program compliance, monitoring and audit. The City of Atlanta reserves the right to conduct an audit of a bidder's work on eligible projects for AABEs, eligible projects for APABEs, eligible projects for HABEs, or eligible projects for FBEs to confirm the bidder's compliance with this equal business opportunity subcontracting program. 
(4)  Contract progress. The office of contract compliance shall require contractors on eligible projects for AABEs, eligible projects for APABEs, eligible projects for HABEs, and eligible projects for FBEs to complete and submit to OCC documentation regarding their utilization of AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, or FBEs (as the case may be), along with all other pertinent records required by OCC. Said documentation shall be in a format that is established by the office of contract compliance. These records will be submitted to OCC monthly. 
(e)  Penalties. Breach of any of the provisions of this section by a bidder shall be subject to any or all of the penalties set forth in section 2-1452 below. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1449. - Requirements for mentor-protégé relationships. 
(a)  Based upon the scope of work and market availability, the office of contract compliance shall determine on a project-by-project basis on eligible projects for AABEs, eligible projects for AABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for APABEs, eligible projects for APABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for HABEs, eligible projects for HABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for FBEs, and eligible projects for FBE small business enterprises whether good faith efforts to enter into a mentor-protégé relationship shall be required for such contract. On such contracts in which good faith efforts to enter into a mentor-protégé relationship are required, no bid shall be accepted unless submitted by a mentor-protégé team, unless the office of contract compliance has determined that good faith efforts to enter into a mentor-protégé relationship have been demonstrated. The office of contract compliance shall determine whether good faith efforts to enter into a mentor-protégé relationship have been adequately demonstrated based on a review of relevant facts, documents and circumstances. 
(b)  On such eligible projects for AABEs, eligible projects for AABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for APABEs, eligible projects for APABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for HABEs, eligible projects for HABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for FBEs, and eligible projects for FBE small business enterprises (as the case may be) in which good faith efforts to enter into a mentor-protégé relationship are required, the mentor and protégé team members must have different race ownership, different gender ownership, or both. MFBE members of the mentor-protégé team must be certified as such by the office of contract compliance, and the mentor-protégé team shall include in its bid submittal the MFBE certification number of each MFBE team member. A bid submitted by a mentor-protégé team comprised of bidders with both the same race and gender ownership shall be deemed nonresponsive and rejected. 
(c)  As to each mentor-protégé relationship under this section, a written mentor-protégé agreement must be completed by both parties to the mentor-protégé relationship and executed before a notary public, which clearly delineates the rights and responsibilities of the mentor and protégé, complies with any requirements of the office of contract compliance as set forth in bid documents or otherwise, and provides that the mentor-protégé relationship shall continue for, at a minimum, the duration of the project. 
(d)  The office of contract compliance shall review and approve all contractual agreements regarding the terms and provisions of the mentor-protégé relationship prior to the award of a contract on an eligible projects for AABEs, eligible projects for AABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for APABEs, eligible projects for APABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for HABEs, eligible projects for HABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for FBEs, and eligible projects for FBE small business enterprises to the mentor protégé team. Mentor-protégé teams may submit agreements for pre-approval no later than 14 calendar days prior to the date set for receipt of bids on an eligible project. Otherwise, agreements must be submitted on or before the date set for receipt of bids on an eligible project. A bid submitted by a mentor-protégé team that does not include a satisfactory written mentor-protégé agreement in accordance with the requirements of this section shall be deemed non-responsive and rejected. 
(e)  During the term of the contract the mentor and protégé businesses must each provide to the office of contract compliance a quarterly summary of the mentor skills provided to the protégé, which shall include: 
(1)  The time spent between mentor and protégé businesses in furtherance of the mentor-protégé relationship; 
(2)  The nature and extent of managerial, technical, financial and/or bonding assistance provided; 
(3)  A summary and explanation of any projects bid on or undertaken by the mentor-protégé team in the private sector or for a governmental entity other than the city; and 
(4)  Any additional or further information required by the office of contract compliance as set forth in bid documents or otherwise. 
(5)  No officer, director, employee or member of the mentor-protégé team shall be allowed to bid or otherwise participate independently on a contract where the mentor protégé team is bidding or otherwise participating. 
(6)  Each member of the mentor-protégé team shall provide the office of contract compliance access to review all records pertaining to mentor-protégé agreements before and after the award of a contract in order to reasonably assess compliance with this subdivision. 
(7)  Penalties for noncompliance. Any responsible bidder who fails to comply with this section shall be subject to any or all of the penalties contained in section 2-1452. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1450. - Requirements for joint ventures. 
(a)  Based upon the scope of work and market availability, the office of contract compliance shall determine on a project-by-project basis on all eligible projects for AABEs, eligible projects for AABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for APABEs, eligible projects for APABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for HABEs, eligible projects for HABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for FBEs, and eligible projects for FBE small business enterprises whether good faith efforts to enter into a joint venture shall be required for such project. Only projects valued over $5,000,000.00 are eligible for consideration under this section. On such projects in which good faith efforts to enter into a joint venture relationship is required, no bid shall be accepted unless submitted by a joint venture, unless the office of contract compliance has determined that good faith efforts to enter into a joint venture have been demonstrated. The office of contract compliance shall determine whether good faith efforts to enter into a joint venture have been adequately demonstrated based on a review of relevant facts, documents and circumstances. 
(b)  On such eligible projects for AABEs, eligible projects for AABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for APABEs, eligible projects for APABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for HABEs, eligible projects for HABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for FBEs, and eligible projects for FBE small business enterprises (as the case may be) in which good faith efforts to enter into a joint venture relationship is required, the joint venture member businesses must have different race ownership, different gender ownership, or both. MFBE members of the joint venture must be certified as such by the office of contract compliance, and the joint venture team shall include in its bid submittal the MFBE certification number of each MFBE joint venture member. A bid submitted by a joint venture comprised of bidders with both the same race and gender ownership shall be deemed non-responsive and rejected. 
(c)  As to each joint venture under this section, a written joint venture agreement must be completed by all parties to the joint venture and executed before a notary public, which clearly delineates the rights and responsibilities of each member or partner, complies with any requirements of the office of contract compliance as set forth in bid documents or otherwise, and provides that the joint venture shall continue for, at a minimum, the duration of the project. 
(d)  The office of contract compliance shall review and approve all contractual agreements regarding the terms and provisions of each joint venture relationship prior to the award of a contract on an eligible projects for AABEs, eligible projects for AABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for APABEs, eligible projects for APABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for HABEs, eligible projects for HABE small business enterprises, eligible projects for FBEs, and eligible projects for FBE small business enterprises (as the case may be) to the joint venture, including agreements pertaining to: 
(1)  The initial capital investment of each venture partner; 
(2)  The proportional allocation of profits and losses to each venture partner; no MFBE venture partner's liability should ever exceed said partners percentage of revenue earned while a participant in the joint venture. 
(3)  The sharing of the right to control the ownership and management of the joint venture; 
(4)  Actual participation of the venture partners on the project; 
(5)  The method of and responsibility for accounting; 
(6)  The method by which disputes are resolved; and 
(7)  Any additional or further information required by the office of contract compliance as set forth in bid documents or otherwise. 
Joint ventures may submit agreements for pre-approval no later than 14 calendar days prior to the date set for receipt of bids on an eligible-project. Otherwise, agreements must be submitted on or before the date set for receipt of bids on an eligible project. A bid submitted by a joint venture that does not include a satisfactory written joint venture agreement in accordance with the requirements of this section shall be deemed non-responsive and rejected. 
(e)  The joint venture, and each member of the joint venture, shall provide the office of contract compliance access to review all records pertaining to joint venture agreements before and after the award of a contract in order to reasonably assess compliance with this subdivision. 
(f)  Penalties for noncompliance. Any responsible bidder who fails to comply with this section shall be subject to any or all of the penalties contained in section 2-1452. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1451. - Mediation of disputes between joint venture and mentor-protégé team members and prime and subcontractors. 
(a)  If, after the award of a contract to a joint venture or mentor-protégé team, any member of the joint venture or mentor-protégé team believes that the terms and conditions of the agreement as approved by the office of contract compliance have not been complied with, then such member may seek review and mediation of such agreement before the director of the office of contract compliance. The request for review must be made in writing. 
(b)  If, after the award of a contract, a dispute arises between the prime contractor and a subcontractor regarding performance of work or provision of services or supplies on the eligible project, then such prime contractor or subcontractor may seek review and mediation of the issue before the director of the office of contract compliance. The request for review must be made in writing. If the dispute involves an alleged violation of the city's prompt payment requirement, as set forth in section 2-1456 below, the contractor, subcontractor and the city shall proceed as is set forth in section 2-1456(3). 
(c)  Within 20 calendar days of receipt of a request for review, if the dispute has not already been resolved informally among the parties, the director shall set a mediation date, and the director shall provide written notice of the mediation date to each of the interested parties. 
(d)  The director shall have authority to make recommendations in an attempt to resolve the dispute. 
(e)  In the event that the mediation with the director of contract compliance does not resolve all disputes, the director of the office of contract compliance shall have the option of referring mediation proceedings to a qualified outside mediator, contingent upon the consent of the interested parties. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1452. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
A contractor who fails to comply with any portion of this division, and whose failure to comply continues for a period of 30 calendar days after the contractor receives written notice of such noncompliance from the director of the office contract compliance, shall be subject to any or all of the following penalties: 
(1)  Withholding of ten percent of all future payments for the eligible project until the office of contract compliance determines that the contractor is in compliance with this subdivision. 
(2)  Withholding of all future payments under the eligible project until it is determined that the contractor is in compliance with this subdivision. 
(3)  Cancellation of the eligible project. 
(4)  Refusal of all future contracts or subcontracts with the city for a minimum of one year and a maximum of five years from the date upon which this penalty is imposed pursuant to the provisions contained in Division 16 herein. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1453. - Certification of African American-, Asian Pacific American-, Hispanic American-, and female-owned businesses. 
(a)  Application for certification. AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, or FBEs who wish to be certified as such by the office of contract compliance must submit a written certification application on a form approved and provided by the office of contract compliance. 
(b)  Standards. The office of contract compliance shall determine the eligibility of AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, and FBEs to be certified according to the following standards: 
(1)  The owner of an MFBE must be an African American, Asian Pacific American, Hispanic American, or female. Bona fide racial or ethnic group memberships shall be established on the basis of the individual's claim that he or she is African American, Asian Pacific American, or Hispanic American as defined in section 2-1443, and is so regarded by that particular racial or ethnic community. 
(2)  The business enterprise seeking certification must be a for-profit entity that is independent and continuing. 
(3)  The MFBE owner(s) listed on the certification application must "own" and "control" the business, as those terms are defined in section 2-1443 above; 
(4)  The MFBE must be able to demonstrate that it is or will be performing a commercially useful function; and 
(5)  The MFBE must be located in the Atlanta Region. 
(c)  The office of contract compliance will certify the applicant as an AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE, or provide the applicant with written justification of denial of certification, within 90 days after the date that the office of contract compliance receives a satisfactorily completed application from the applicant. 
(d)  The office of contract compliance will review and evaluate applications, and may reject an application based on one or more of the following: 
(1)  The applicant does not meet the requirements for certification as an AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE as set forth in subsection 2-1453(b). 
(2)  The application is not satisfactorily completed within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the office of contract compliance. 
(3)  The application contains false information. 
(4)  The applicant does not promptly provide required information in connection with the certification review conducted by the office of contract compliance. 
(e)  Certification denial. If an AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE applicant is denied certification on the basis of information submitted, the business cannot reapply for certification for a period of one year from the date of the notice of denial, provided that such business shall have the right to appeal such denial under section 2-1454, and to be certified if such appeal is decided in its favor. 
(f)  Investigation. The office of contract compliance shall investigate, including on-site investigation if necessary, African American, Asian Pacific American, Hispanic American, and female business ownership arrangements beyond formal documents submitted by such businesses if 
(1)  The business is applying for certification with the city for the first time; 
(2)  The business is newly formed or the business has African American, Asian Pacific American, Hispanic American, and/or female ownership of less than 100 percent; 
(3)  There is a previous or continuing employer-employee relationship between or among present owners; 
(4)  A business which is not an AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE has an interest in such entity; 
(5)  The ownership of the business has changed since documents have been submitted to the office of contract compliance; 
(6)  A review of the documents submitted with the application raises concerns regarding either ownership or control of the business; and/or 
(7)  The director of the office of contract compliance deems it appropriate. 
(g)  Term. The certification as an AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE shall expire two years from the date of the approval of the application. Following the expiration date, a business is no longer a certified AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE. An African American-, Asian Pacific American-, Hispanic American-, or female-owned business must submit a new application for certification as an AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE and establish that it continues to meet the requirements in this section in order to be certified as an AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE. 
(h)  Graduation. Certified AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, or FBEs shall be deemed graduated from being certified as AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, or FBEs when the MFBE has been certified for ten consecutive years, unless the certified AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE continues to qualify as an SBE pursuant to section 2-1357 and section 2-1363, in which case it may continue to be certified as an AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE, respectively. The office of contract compliance will nevertheless continue to ensure that African Americans, Asian Pacific Americans, Hispanic Americans, and females are not discriminated against in the procurement process, whether or not such companies are eligible for certification as MFBEs. 
(i)  Decertification. The office of contract compliance may decertify a business that it finds is not or is no longer a bona fide AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE. Businesses decertified for reasons other than by voluntary request may not apply for recertification for such time as may be specified, up to one year. A business that is decertified may file an appeal under section 2-1454. Any of the following reasons, which are not intended to be all-inclusive, are sufficient grounds for decertification: 
(1)  The business has changed to the extent that it no longer satisfies the ownership, control, and/or other requirements set forth in subsection 2-1453(b); 
(2)  The business fails to submit within a reasonable time period information requested by the office of contract compliance; 
(3)  The business ceases to be a viable enterprise for profit because of involuntary bankruptcy, dissolution or other cessation of commerce. 
(4)  Information or evidence that was not available to the office of contract compliance at the time the firm was certified is now available, and said information, if known at the time of certification review would have resulted in a denial of certification. 
(5)  Information was concealed or misrepresented by the firm in connection with the certification application or review conducted by the office of contract compliance. 
(6)  A change in the certification standard or requirements of the city has occurred since the certification of the firm. 
(j)  Continuing duty. Certified AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, and FBEs shall be under a continuing duty to inform the office of contract compliance in writing of any changes in the AABE's, APABEs, HABE's, or FBE's business if, as a result of such changes, the AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE no longer satisfies the requirements of subsection 2-1453(b). 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1454. - Appeals. 
(a)  Determination of non-responsiveness. A bidder that is determined to be non-responsive to the requirements of this division by the office of contract compliance, and that otherwise would have been awarded a contract, as determined in consultation with the chief procurement officer, shall receive a written determination by the director of the office of contract compliance, via certified mail, setting forth the reasons for the determination of non-responsiveness. 
(b)  Denial of certification as an AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE. Upon denying certification as an AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE, the director of the office of contract compliance shall notify the affected party in writing, via certified mail, setting forth the reasons for the denial of certification. 
(c)  Time for filing notice of appeal. Any business that has been denied certification as an AABE, APABE, HABE, or an FBE, or against whom a final determination of non-responsiveness regarding the requirements of this division has been made by the office of contract compliance, may appeal the final determination of non-responsiveness or denial of AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE certification, by filing a notice of appeal with the director of the office of contract compliance in writing within seven calendar days of receipt of the notice of the final determination of non-responsiveness or denial of certification. 
(d)  Posting of appeal security. Any bidder that files an appeal to a final determination of non-responsiveness by the office of contract compliance must, at the time of filing, post security in the amount of one percent of the financial offer of the appellant or, in the event the bid/proposal does not involve a fixed financial offer either in the form of payment of monies to the city or payment of monies to the appellant, $100,000.00, to be tendered in the form of a bond or certified check. If the contract compliance hearing officer upholds the determination of the office of contract compliance, he or she shall assess against the appellant reasonable attorneys' fees and other administrative costs incurred by the city in reviewing and responding to the appeal. If the city is represented by its law department, such fees and costs will be calculated at the hourly rate of each attorney participating in the review and response to the appeal set forth in each attorney's most recent city paycheck times the number of hours worked by such participating attorneys on the appeal. If the city is represented by outside counsel, such fees and costs will be calculated at the billing rates of the firm's attorneys, plus all out of pocket costs of the firm concerning the appeal. Within 15 days of ruling against the appellant, the contract compliance hearing officer, in consultation with the city's law department and outside counsel, if any, will calculate the city's cost in reviewing and responding to the appeal and will apply the appellant's bond or certified check to the costs. Any remaining balance of the bond or certified check will be returned to the appellant. 
(e)  Notice of hearing date and hearing. Within three calendar days of receipt of a notice of appeal from an aggrieved party, excluding official holidays, the director of the office of contract compliance shall forward the notice to the contract compliance hearing officer. 
(f)  Exhaustion of administrative remedies. A protestor shall be required to exhaust its administrative remedies before filing suit in any state or federal court based on a determination of non-responsiveness or denial of certification by the office of contract compliance rendered pursuant to the city's equal business opportunity subdivision. 
(g)  Duties of contract compliance hearing officer. The duties of the contract compliance hearing officer shall be as follows: 
(1)  Exclusive jurisdiction of the contract compliance hearing officer. The contract compliance hearing officer shall have exclusive jurisdiction in all appeals from denials of certification as an AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE and in appeals by a bidder against whom a determination of non-responsiveness regarding the requirements of this division has been made by the office of contract compliance. 
(2)  The contract compliance hearing officer shall set a hearing date not more than seven calendar days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal from the director of the office of contract compliance, excluding official holidays. The hearing officer shall cause notice of the hearing to be served upon all parties by certified U.S. mail. Such notice shall set forth with particularity the decision being appealed by the aggrieved business and shall include the hearing date, time and place. 
(3)  At the hearing, all parties shall be provided a fair and impartial hearing and shall be allowed to produce any and all evidence in either party's possession concerning the final determination of non-responsiveness to the requirements of this division, or the denial of certification as an AABE, APABE, HABE, or FBE. 
(h)  Decision. Within seven calendar days after conclusion of the hearing, excluding official holidays, the contract compliance hearing officer shall make a written decision on the appeal, which decision shall affirm, alter or reverse the final determination of non-responsiveness or the denial of certification by the director of the office of contract compliance. The hearing officer shall decide whether the final determination of non-responsiveness or the denial of certification being appealed was in accordance with the law at the time that the director of the office of contract compliance made the decision being disputed. 
(i)  Notice of decision. Within seven calendar days after conclusion of the hearing, excluding official holidays, the contract compliance hearing officer shall issue written notice of the decision on the appeal to all parties. The notice of the decision shall be sent to all parties by certified U.S. mail and shall set forth the reasons for the decision. 
(j)  Appeal. The decision of the hearing officer shall be binding on all parties, subject to the right of appeal as provided by O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1455. - Outreach and assistance to subcontractors by the office of contract compliance. 
To ensure that opportunities to participate on city contracts are available to the widest feasible universe of interested, available and qualified businesses, the office of contract compliance shall develop and implement a written comprehensive outreach program aimed at increasing business participation in the city's contracting and procurement process. This program may include, without limitation, any or all of the following: 
(1)  The office of contract compliance may disseminate at community events, trade shows, and other appropriate business functions, and publish at regular intervals, in print and in electronic media (including publications or electronic media targeted to MFBEs and small businesses) information describing the equal business opportunity program, the small business opportunity program, and the functions of the office of contract compliance. In addition, the office of contract compliance may disseminate information in print and/or electronic form, may provide individualized counseling, and/or may conduct seminars regarding the certification process. 
(2)  The office of contract compliance may establish a procedure to engage in continuous recruitment and outreach efforts directed at business assistance organizations to increase the pool of businesses available to do business with the city. The office of contract compliance may identify suppliers through business development organizations and participation at various trade shows, supplier diversity groups and work with various national and local supplier development counsels and organizations. 
(3)  The office of contract compliance may disseminate at community events, trade shows, and other appropriate business functions, and publish at regular intervals, in print and in electronic media information identifying ongoing contracting opportunities with the city, and providing contact information by which businesses may obtain additional information from the office of contract compliance. OCC will provide this information in languages other than English, where appropriate. To the extent feasible, the office of contract compliance may enter into arrangements to share data regarding upcoming city projects, and subcontracting opportunities on the projects, with other businesses and agencies or jurisdictions in the Atlanta Region. 
(4)  The office of contract compliance may assist businesses in submitting bids for contracts by disseminating information in print or electronic form, by providing individualized counseling, and/or by conducting seminars regarding the process for submitting a bid on a city project. The office of contract compliance may sponsor "How to do business with the City of Atlanta" seminars and invite a wide array of businesses. 
(5)  The office of contract compliance may actively encourage businesses to attend the pre-bid conferences, providing face-to-face and one-on-one meeting opportunities with employees of the city within the divisions and departments that are involved with the contracting and procurement process. OCC may establish and implement training and awareness programs with the employees of the city's user departments to educate them with regard to increasing utilization of a wide array of businesses. 
(6)  The office of contract compliance may provide information and advice to the department of procurement regarding the effectiveness of current bidding procedures in facilitating bidding on contracts by the widest feasible universe of interested businesses. This information may include suggestions regarding how to arrange solicitations, times for the presentation of bids, quantities, specifications, and delivery schedules in ways that facilitate the participation of all interested businesses. In this regard, the office of contract compliance may provide and encourage feedback from contractors and subcontractors regarding every aspect of the city's procurement process and may establish a system to allow for anonymous comments to be sent through the mail. 
(7)  The office of contract compliance may create workshops for businesses located within the city on how to compete in the private sector, including advice on marketing, soliciting, and preparing a bid. OCC may establish a program which will incorporate business and entrepreneurial training and assistance mentoring, matchmaking, individual consulting and regular training workshops and seminars. To accomplish the same, OCC may reach out to and collaborate with regional higher educational institutions. 
(8)  The office of contract compliance may develop communications and other written materials that are meant to encourage and provide information to contractors to increase their utilization of subcontractors. In addition, OCC may sponsor networking events that allow businesses to meet each other and that create an opportunity for contractors to discuss with subcontractors upcoming needs. 
(9)  The office of contract compliance may develop a resource directory to be provided to interested businesses, with information regarding assistance in bonding and financing, financial management, accounting, construction management and technical assistance. 
(10)  The office of contract compliance may establish policies to prohibit discrimination in the provision of credit or bonding regarding City of Atlanta contracts. 
(11)  The OCC may work with existing service providers in the Atlanta Region: a) Develop a technical assistance program to prepare small businesses to compete for specific contracts; b) Implement and monitor a supportive services program to develop and improve immediate and long term business management, record keeping and financial and accounting capability for businesses; c) Develop and provide services to help businesses improve their long term development, increase their opportunities to participate in a variety of kinds of work, handle increasingly significant projects, and achieve self sufficiency; d) Establish a program to assist new, start-up or emerging businesses; and e) Assist businesses in developing their capability to utilize emerging technology and conduct business through electronic media. 
(12)  The office of contract compliance may create and maintain records on all subcontractor participation on city projects. The office may perform investigations regarding the actual utilization of subcontractors during the term of the contract as compared with the anticipated use of subcontractors at the time of bid submittal. Subcontractors shall report the amount of work they anticipate performing on the contract and will report the actual work performed and the amount billed. The office of contract compliance will allow subcontractors to confirm the status of their subcontracts and the payments received thereunder. 
(13)  The office of contract compliance may continue to develop its website to provide general information on doing business with the city, on the bid process, on how to get certified, to provide a calendar of events, bid lists, bid status reports, to post solicitation notices, and to provide downloadable forms and other appropriate information, in addition, contractors that have been awarded city contracts may be posted on the website to allow businesses to target their marketing efforts to contractors that have worked or are working with the city, 
(14)  The office of contract compliance shall establish a mechanism by which a business can file an administrative complaint with the city if it believes a prime contractor or the city is discriminating in the award of contracts or subcontracts. 
(15)  The office of contract compliance is authorized to develop and implement such other and further outreach activities and programs as the director may from time to time recommend. From time to time an overall evaluation of the effectiveness of the program with regard to non-discrimination in contracting shall be conducted. Appropriate changes to the measures and programs based on the results of the evaluations will be implemented. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1456. - Prompt payment of prime contractors and subcontractors. 
Contractors awarded City of Atlanta contracts shall ensure the prompt and full payment of any subcontractors working on the contract. 
(1)  Every contract by the city for the performance of work shall contain a provision requiring the prime contractor to certify in writing that all subcontractors and suppliers have been paid promptly for work and materials from previous progress payments received (less any retainage) by the prime contractor prior to receipt of any further progress payments. A contractor is required to pay subcontractors or suppliers funds due from progress payments within three business days of receipt of payment from the city. 
During the contract and upon completion of the contract, the city may request documentation to certify payment to subcontractors or suppliers. This subsection in no way creates any contractual relationship between any subcontractor and the city or any liability on the city for contractor's failure to make timely payment to the subcontractor. 
(2)  A contractor who fails to ensure the prompt and full payment of subcontractors shall be subject to the penalties set forth under section 2-1452. 
(3)  In the event of a good faith dispute regarding the amount of payment due to a subcontractor, contractor and subcontractor shall attend a binding arbitration within seven days of notice by the office of contract compliance in order to resolve any payment disputes. If the arbitrator determines that the subcontractor is entitled to payment under the subcontract, contractor shall be required to pay the subcontractor within three business days of the arbitrator's decision. In the alternative, the contractor and subcontractor may utilize the mediation mechanism set forth in section 2-1451, but only if such alternative is agreed to by the contractor, subcontractor, and the director of the office of contract compliance. 
(4)  The director of the office of contract compliance is authorized to make a determination that the interests of the city are best served by issuing joint checks to resolve a dispute between vendors and suppliers, prime and subcontractors or sub-consultants, mentors and protégés, or joint venture partners. In such circumstances, the director of the office of contract compliance will issue a written request to the chief financial officer to issue two checks, in amounts deemed by the director of the office of contract compliance to be equitable. The department of finance will issue these checks exclusively to the director of the office of contract compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1457. - Reports by the office of contract compliance. 
(a)  The director of the office of contract compliance shall cause to be issued periodically, but no later than 30 months after the effective date of this division, reports on the operation of this subdivision. The director shall be authorized to contract with or retain outside consultants or experts in connection with preparing a report and to assist in assembly, review and analysis of data necessary to prepare such report. 
(b)  The office of contract compliance shall provide to such consultants or experts such records in its custody as may be necessary to evaluate the operation of this subdivision and the extent to which the purposes of this subdivision are accomplished. A report shall include any findings or recommendations regarding the economic opportunities available to AABEs, APABEs, HABEs, and FBEs in the Atlanta Region and any recommendations regarding changes to this subdivision or the enactment of any additional programs, procedures or strategies to better effectuate the purposes of this subdivision. 
(c)  Reports issued under this section shall be delivered to the mayor and to the city council, a copy of any report(s) shall be maintained at the office of contract compliance for review, and copies shall be made available to the general public upon written request. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1458. - City's role in dispute resolution. 
All actions taken by the office of contract compliance to ensure the fair and equitable treatment of subcontractors or joint venture/mentor protégé partners working on City of Atlanta projects or seeking work on City of Atlanta projects are done pursuant to the city's non-discrimination policy and shall not be construed as the city taking a position as to the merits of the dispute nor creating any privity of contract between the city and any contractor or subcontractor. Further, no contractor working on a City of Atlanta project or seeking work from the City of Atlanta shall have any claim against the city for any actions taken to ensure the fair and equitable treatment of subcontractors working on City of Atlanta projects or seeking work on City of Atlanta projects. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1459. - Severability. 
If any provision of this subdivision or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this subdivision which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or applications, and are to this end declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1460. - Sunset 
This division 12 shall sunset on December 31, 2020. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2013-44(13-O-1267), § 1, 9-25-13 ; Ord. No. 2014-15(14-O-1147), § 1, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-37(14-O-1380), § 1, 8-27-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-01(14-O-1620), § 1, 1-14-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-30(15-O-1266), § 1, 6-24-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-63(15-O-1556), § 5, 12-16-15 ) 
Secs. 2-1461—2-1464. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Vendor Relations 

Sec. 2-1465. - Short title. 
This subdivision shall be known as the City of Atlanta's "Vendor Relations Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1466. - General policy. 
The City of Atlanta has a need to maintain data on the performance of its vendors in order to ensure that purchases are made from, and contracts are awarded to, responsible prospective contractors only. The award of a contract to a contractor based on lowest evaluated price alone can be false economy if there is subsequent default, improper or exaggerated claims, late deliveries, or other unsatisfactory performance, resulting in additional contractual and administrative costs. While it is important that city purchases be made at the lowest price, this does not require an award to a contractor solely because that contractor submits the lowest offer. A prospective contractor must affirmatively demonstrate its responsibility, including, when necessary, the responsibility of proposed subcontractors. 
The department of procurement has responsibility for making determinations of responsibility with input from the using departments and the office of contract compliance. In addition to information gathered about a bidder during the bid process, it is important that the city gather information regarding the responsibility of the contractor throughout the term of the contract, including without limitation data regarding the contractor's interactions with the city, and maintain said information in a central repository which is accessible to all city departments. It is the policy of the City of Atlanta to manage vendor relations proactively. 
One aspect of responsibility is the vendor's compliance with the city's non-discrimination policy. It is the policy of the City of Atlanta not to discriminate, either directly or indirectly, against persons because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, disability, age, gender identity or racial profiling. To that end, the city has the right to take any measures it deems appropriate to ensure that it is not a passive participant in public or private sector discrimination by the vendors with whom it contracts. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1467. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Atlanta Region shall mean the geographical area consisting of Barrow, Bartow, Carroll, Cherokee, Clayton, Cobb, Coweta, DeKalb, Douglas, Fayette, Forsyth, Fulton, Gwinnett, Henry, Newton, Paulding, Pickens, Rockdale, Spalding and Walton counties. 
Bid shall mean a quotation, proposal, sealed bid or offer to perform or provide labor, materials, supplies or services to the city for a price for an eligible project, or for an eligible project that generates revenue for the city. 
Bidder shall mean any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, or corporation that submits a bid to the City of Atlanta. 
City shall mean the City of Atlanta. 
Contractor shall mean all individuals, sole proprietorships, partnerships, joint ventures, or corporations who enter into a contract with the city as a prime contractor. The term "contractor" shall be used synonymously with the term "vendor" herein. 
Eligible project shall mean: 
(1)  Any city contract as described in section 2-1188 and section 2-1189, excluding small purchases not exceeding $100,000.00 under section 2-1190, sole source procurement under section 2-1191, emergency procurement under section 2-1192, and contracts governed by 49 CFR Parts 23 and 26. 
(2)  For purposes of this subdivision, contract or project "value" shall mean either the expenditure of funds by the city on said contract, or the amount of revenue generated for the city by a contractor as a direct result of a city contract. 
Non-discrimination policy shall mean the following: It is the policy of the City of Atlanta not to discriminate, either directly or indirectly, against persons because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, disability, age, gender identity or racial profiling. 
Officer shall mean any individual who serves as the chief executive officer, chief financial officer, or chief operating officer of the contractor, by whatever titles known. 
RFQ shall mean a request for qualifications on an eligible project. 
RFQ proponent shall mean an individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, or corporation that submits a proposal in response to a city RFQ. 
Subcontract shall mean any contract between a subcontractor and a contractor. 
Subcontractor shall mean any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, or corporation which is engaged by a contractor pursuant to a contract with the city, or which is proposed to be utilized by a bidder in a bid submitted to the city. 
Vendor shall mean all individuals, sole proprietorships, partnerships, joint ventures, or corporations who enter into a contract with the city as a prime contractor. The term "vendor" shall be used synonymously with the term "contractor" herein. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1468. - Implementation. 
This subdivision shall be implemented by the mayor's office of contract compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1469. - Vendor relations database. 
(a)  The office of contract compliance shall maintain a vendor relations database in electronic form, which is accessible to appropriate officials in all city departments. 
(b)  All city departments are directed to maintain information, in an electronic form, on the performance of vendors on city contracts and to transmit this information periodically, but in all instances no later than every six months plus one month after the end of each eligible project, to the director of the office of contract compliance. 
(c)  The vendor relations database shall include all vendor performance information generated during the process of administering city contracts by all city departments, including: 
(1)  Vendor performance evaluations; 
(2)  Determinations of unsatisfactory vendor performance on city contracts; 
(3)  Communications to the vendor regarding unsatisfactory vendor performance on city contracts; 
(4)  Results of formal city investigations into reports of unethical or illegal behavior by vendors by the department of law; 
(5)  Findings from the investigation of allegations of discrimination by the office of contract compliance; 
(6)  Copies of all change order requests by the vendor from the department of finance; 
(7)  Reports of federal wage and hour violations from the office of grants management; 
(8)  Information on insurance lapses during the performance of city contracts from the department of finance; 
(9)  Information on previous debarments or suspensions from city or other governmental projects; and 
(10)  Any other information which could be significant in assisting the chief procurement officer in making a determination of contractor responsibility. 
(d)  The director of the office of contract compliance shall notify the chief procurement officer when s/he enters into the vendor relations file negative information that could lead to a determination by the chief procurement officer that a vendor is non-responsible. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1470. - Investigation of violation of non-discrimination policy. 
(a)  Authority to investigate. The office of contract compliance shall have the authority to investigate any reasonable concern that a contractor or subcontractor is violating the nondiscrimination policy in its private sector and/or public sector contracting. A reasonable concern may arise from information from any source deemed reliable by the office of contract compliance that the contractor or subcontractor is acting in violation of the non-discrimination policy. Where the office of contract compliance makes a preliminary finding of a violation of the non-discrimination policy, the director of the office of contract compliance must provide the contractor or subcontractor an opportunity to meet with the director, to hear the evidence gathered, to explain its actions, and to provide any evidence that it chooses to demonstrate that it did not violate the policy. The director of the office of contract compliance must consider the evidence presented by the contractor or subcontractor prior to determining whether the vendor violated the non-discrimination policy. 
(b)  Notification of chief procurement officer. In the event that the office of contract compliance investigation results in a finding that a contractor or subcontractor violated the non-discrimination ordinance, the director of the office of contract compliance will provide written notification of said finding to the chief procurement officer, including a detailed description of the basis for such finding. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1471. - Role of chief procurement officer in determining and requiring responsibility. 
(a)  Where the director of the office of contract compliance notifies the chief procurement officer that s/he is entering into the vendor relations file negative information that could lead to a determination by the chief procurement officer that a vendor is non-responsible, pursuant to section 2-1469 (d) above, the chief procurement officer may begin an investigation with regard to other areas of the vendor's responsibility. Similarly, where the director of contract compliance notifies the chief procurement officer of a finding that a contractor or subcontractor has violated the non-discrimination policy, pursuant to subsection 2-1470(b) above, the chief procurement officer shall begin an investigation with regard to other areas of the vendor's responsibility. These additional areas of vendor responsibility may include without limitation: the character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency of the vendor; the quality of performance of previous contracts or services with the city; and the previous and existing compliance by the vendor with laws and ordinances. 
(b)  Any contractor or subcontractor being investigated by the chief procurement officer pursuant to this section 2-1469 shall be given an opportunity to meet with the chief procurement officer, to hear the evidence gathered, to explain its actions, and to provide any evidence that it chooses to demonstrate that it is responsible. The chief procurement officer must consider the evidence presented by the vendor prior to determining whether the vendor is responsible. 
(c)  In the event that the chief procurement officer finds the vendor non-responsible, the chief procurement officer may impose any of the penalties set forth in the city's procurement code, section 2-1162. 
(d)  In the event that the office of contract compliance makes a finding that the contractor or subcontractor violated the vendor non-discrimination policy, pursuant to section 2-1470(a) above, but the chief procurement officer finds the contractor or subcontractor to be otherwise responsible, the chief procurement officer, in consultation with the director of the office of contract compliance, may impose one or more of the following actions or penalties: 
(1)  The office of contract compliance may assist the contractor or subcontractor with identifying and making contact with a variety of available and qualified subcontractors and suppliers that provide goods and services in the area of trade performed by the contractor or subcontractor. 
(2)  Withholding of ten percent of all future payments on one or more city projects on which the contractor is working, until the office of contract compliance finds that the contractor is in compliance with the non-discrimination policy. 
(3)  Withholding of all future payments on one or more city projects on which the contractor is working, until the office of contract compliance finds that the contractor is in compliance with the non-discrimination policy. 
(4)  Removal of the subcontractor from one or more of the city projects on which it is working, without penalty to the city. 
(5)  Termination of any city contract with the contractor without penalty to the city. 
(6)  Refusal of all future contracts or subcontracts with the city until the office of contract compliance determines that the contractor or subcontractor has been in compliance with the non-discrimination policy for at least one year. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1472. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeal to procurement hearing officer. Where the chief procurement Officer finds the vendor or subcontractor to be non-responsible pursuant to section 2-1471 above, the chief procurement officer shall notify the vendor in writing via certified mail, setting forth in detail the basis for said finding. The entity that is the subject of the finding may appeal the finding pursuant to section 2-1166 of the procurement code. 
(b)  Appeal to contract compliance hearing officer. Where the office of contract compliance finds the vendor or subcontractor to be in violation of the non-discrimination policy pursuant to subsection 2-1470(a), but the chief procurement officer finds the vendor or subcontractor to be otherwise responsible, the chief procurement officer shall notify the vendor or subcontractor in writing via certified mail, setting forth in detail the basis for said finding. The entity that is the subject of finding may appeal the decision to the contract compliance hearing officer pursuant to the following procedure: 
(1)  Time for appeal. The appellant shall submit its written appeal to the director of the office of contract compliance within seven calendar days of receiving the certified notification letter. Filing of the appeal shall be accomplished by hand delivery of the appeal document to the office of contract compliance during normal business hours, and shall be evidenced by the appellant's receiving an office of contract compliance date stamp on her/his copy of the appeal. 
(2)  Form and content of appeal. The appeal shall be in writing and shall state with specificity all of the facts and legal basis upon which the appellant contests the office of contract compliance finding. In addition, the appellant shall include with its protest all supporting documentation. Within two business days of the office of contract compliance's receipt of the appeal, the office of contract compliance shall forward the appeal to the contract compliance hearing officer. 
(3)  Contract compliance hearing officer determination. The contract compliance hearing officer shall consider the appeal, and shall hold a hearing no later than seven days after the officer's receipt of the appeal to determine the merits of the appeal. 
(4)  Notification to appellant of contract compliance hearing officer decision. The contract compliance hearing officer shall issue a written decision regarding the appeal within seven days of the hearing. The written decision shall provide in detail the basis for the determination. The contract compliance hearing officer shall send a copy of the decision by certified mail to the office of contract compliance and to the appellant. If the contract compliance hearing officer upholds the contract compliance officer's finding, the appellant shall have the right to appeal the matter to the Fulton County Superior Court through a writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1473. - Non-discrimination. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize or require any bidder, contractor or subcontractor to discriminate against or grant preferential treatment to any business on the basis of race, gender, ethnicity, or any other classification in connection with the identification, contact, contracting or utilization of any such business in private sector and/or public sector projects. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1474. - Severability. 
If any provision of this subdivision or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this subdivision which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or applications, and are to this end declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 12, 12-15-09) 
Secs. 2-1475—2-1480. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - ETHICS IN PUBLIC CONTRACTING 

Sec. 2-1481. - Rejection of bids and offers and cancellation of contracts. 
The city council, by a duly enacted resolution, may reject a bid, offer or other response to a city solicitation or cancel any contract because of any false representation contained in or made in conjunction with an invitation for bids, request for proposals or any other solicitation of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 13, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1482. - Conflicts of interest. 
In accordance with this division and article VII, division 2 of this chapter, it shall be unethical for any city officer or employee to participate directly or indirectly in a procurement, except in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Procurement by competitive sealed bidding. Direct or indirect financial interest in or employment by or having any other interest in a business which is involved in a procurement with the city only through a competitive sealed bid shall not be a cause for a conflict of interest under this division or pursuant to article VII, division 2. 
(2)  Disposition of real property by competitive sealed bidding. Direct or indirect financial interest in or employment by or having any other interest in a business which is involved in the acquisition of real property disposed of by the city through competitive sealed bidding shall not be a cause for a conflict of interest under this division. 
(3)  Disclosure and determination of no adverse interest. Any city officer or employee who has a direct or indirect financial interest in any procurement made other than by a competitive sealed bid shall disclose the nature of the financial interest to the chief procurement officer. The mayor shall make a written determination as to whether the city officer or employee will be able to perform such officer's or employee's procurement functions without actual or apparent bias or favoritism and whether the award will be in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 13, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1483. - Liability of city officers and employees for unauthorized contracts. 
If any officer or employee of the city shall create any actual legal liability against himself or herself or the city under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Such officer or employee requests or knowingly permits any person to proceed or to continue with the performance of any construction or services for the city, or to provide supplies to the city; and 
(2)  The construction or service, or the provision of supplies was not duly authorized by the city council or the mayor or the mayor's designee, in accordance with the Atlanta City Charter and this code of ordinances, prior to the performance of the construction, service, or provision of supplies, and such officer or employee knew or should have known such fact; and 
(3)  The contractor or supplier expends money, incurs liability or otherwise acts to its financial detriment in reliance upon the representation of the city officer or employee involved; 
then in such event, if the chief operating officer and department head, in the case of an employee, or the mayor, in the case of an appointed official, as the case may be, determines that such circumstances exist, that there are no mitigating or extenuating factors sufficient to justify the actions of the officer or employee, and that just cause exists for the discharge of the offending officer or employee of the city, then such offending officer or employee shall be discharged from his or her employment with the city, subject to the labor-management relations ordinance in chapter 114, article VI of this code, where appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 13, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1484. - Gratuities and kickbacks. 
(a)  Former employees. Unless otherwise provided, in accordance with section 2-808, no former officer or employee shall participate directly or indirectly in a city procurement for a period of six months after termination of service or employment with the city. 
(b)  Gratuities. In accordance with this division and article VII, division 2 of this chapter, it shall be unethical for any person to offer, give or agree to give any employee or former employee or for any employee or former employee to solicit, demand, accept or agree to accept from another person a gratuity or an offer of employment in connection with any decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, preparation or any part of a program requirement or a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing or in any other advisory capacity in any proceeding or application, request for ruling, determination, claim or controversy or other particular matter pertaining to any program requirement or a contract or subcontract or to any solicitation or proposal therefor. 
(c)  Kickbacks. It shall be unethical for any payment, gratuity or offer of employment to be made by or on behalf of a subcontractor under a contract to the prime contractor or higher tier subcontractor or any person associated therewith as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order. 
(d)  Contract clause. The prohibition against gratuities and kickbacks prescribed in this section shall be conspicuously set forth in every contract and solicitation therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 13, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1485. - Contingent fees. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unethical for a person to be retained or to retain a person to solicit or secure a city contract upon an agreement or understanding for a commission, percentage, brokerage or contingent fee, except for retention of bona fide employees of bona fide established commercial selling agencies for the purpose of securing business. 
(b)  Contract clause required. Every city contract or purchase order shall contain the clause prohibiting contingent fees, as follows: 
"The vendor or contractor or firm warrants that it has not employed or retained any company or person, other than a bona fide employee working for the vendor or contractor or firm, to solicit or secure this contract or purchase order; and that the vendor or contractor or firm has not paid or agreed to pay any person, company, association, corporation, individual or firm, other than a bona fide employee working for the vendor or contractor or firms, any fee, commission, percentage, gift or any other consideration contingent upon or resulting from the award or making of this agreement. For the breach or violation of the above warranty, and upon a finding after notice and hearing, the city shall have the right to terminate the contract or purchase order without liability, and, at its discretion, to deduct from the contract or purchase order price, or otherwise recover the full amount of such fee, commission, percentage, gift or consideration." 
The requirement of incorporating the clause prohibiting contingent fees into purchase orders and contracts shall be considered met when such quoted language is set forth in an exhibit attached to the contract and appropriate language incorporating the exhibit into the contract is set forth in the contract. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 13, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1486. - Contemporaneous employment. 
Unless otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unethical under this division and under article VII, division 2 of this chapter for any employee who is participating directly or indirectly in the procurement process to become or to be, while such an employee, the employee of any person contracting with the governmental body by whom the employee is employed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 13, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1487. - Use of confidential information. 
In accordance with this division and article VII, division 2 of this chapter, it shall be unethical for any employee or former employee willfully to use confidential information for actual or anticipated personal gain or for the actual or anticipated personal gain of any other person. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 13, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1488. - Penalties. 
(a)  Criminal penalties. To the extent that violations of the ethical standards of conduct set forth in this division constitute violations of state law or violations of the city standards of conduct set forth in section 2-807 of this Code, they shall be punishable as provided therein. Such penalties shall be in addition to the civil sanctions set forth in this division. Criminal, civil and administrative sanctions against employees or nonemployees which are in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives shall not be impaired. 
(b)  Sanctions. 
(1)  Employees. The mayor, upon the recommendation of the commissioner of administrative services, may impose any one or more of the following sanctions on an employee for violations of the ethical standards of this division: 
a.  Oral or written warnings or reprimands; 
b.  Suspension with or without pay for specified periods of time; or 
c.  Termination of employment. 
(2)  Nonemployees. The mayor, upon approval by the city council, may impose any one or more of the following sanctions on a nonemployee for violations of the ethical standards: 
a.  Written warnings or reprimands; 
b.  Termination of contracts; or 
c.  Debarment or suspension as provided in section 2-1162. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 13, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1489. - Recovery of value transferred or received in breach of ethical standards. 
(a)  Generally. The value of anything transferred or received in breach of the ethical standards of this article by an employee or a nonemployee may be recovered from both the employee and nonemployee. 
(b)  Recovery of kickbacks by city. Upon a showing that a subcontractor made a kickback to a prime contractor or a higher tier subcontractor in connection with the award of a subcontract or order thereunder, it shall be conclusively presumed that the amount thereof was included in the price of the subcontract or order and ultimately borne by the city and will be recoverable under this article from the recipient. In addition, that amount may also be recovered from the subcontractor making such kickback. Recovery from one offending party shall not preclude recovery from other offending parties. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 13, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1490. - Notice of sanction and appeal. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, when sanctions are imposed under this division, the mayor or the mayor's designee shall give written notice to the offending party, by registered or certified mail, which notice shall state the reasons therefor and the effective date. If the sanction is imposed in connection with prequalification, an invitation for bids, a request for proposals or other solicitation by the city, the offending party shall be notified of the right to protest and administrative review as provided in division 3 of this article. If the sanction does not involve prequalification, an invitation for bids, request for proposals or other solicitation by the city, the offending party shall be notified of the right to administrative review, as provided in division 3 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 13, 12-15-09) 
Secs. 2-1491—2-1515. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - REAL ESTATE 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 2-1516. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Abandonment means the voluntary surrender or relinquishment of all or part of any right, claim, title or possession of real property with the intention of not reclaiming it. 
Easement means a right of use over the property of another. 
Lease means a contract for the use of real property under which title will not pass to the city, for leases of property used by the city, or under which title will remain in the city, for city-owned property. 
Option means a right which acts as a continuing offer, given for consideration, to purchase or lease property at an agreed-upon price and term, within a specified time. 
Owner means the person or entity in whom is vested dominion or title over real property. An owner is any part owner or joint owner of the whole or part of the real property. 
Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Street includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1517. - Duties of chief procurement officer. 
(a)  Principal real estate official. Unless otherwise provided or within the jurisdiction of another city department or agency, the chief procurement officer shall serve as the principal real estate official and shall be responsible for the acquisition, disposal, leasing and redevelopment of real property as may be necessary for the city, in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Duties. In accordance with this article and subject to the supervision of the mayor and the chief procurement officer, upon the recommendation of the using agency and with proper legislative authority, shall: 
(1)  Acquire or supervise the acquisition of all real property needed by this city; 
(2)  Sell, trade or otherwise dispose of city-owned real property; 
(3)  Lease or supervise the leasing of city-owned real property; 
(4)  Lease or supervise the leasing of real property for use by the city; 
(5)  Provide assistance and support to the redevelopment programs of the city, including: 
a.  Acquisition and disposition of real property; 
b.  Negotiation of leases; and 
c.  Assistance in the preparation of contracts; 
(6)  Maintain deeds, leases and other documents evidencing rights to real property owned or used by the city; and 
(7)  Prepare an annual inventory of all real estate or interests in real estate owned by the city, together with an inventory of all of the improvements situated thereon. 
(c)  Operational procedures. Consistent with this article and with the approval of the commissioner of administrative services, the chief procurement officer shall adopt operational procedures relating to the execution of the chief procurement officer's real estate duties. These operational procedures shall be set forth in a purchasing and real estate manual. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1518. - Requirements upon using agencies. 
All using agencies, with the authorization of the department head under which the using agency operates, shall file with the chief procurement officer a detailed written request for the acquisition, leasing or disposal of real property, as may be necessary for city purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Secs. 2-1519—2-1540. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Acquisition and Leases 

Sec. 2-1541 - Purchases. 
(a)  Duties of chief procurement officer. The chief procurement officer is authorized to purchase real property for use by the city, upon written request from the using agency pursuant to section 2-1518 and authorization of the mayor and city council by appropriate legislation. Prior to the purchase of real property for city use, the chief procurement officer shall consult with the using agency. 
(b)  Ordinance required. The chief procurement officer shall prepare an ordinance for adoption by the city council and approval of the mayor for the purchase of real property, excluding easements pursuant to section 2-1545, by the city. The ordinance shall authorize the chief procurement officer to purchase real property that is useful and necessary to the city and shall: 
(1)  Contain a legal description of the property; 
(2)  Provide a list of all structures that shall be a part of said purchase that shall: 
a.  Identify the street address; 
b.  Identify the permissible use for the property; and 
c.  Identify the occupancy status of the property. 
(3)  Authorize the chief procurement officer to; 
a.  Obtain title reports; 
b.  Obtain an appraisal; 
c.  Obtain a land survey, if necessary; 
d.  Negotiate with the owner; 
(4)  Authorize the city attorney, where the chief procurement officer's negotiations with the owner are unsuccessful, to institute necessary legal action through condemnation or any other method provided by law to obtain fee simple title to the selected property; and 
(5)  Appropriate necessary funds for the purchase. 
(c)  Negotiations and option to purchase real estate. After adoption by the city council and approval of the mayor of the enabling ordinance, the chief procurement officer shall obtain title reports, an appraisal and a land survey, if necessary, of the selected property to be purchased. The chief procurement officer shall prepare an option to purchase real estate which shall set the purchase price offered at no less than the fair market value of the property, based upon the appraisal. The option shall be sent to the owner by registered or certified mail, and thereafter the chief procurement officer shall negotiate the purchase with the owner, as necessary, to obtain title to the property. 
(d)  Resolution of acceptance of purchase option; condemnation. If there is an agreement as to the fair market value of the property and the owner signs the option and the chief procurement officer signs the option on behalf of the city, the chief procurement officer shall prepare a resolution for adoption by the city council and approval of the mayor, which shall authorize acceptance of the option by the city. The resolution shall: 
(1)  Authorize the purchase of the property at the negotiated fair market price; 
(2)  Authorize the city attorney to: 
a.  Take necessary action to close the transaction; 
b.  Record the deed; 
c.  Verify title, subject to utility easements of record; 
d.  Have a policy of title insurance issued in favor of the city; and 
(3)  Authorize the appropriation of funds for the purchase. 
However, if the owner rejects the option, the chief procurement officer shall request that the city attorney institute necessary legal action through condemnation or other method provided by law to obtain fee simple title to the selected property. 
(e)  Notice to using agency. When the property is purchased, as evidenced by recordation of the deed by the city attorney in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the appropriate county, the using agency shall be notified of the city's ownership by the chief procurement officer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2017-02(16-O-1697) , 1, 1-12-16) 
Sec. 2-1542. - Eminent domain. 
If the chief procurement officer fails to reach accord with the owner of real property for the purchase thereof for use by the city or if there are defects in the title which are not cured, upon authorization by the mayor and the city council by appropriate legislation, the city attorney shall secure fee simple title by the institution of condemnation proceedings in the court of the appropriate county according to the state law of eminent domain. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1543. - Exchanges. 
The chief procurement officer may acquire real property for use by the city by the exchange of surplus real property owned by the city for the real property to be acquired, provided that the exchange is square-foot for square-foot or dollar-value for dollar-value, whichever the chief procurement officer determines is in the best interest of the city. If the exchange is proposed by an owner and the real property is to be submitted as all or part of a bid for sale of surplus property under section 2-1572, the chief procurement officer shall first determine the city's need for the owner's property. In securing exchanges of property, the chief procurement officer shall comply with the requirements of subsection 2-1541(b). 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1544. - Gratuitous transfers. 
(a)  Generally. The city may accept, in fee simple or in trust, any donation or gift of real property that may be made to it by deed of gift, will or other appropriate conveyance, subject to such conditions as may be specified in the instrument giving or donating the property, provided the city approves of such conditions. The city may improve, embellish or ornament the land so granted as a public park or for other public use. 
(b)  Subdivisions. The city may accept donations of real property for public purposes by approved plats of subdivisions, with areas indicated as parks, streets and drainage easements. Subdivision plats must be approved and recorded by the city attorney to effectuate the transfer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1545. - Easements. 
(a)  Duties of chief procurement officer. The chief procurement officer is authorized to purchase easements for use by the city, upon the written request from the using agency pursuant to section 2-1518 and authorization by the city council and approval of the mayor by appropriate legislation. Prior to the purchase of an easement for city use, the chief procurement officer shall consult with the using agency. 
(b)  Ordinance required. The using agency shall prepare an ordinance for adoption by the city council and approval of the mayor for the purchase of an easement by the city. The ordinance shall authorize the chief procurement officer to purchase easements that are useful and necessary to the city and shall: 
(1)  Contain a description of the use of the easement; 
(2)  Contain a legal description of the easement; 
(3)  Authorize the using agency to obtain the easement for the described purpose; 
(4)  Authorize the chief procurement officer to: 
a.  Obtain title reports; 
b.  Obtain an appraisal; and 
c.  Negotiate with the owner. 
(5)  Authorize the city attorney, where the chief procurement officer's negotiations with the owner are unsuccessful, to institute necessary legal action through condemnation or any other method provided by law to secure the easement; and 
(6)  Appropriate necessary funds for the easement. 
(c)  Negotiations and option for easement. The chief procurement officer, after review of the engineering plans prepared by the engineering staff, shall determine the number of easements to be acquired. The chief procurement officer shall give written notice by registered or certified mail to the owner, which notice shall inform the owner of the city project for which the easement is necessary and shall include the appraisal. However, if the project is federally assisted in whole or in part, the chief procurement officer shall solicit quotations from no less than two appraisers as to their appraisal fees, shall select the appraiser and shall notify the owner in writing by registered or certified mail of the name and telephone number of the appraiser and shall advise the owner of the right to accompany the appraiser during the inspection of the property. The chief procurement officer shall prepare an option for easement, and, if the project is federally assisted, a statement of just compensation shall be prepared. The option shall set the purchase price offered at no less than the fair market value of the easement, which fair market value shall be based upon the appraisal. The option and, if necessary, the statement shall be sent to the owner by registered or certified mail. Thereafter, the chief procurement officer shall negotiate with the owner, as necessary to obtain the easement. 
(d)  Resolution of acceptance of option: condemnation. If the negotiation of the chief procurement officer with the owner is successful and there is an agreement as to the fair market value of the property and the chief procurement officer executes the option with the owner on behalf of the city, the chief procurement officer shall prepare a resolution for adoption by the city council and approval of the mayor which shall authorize acceptance of the option by the city. The resolution, in accordance with the enabling ordinance, shall: 
(1)  Authorize the chief procurement officer to purchase the easement for the proposed city purpose; 
(2)  Authorize acceptance of the purchase at the agreed price; 
(3)  Authorize the city attorney to close the transaction; and 
(4)  Appropriate funds for the purchase of the easement. 
However, if the owner rejects the option, the chief procurement officer shall request that the city attorney institute necessary legal action through condemnation or other method provided by law to obtain fee simple title to the easement. 
(e)  Notice to using agency. When the easement is acquired, as evidenced by proper recordation of the deed by the city attorney in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the appropriate county, the using agency shall be notified of the city's ownership by the chief procurement officer. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1546. - Leases of real property for city use. 
(a)  Authority to lease. The chief procurement officer, upon the request of and in consultation with the using agency, shall enter into leases for the use of real property by the city, provided: 
(1)  It is in the best interest of the city; 
(2)  All conditions for renewal and costs of termination are set forth in the request for lease proposals and the lease; 
(3)  The lease is not used to circumvent normal real estate acquisition procedures; 
(4)  The rental fee is fair and reasonable, based upon the fair market rental value of the property; and 
(5)  The chief procurement officer complies with the requirements of section 2-1205 if the lease may be renewed by the city beyond the first term. 
(b)  Request for lease proposals. Leases of real property for city use shall be solicited through a request for lease proposals. 
(c)  Procedure. The chief procurement officer shall follow the procedures for public notice, opening of lease proposals, stating of evaluation factors, discussions with responsible offerors and revisions to proposals, as set forth in section 2-1189, when soliciting leases of real property for city use. 
(d)  Award. Award shall be made to the highest responsible and responsive offeror, in the same manner as provided in subsection 2-1189(g). All awards of leases of real property for city use shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1547. - Leases of city-owned real property. 
(a)  Authority to lease. The chief procurement officer, upon the request of and after consultation with the using agency, shall lease city-owned real property if: 
(1)  The sale of the property is not in the best interests of the city and the property is not currently being used by the city; or 
(2)  The real property has been newly acquired, but not immediately put to use by the city, and may be leased on a month-to-month basis. 
(b)  City-owned houses. City-owned houses shall be leased in accordance with section 2-6. 
(c)  Improvements to property, restrictions on use. If city-owned real property is to be leased, the chief procurement officer shall, after consultation with appropriate agencies, include as part of the solicitation the requirement that improvements to the property be made for the health, benefit and general welfare of the city and that restrictions shall be placed on the use of the property to promote public policies, including but not limited to redevelopment, historical preservation and billboard limitations. 
(d)  Appraisal. The chief procurement officer shall obtain an appraisal on the city-owned property to be leased to determine the fair market rental value of the property. 
(e)  Request for lease proposals. Unless otherwise provided, leases of city-owned real property, other than governmental agencies, shall be solicited through a request for lease proposals. 
(f)  Procedure. The chief procurement officer shall follow the procedures for public notice, opening of proposals, stating of evaluation factors, discussions with responsible offerors and revisions to proposals, as set forth in section 2-1189, when soliciting leases for city-owned real property. 
(g)  Award. Award shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the request for lease proposals to the highest responsible and responsive offeror, provided that the rental fee offered is acceptable to the chief procurement officer as the fair market rental value of the property, based upon the appraisal. Where such rental fee offered is not acceptable to the chief procurement officer, the offer may be rejected and the chief procurement officer may negotiate the lease, provided that the negotiated rental fee is higher than the highest responsible offeror's rental fee, or offers may be resolicited. 
(h)  Revision of rental fees. Rental fees for city-owned real property shall be revised annually by the chief procurement officer, and the rental fee schedule shall be adopted by the city council and approved by the mayor. 
(i)  Multi-term leases. If the lease may be renewed or extended beyond its original term, the chief procurement officer shall comply with the requirements of section 2-1205, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1548. - Rentals of city-owned real property. 
The following fee schedule shall apply to the rental of certain city-owned properties and rooms located therein: 
(a)  Neighborhood service center room rental fees. 
(1)  Georgia Hill. 
Resident hourly multipurpose room/large meeting room ..... $30.00 
Non-resident hourly multipurpose room large meeting room ..... 50.00 
Fulton County Board of Elections daily multipurpose room/large meeting room janitorial fee (no rent shall be charged) ..... 156.06 
Resident hourly small meeting room ..... 25.00 
Non-resident hourly small meeting room ..... 35.00 
Fulton County Board of Elections daily mall meeting room janitorial fee (no rent shall be charged) ..... 156.06 
Current Georgia Hill Service Center tenant in good standing-Multipurpose room/large meeting room or small meeting room* ..... 0.00 
Councilmember Town Hall Meetings, Neighborhood Planning Units, Neighborhood Planning Unit Committees, and City of Atlanta recognized Neighborhood Associations-Multipurpose room/large meeting room or small meeting room ..... 0.00 
Refundable room deposit fee ..... 100.00 
*Use of meeting rooms by a current Georgia Hill Service Center tenant in good standing shall be based upon the written policies and rules for the center's tenants, as created by the commissioner of the department of enterprise assets management, or her/his designee. The commissioner of the department of enterprise assets management, or her/his designee, may require a renter of a room at the Georgia Hill Service Center to hire a security officer for the event, and such determination shall be based upon the size and time of the event. 
(2)  John C. Birdine. 
Resident hourly multipurpose room/large meeting room ..... $30.00 
Non-resident hourly multipurpose room/large meeting room ..... 50.00 
Fulton County Board of Elections daily multipurpose room/large meeting room janitorial fee (no rent shall be charged) ..... 156.06 
Resident hourly small meeting room ..... 25.00 
Non-resident hourly small meeting room ..... 35.00 
Fulton County Board of Elections daily small meeting room janitorial fee (no rent shall be charged) ..... 156.06 
Current Birdine Neighborhood Center tenant in good standing-Multipurpose room/large meeting room or small meeting room* ..... 0.00 
Councilmember Town Hall Meetings, Neighborhood Planning Units, Neighborhood Planning Unit Committees, and City of Atlanta recognized Neighborhood Associations-Multipurpose room/large meeting room or small meeting room ..... 0.00 
Refundable room deposit fee ..... 100.00 
*Use of meeting rooms by a current John C. Birdine Service Center tenant in good standing shall be based upon the written policies and rules for the center's tenants, as created by the commissioner of the department of enterprise assets management, or her/his designee. 
(3)  Dunbar. 
Resident hourly multipurpose room/large meeting room ..... $30.00 
Non-resident hourly multipurpose room/large meeting room ..... 50.00 
Fulton County Board of Elections daily multipurpose room/large meeting room janitorial fee (no rent shall be charged) ..... 156.06 
Resident hourly small meeting room ..... 25.00 
Non-resident hourly small meeting room ..... 35.00 
Fulton County Board of Elections daily small meeting room janitorial fee (no rent shall be charged) ..... 156.06 
Current Dunbar Neighborhood Center tenant in good standing-Multipurpose room/large meeting room or small meeting room* ..... 0.00 
Councilmember Town Hall Meetings, Neighborhood Planning Units, Neighborhood Planning Unit Committees, and City of Atlanta recognized Neighborhood Associations-Multipurpose room/large meeting room or small meeting room ..... 0.00 
Refundable room deposit fee ..... 100.00 
*Use of meeting rooms by a current Dunbar Service Center tenant in good standing shall be based upon the written policies and rules for the center's tenants, as created by the commissioner of the department of enterprise assets management, or her/his designee. 
(b)  Water works lodge rental fees. The following fees do not apply to city departments and agencies using the facility for city-sponsored purposes. The total number of city-sponsored events that are fee exempt shall not exceed 24 in any one calendar year. All city departments and agencies will comply with the scheduling guidelines of the department of enterprise assets management. 
City Residents 
Day rate (8:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m.), Monday—Friday ..... $80.00 
Evening rate (6:00 p.m.-11:00 p.m.), Monday—Friday ..... 150.00 
Saturday—Sunday & holidays (all day, 8:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m.) ..... 250.00 
Non-City Residents 
Day rate (8:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m.), Monday—Friday ..... 130.00 
Evening rate (6:00 p.m.-11:00 p.m.), Monday—Friday ..... 200.00 
Saturday—Sunday & holidays (all day, 8:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m.) ..... 300.00 
(c)  72 Marietta Art Gallery fees. 
(1)  Hourly rates. 
1.  Refundable security deposit ..... $100.00 
2.  Resident Individuals ..... $30.00 
3.  Non-resident Individuals ..... $43.00 
4.  Resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $30.00 
5.  Non-resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $43.00 
6.  All other Resident organizations ..... $75.00 
7.  All other Non-resident organizations ..... $112.00 
(2)  Event Packages. 
Weddings and wedding receptions. Any individual or organization wishing to hold a wedding or wedding reception at the gallery, based on availability, shall be charged $750.00 total for use. This rental shall entitle the renter to seven hours of use, including a maximum of four hours for the event itself, two hours for set up, and one hour for break down. Any additional hours of use will be billed at $187.50 per hour. 
(3)  Salary surcharge and security requirements. 
Salary surcharge. In addition to all of the rates set forth above in this subsection (c), the gallery renter shall be required to pay a salary surcharge for those times when the rental occurs outside of operating hours of the gallery. The salary surcharge shall be applied to any and all renters using the gallery. The salary surcharge shall be $25.00 per hour for each staff person required. One staff person shall be provided for every 100 persons whom the Office of Cultural Affairs reasonably expects to attend, such that 1—100 anticipated attendees shall require one staff person; 101—200 anticipated attendees shall require two staff people, etc. The number of expected attendees shall be based upon the number provided on the rental agreement. The Office of Cultural Affairs may apply a different number where it has reasonably reliable information that more attendees will be present, where it provides that information and the decision to the applicant in writing, and where it gives the applicant an opportunity to refute the information. 
(4)  Security. 
Security requirement. The renter of all or a portion of the gallery must provide off-duty POST-certified law enforcement officers during the rental, regardless of whether the rental occurs during regular or non-regular operating hours if the Office of Cultural Affairs reasonably expects that the number of attendees will be greater than 75, the event is a party or other gathering for social purposes (i.e. not a meeting), where the Office of Cultural Affairs reasonably expects that the event will be attended primarily by persons under the age of 21 years, the event involves the serving of alcohol, or the Office of Cultural Affairs and the Atlanta Police Department both reasonably determine that security is required because of the nature of the event to protect the safety of persons and/or property. The number of security personnel required shall be one officer for every 75 anticipated attendees or less (1—75 anticipated attendees shall require one officer; 76—150 anticipated attendees shall require two officers, etc.), unless the Atlanta Police Department decides that a greater ratio of security personnel is required to protect the safety of persons and/or property. The Office of Cultural Affairs shall establish in writing the procedure for ascertaining that the renter has met the security requirements established by the Atlanta Police Department for the rental. To the extent that this subsection (4) requires that a discretionary decision be made by the Office of Cultural Affairs and/or the Atlanta Police Department, the decision must be made based upon reasonably reliable information, that information and decision must be provided to the applicant in writing, and the applicant must be given an opportunity to refute the information. In no event shall the basis of the discretionary decision be the applicant or attendees' race, color, creed, religion, gender, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, gender identity, or disability status. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2017-69(17-O-1215), § 1, 11-29-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 8, 8-29-18 ) 
Secs. 2-1549—2-1570. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Sale and Disposition 

Sec. 2-1571. - Methods. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by law, the sale or disposition of all interests in city-owned real property shall be by competitive sealed bidding, pursuant to section 2-1572, except in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Narrow strips of land. Narrow strips of land, so shaped or so small as to be incapable of being used independently as zoned or under applicable subdivision or other development ordinances, or streets, whether owned in fee or used by easement, may be sold to the abutting property owner in proportion to abutting ownership in an equitable manner as provided in sections 2-1578 and 138-5; 
(2)  Easements. All types of easements, where the abutting property owner also owns the underlying fee simple title, such land or interest in land may be sold to the abutting property owner in proportion to abutting ownership in an equitable manner, as provided in section 2-1579; 
(3)  Exchanges. Any land or interest therein which was originally acquired for the purpose of streets, rights-of-way or easements may be traded or exchanged pursuant to section 2-1543 as consideration for other land acquired for streets, rights-of-way or easements, including transactions which may be partly for cash and partly by trade or exchange, when the chief procurement officer determines that it is in the city's best interest; and 
(4)  Development contracts. The city may have city-owned real estate developed by contract with an independent entity. 
(5)  Homesteading program(s) as provided in chapter 54 (Community Development). Any city-owned real property disposed of pursuant to the Affordable Housing Homesteading Program may be disposed of through a request for proposals process as set forth in article IV, chapter 54. 
(b)  However, nothing in this subdivision shall require the city to accept any offer or be required to consummate any sale or exchange. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the forgoing, in the event the Mayor chooses to explore the disposition of real property valued in excess of $250,000.00, through the issuance of a bid or request for proposals, the mayor shall notify the city council of such activity by written communication prior to undertaking the procurement process. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2017-65(17-O-1463), § 2, 11-6-17 ) 
Sec. 2-1572. - Competitive sealed bidding. 
(a)  Conditions for use. The sale of interests in real property owned by the city shall be made by competitive sealed bidding, except as otherwise provided. 
(b)  Duties of chief procurement officer. The chief procurement officer shall sell real property owned by the city when such property is no longer used or needed by the city, as provided in this section. Prior to the sale of any real property, the chief procurement officer shall consult with the using agency to determine if any conditions for use or deed restrictions should apply to the sale to further the city's economic, physical and social development objectives and land use plans. 
(c)  Ordinance required. The chief procurement officer shall prepare an ordinance for adoption by the city council and approval of the mayor for the sale of the property. The ordinance shall: 
(1)  Specify that the land is no longer useful to or needed by the city; 
(2)  Order that the real property be sold; 
(3)  Authorize the chief procurement officer to: 
a.  Obtain a land survey; 
b.  Obtain a sealed appraisal of the land from a competent real estate appraiser, based upon any conditions of sale, restricted use or deed restrictions to be applied to the sale; 
c.  Advertise for bids for the sale of the property; and 
(4)  Appropriate funds for the cost of the appraisal, land survey and advertisement of sale bids. 
(d)  Invitation for sale bids. An invitation for sale bids shall be issued and shall include a legal description of the real property and all terms and conditions applicable to the sale, including but not limited to the requirement of bid security as provided in section 2-1573. 
(e)  Public notice. An advertisement inviting bids shall be published at least once a week for two consecutive weeks in the official legal organ of the county or in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city, not less than 15 nor more than 60 days prior to the last day for receipt of bids. Such advertisement shall give a legal description of the property, its dimensions, its location and any conditions of the sale or restrictions for use. Notice shall also include the posting of a sign on the property in a size appropriate to give a ready, willing and able buyer adequate notice and which shall contain general information of the sale. 
(f)  Bid opening, acceptance and evaluation. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for sale bids. The name of each offeror, the amount of each bid and other such relevant information as the chief procurement officer deems appropriate shall be recorded. The record and each bid shall be open to public inspection. The chief procurement officer shall open the sealed appraisal, and the responsiveness of each bid shall be evaluated in relation to the fair market value set by the appraisal. 
(g)  Withdrawal of bids. Except as provided in this subdivision, bids shall become irrevocable when the bid deposit has been received by the city. 
(h)  Award. The award shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the invitation for sale bids to the highest responsible and responsive offeror, provided that the price offered by such offeror is acceptable to the chief procurement officer based upon the appraised fair market value of the property. The chief procurement officer may accept a bid that is lower than the appraised value subject to prior city council approval. Where the offered price is not acceptable, the chief procurement officer may reject the bid and negotiate the sale or bids may be resolicited. The chief procurement officer shall advertise in a paper of daily general circulation and the official legal organ of the county. 
(i)  Resolution and closing. The chief procurement officer shall prepare a resolution for adoption by the city council and approval of the mayor, which shall: 
(1)  Authorize the bid award to the highest responsible offeror; 
(2)  Authorize sale of the property; 
(3)  Authorize the mayor to execute a deed; and 
(4)  Contain a legal description of the property. 
The chief procurement officer shall notify the chief financial officer in writing upon the close of the sale and shall make the adjustments to the real property inventory and assets listing of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1573. - Bid security for real estate contracts. 
(a)  Required. Bid security shall be required for all competitive sealed bidding for the purchase of interests in real property owned by the city. Bid security shall be a bond provided by a surety company authorized to do business in the state or the equivalent in cash, certified check or otherwise supplied in a form satisfactory to the city. 
(b)  Amount. Bid security shall be in an amount equal to at least ten percent of the amount of the bid. Unsuccessful offerors shall be entitled to the return of the bid security. 
(c)  Public notice. The requirement of bid security shall be included in the advertisement for invitations for sale bids. 
(d)  Rejection of bids for noncompliance. When the invitation for sale bids requires security, the bid shall be rejected if it fails to comply in a substantial manner with the security requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1574. - Determination of fair market value. 
Unless otherwise provided, any conveyance, sale or exchange of any interest in real property owned by the city shall not be for less than the fair market value of the land or interest being conveyed, sold or exchanged, as determined by at least one appraisal obtained by the city, which shall be conclusive of the fair market value thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1575. - Nonpayment of brokerage fees. 
In accordance with section 2-1485, the city shall not pay to any person a brokerage or real estate agent's fee on the purchase, sale or leasing of real property by or for the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1576. - City's rights upon failure of selected offeror to close transaction. 
In accordance with the terms set forth in the invitation for sale bids under this subdivision, the city shall, as may be necessary, pursue its rights upon the failure of the selected offeror to close a transaction concerning the sale, conveyance or exchange of real property owned by the city. When the deed conveying the real property offered for sale by the city has been executed by the Mayor and is ready for delivery, the selected offeror shall be notified by registered or certified mail of where delivery of the deed shall be accepted. If for any reason the selected offeror fails to render full payment of the consideration upon which the bid was based within 15 days after the mailing of the notice, such failure shall be construed as a refusal to pay the consideration due the city under the terms of the bid and as a refusal to accept the city's deed. If the selected offeror fails or refuses, for any reason, to close the transaction within the 15-day period, the city shall, at its option, have the right to retain the bid security or to proceed against the surety, the amount of the security being agreed upon as liquidated damages. Additionally, the city shall, at its option, have the right to pursue any and all remedies available to it at law or in equity, including but not limited to the right to specific performance. If the city is successful in enforcing its right to specific performance, the city may demand that the selected offeror pay the city's reasonable attorney's fees incident thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1577. - Selected offeror's rights upon failure of the city to close the transaction. 
Subject to the city's rights to reject bids under section 2-1571, the city shall tender a duly executed deed conveying the land or interest in real property offered by it for sale within 120 days after the resolution awarding the bid to the selected offeror has been adopted by the city council and approved by the mayor. Failure by the city to render such deed within the 120-day period shall entitle the selected offeror to refuse to close the transaction by giving written notice of such action to the chief procurement officer. Upon receipt of such written notice of refusal, the city shall refund the selected offeror's security. Neither the city nor the selected offeror shall be liable to any party in any respect as a result of such refusal to close the transaction under this circumstance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1578. - Abandonment of streets. 
(a)  Authority to sell streets. Whenever the city, by ordinance of the city council, decides that a street is no longer useful and necessary to the city and that it should be abandoned, the chief procurement officer, in consultation with the department of public works and upon the recommendation of the committee on city utilities, shall sell such abandoned street to the abutting property owner(s) in proportion to their abutting fee ownership pursuant to this section and section 138-5. 
(b)  Public notice. Public notice of the intention of the city to abandon a street or a portion a street shall be given by the municipal clerk in the manner provided in section 138-5. Costs of such publication shall be paid by the petitioner. 
(c)  Duties of chief procurement officer. The chief procurement officer, pursuant to a duly enacted ordinance, shall: 
(1)  Order an appraisal of the land to be sold, which appraisal shall be reviewed by the committee on city utilities. Appraisals shall be based on fee simple fair market value. Costs of such appraisal shall be paid by the petitioner: 
a.  The authorization to obtain an appraisal; 
b.  The fee simple fair market value of the tract according to the appraisal; and 
c.  The consideration acceptable to the city for the owner to acquire the tract or an interest therein. 
(d)  Negotiations and quitclaim deed. After the petitioner submits payment of the price for which the city offers to sell the tract or interest therein, the chief procurement officer shall, upon consultation with the city attorney, prepare a quitclaim deed. The quitclaim deed shall be submitted to the mayor for execution. However, if the owner desires to negotiate with the chief procurement officer for a purchase price different from the price offered by the chief procurement officer based upon the appraisal, the abutting owner will be required to obtain a separate appraisal report for negotiation purposes. If no agreement can be reached, the chief procurement officer and abutting owner shall agree on a value established by a review appraiser selected by the chief procurement officer. The cost of the review appraisal report shall be shared equally by the city and the abutting property owner. The chief procurement officer shall submit the negotiated offered purchase price to the committee on city utilities. If the committee approves the negotiated price and recommends acceptance thereof to the council, which accepts the negotiated price by ordinance, a quitclaim deed shall be prepared by the chief procurement officer upon consultation with the city attorney and submitted to the mayor for execution thereof. Upon execution of the quitclaim, the petitioner shall make payment to the city for an amount not less than the sum approved by council, in exchange for which payment the petitioner shall obtain possession of the executed quitclaim deed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1579. - Abandonment of easements. 
In order to vacate or abandon any easement, an ordinance declaring the intent of the city to vacate or abandon the easement which in the judgment of the city council is no longer useful or necessary for public use and convenience shall be passed by the council. The ordinance shall authorize the chief procurement officer to sell such easement for the fair market value thereof, as determined by an appraisal, or for the actual costs to the city, based upon a per-square-foot proration of the city's costs plus the cost of any city improvements to the property covered by the easement, whichever is greater. However, nothing in this section shall prevent the city from selling a permanent easement as part of the sale of land owned by the city, which land is appurtenant to the easement. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 14, 12-15-09) 
Secs. 2-1580—2-1600. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS 

Sec. 2-1601. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Cooperative purchasing means procurement conducted by or on behalf of more than one public procurement unit. 
Public procurement unit means the United States Government or any department, agency or division thereof; any county, city, town and any subdivision of the state or public agency of any such subdivision; public authority, educational, health or other institution; any other entity which expends public funds for procurement of supplies, services or construction. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 15, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1602. - Cooperative purchasing authorized. 
The chief procurement officer may either participate in, sponsor, conduct or administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the procurement of supplies, services or construction with one or more public procurement units in accordance with an agreement entered into between the participants. Such cooperative purchasing agreements may include but are not limited to joint or multiparty contracts between public purchasing units. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 15, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1603. - Sale, acquisition or use of supplies. 
The chief procurement officer may sell to, acquire from or use any supplies belonging to another public procurement unit independent of the requirements of divisions 4 and 8 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 15, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1604. - Cooperative use of supplies or services. 
The chief procurement officer may enter into an agreement, independent of the requirements of divisions 4 and 8 of this article, with any public procurement unit for the cooperative use of supplies or services under the terms agreed upon between the parties. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 15, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1605. - Joint use of facilities. 
The chief procurement officer may enter into agreements for the common use or lease of warehousing facilities, capital equipment and other facilities with another public procurement unit under the terms agreed upon between the parties. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 15, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1606. - Use of state contracts. 
The chief procurement officer may procure supplies, services or construction items through contracts established by the purchasing division of the state where such contracts and contractors substantially meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 15, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1607. - Purchase of surplus and excess federal property authorized. 
The chief procurement officer may purchase surplus and excess personal and real property from the United States government or any department, agency or division thereof, independent of the requirements of division 4 of this article and subdivision III of division 14 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 15, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1608. - Council authorization required. 
(a)  The chief procurement officer shall not procure, acquire, sell, dispose of, lease, or use any supplies, services, construction items, or professional and consultant services, facilities, equipment, or real property on behalf of the city pursuant to any state contract or cooperative purchasing transaction or contract established by a public procurement unit, regardless of the form of the contract, where the estimated value of such transaction or contract exceeds $20,000.00 without prior authorization from the city council. 
(b)  The chief procurement officer shall evaluate and certify in writing to the city council on any cooperative purchasing agreement to be used for procurement of supplies, services or construction for the city that competitive procedures akin to those used by the city were used by the agency/organization in the development of the contract from which the cooperative purchasing agreement was derived as identified in the certification and that the cost of the goods, supplies, services or construction are comparable to or less than the cost of the same goods, supplies, services or construction if obtained through city procurements under Division 4 of the City Procurement Code. Certification by the chief procurement officer can come in the form of a whereas clause in the approving legislation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 15, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2011-04(11-O-0239), § 1, 3-2-11) 
Secs. 2-1609—2-1620. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - SUSPENSION, DISQUALIFICATION AND DEBARMENT OF CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 2-1621. Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Contractor means any individual, partnership, corporation or other business entity that seeks to obtain any construction, procurement, concession, services, lease, subcontract or other contract with the city. 
Debarment means action taken by the city to bar a company from doing business with the city for a period of time not to exceed five years. 
Director means the director for the office of contract compliance. 
Disqualification means action taken by the city to bar a contractor from doing business with the city for a period of time not to exceed one year. 
Due process hearing means any hearing whereby notice and an opportunity to be heard and to defend has been given a contractor to proceed in an orderly proceeding to prove or disprove the basis for debarment action taken by the director. Such hearing shall include, but is not limited to, administrative hearings, arbitrations and judicial proceedings. 
Suspension means action by the city to bar a company from doing business with the city during a period when investigation into possible disqualification or debarment is underway. The suspension period will not exceed 120 days. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 16, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1622. - Authority to suspend, disqualify or debar. 
The director, after consulting with the chief procurement officer and the city attorney's office, is authorized to suspend, disqualify or debar a person or business for cause for consideration for award of contracts by the city for a period of up to five years, when such cause is based upon a finding under the EBO or EEO ordinances, or a finding of impropriety, fraud, or violation of local, state or federal law including, but not limited to, a violation of section 2-1296, section 2-1366, or section 2-1373. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 16, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1623. - Basis for suspension, disqualification or debarment; action by contract compliance director. 
(a)  Suspension. The director, in consultation with the chief procurement officer and the city attorney, shall determine if due cause exists for disqualification or debarment of the contractor. Such due cause shall be based upon a finding under the EBO or EEO ordinances of impropriety, fraud, violation of local, state or federal law including, but not limited to, a violation of section 2-1296, section 2-1366, or section 2-1373, a finding from a previous due process hearing which affects the responsibility of a contractor, or other act so serious as to affect the responsibility as a contractor where the use or misuse of a minority, disadvantaged or female business enterprise is at issue. If the determination is in the affirmative, the director shall provide a written notice of the suspension, including a written copy of the director's determination, which shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the contractor. Such notice shall state that: 
(1)  The suspension is for the period it takes to complete an investigation into the grounds for disqualification or debarment, including any appeal of a disqualification or debarment decision, but in any event not for a period in excess of 120 days. 
(2)  Bids or proposals will not be solicited from the suspended contractor, and, if they are received, they will not be considered during the period of suspension. 
(3)  Set forth with particularity the actions of the contractor under the city's EBO or EEO policies that constitute the reasons for disqualification or debarment. 
(b)  Debarment. The following shall constitute causes sufficient for debarment: 
(1)  Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of the contract or subcontract where the use or misuse of a minority, disadvantaged or female business enterprise is at issue. 
(2)  Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, fraud, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously, and directly affects responsibility as a contractor, where the use or misuse of a minority, disadvantaged or female business enterprise is at issue. 
(3)  Conviction under state and federal antitrust statutes arising out the submission of bids or proposals, where the use or misuse of a minority, disadvantaged or female business enterprise is at issue. 
(4)  Disqualification for a second time within a three-year period, where the use or misuse of a minority, disadvantaged or female business enterprise is at issue. 
(5)  Knowingly, willfully or fraudulently obtaining certification as a minority or female business enterprise. 
(6)  Knowingly, willfully or fraudulently: 
a.  Making use of a joint venture or subcontractor that has fraudulently obtained certification; 
b.  Making use of a joint venture or a subcontractor that misrepresents the nature of and extent of participation in such business on city contracts; or 
c.  Otherwise making false or misleading representations to the city as to the use or misuse of a minority, disadvantaged or female business enterprise. 
(7)  Any other cause so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a city contractor, including debarment by another governmental entity where the use or misuse of a minority, disadvantaged or female business enterprise is at issue. 
(8)  Making any material misrepresentation of the composition of the ownership or work force of a business entity certified to the city as a minority, disadvantaged or female business enterprise. 
(9)  Knowingly misrepresenting to the city of the use which a majority-owned contractor intends to make of a minority, disadvantaged or female business enterprise (a business entity, at least 51 percent of which is owned and controlled by a minority, disadvantaged or female person, as defined in section 2-1443 and certified as such by the city), and as a subcontractor or a joint venture partner, in performing work under contract with the city. 
(10)  Having been shown to be a high cost lender or a predatory lender, or an affiliate thereof, as defined by City of Atlanta Code section 58-102. 
(11)  A violation of section 2-1296, section 2-1366, or section 2-1373. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 16, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1624. - Rights of contractors. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a suspension, disqualification or debarment notice, the contractor shall have ten working days to appeal to the director. The appeal must be in writing, specifying all details for appealing the decision. 
(b)  A contractor or prospective contractor who has been notified of a proposed debarment action may request in writing that a hearing be held. Such request must be received by the director within ten days of receipt of notice of the proposed action. If no request is received within the ten-day period, a final determination may be made by the director within five working days from the tenth day. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 16, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1625. - Authority of director. 
Under this division, the director has the power to: 
(1)  Hold informal conferences to settle issues, simplify and set forth the issues in a proceeding, or to consider other matters that may aid in the expeditious disposition of the proceeding either by consent of the parties or upon such officer's own motions, where the use or misuse of a minority, disadvantaged or female business enterprise is at issue. 
(2)  Fix time limits and require parties to produce for examination those relevant witnesses and documents under their control. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 16, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1626. - Availability. 
Any offeror or other party aggrieved by the provisions of this division may appeal such determination to the contract compliance hearing officer under the provisions of sections 2-1627 through 2-1630. It is the intent of the city to ensure all parties basic guarantees of due process consisting of the right to be heard, the right to a full and fair hearing, the right to present evidence, the right to confront an opposing party or parties, the right to be represented by legal counsel and the right to be heard by an impartial trier of fact; and the same are hereby so guaranteed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 16, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1627. - Time for filing notice of appeal. 
Any party who has been suspended, disqualified or debarred under this section may appeal an adverse decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the director of the office of contract compliance within ten days of receipt of the notice of determination of disqualification or debarment, but not later than 15 days after such determination. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 16, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1628. - Notice of hearing. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the notice of appeal from the contractor, the director shall forward the notice to a contract compliance hearing officer, referred to in this section as the hearing officer, within three days of receipt. 
(b)  Within ten days of the date of receipt of the notice of appeal from the director of the office of contract compliance, the hearing officer shall set the matter for a hearing, which hearing shall be held not more than 30 days from the date the hearing officer received the notice of appeal. 
(c)  The hearing officer shall cause a written notice of hearing to be served upon all parties by registered mail, which shall state the date, time and place of hearing. Such notice shall also inform the parties of due process rights and relevant procedural matters. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 16, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1629. - Hearing. 
At the hearing, all parties shall be provided a full and fair opportunity to be heard. Each party may be represented by counsel. Each party may present documentary evidence and the sworn testimony of witnesses; and shall have the right to object to the introduction of documents and to cross-examine opposing witnesses. Although formal rules of evidence shall not apply, the hearing officer shall cause a record to be made of the proceeding, through the use of a court reporter or by way of electronic tape recording with subsequent transcription. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 16, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1630. - Decision. 
(a)  Within seven days of the conclusion of the hearing, and based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented, the hearing officer shall render a written decision, i.e., an order, which shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law, which may affirm, reverse or otherwise alter the determination of the director to disqualify or debar a contractor. The notice of the decision shall be sent to all parties by registered mail. 
(b)  The decision of the hearing officer shall be binding on all parties, subject to the right of appeal as may be provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 16, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1631. - Effect of notice of suspension. 
A contractor or prospective contractor is suspended upon issuance of the notice of suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect during any appeals. Otherwise the suspension shall only be ended when the suspension has been in effect for 120 days or a disqualification or debarment decision has taken effect. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 16, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1632. - Effect of disqualification or debarment decision. 
A disqualification or debarment decision shall take effect upon issuance and mailing of written notice of such action to the contractor or prospective contractor. After the disqualification or debarment decision takes effect, the contractor shall remain disqualified or debarred until the period specified in the decision expires, but in no event longer than five years. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 16, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2-1633. - Conflict with powers of the chief procurement officer. 
Nothing in this division shall act or be construed to alter the powers of and duties of the chief procurement officer to suspend or debar a contractor pursuant to section 2-1162. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 16, 12-15-09) 
Secs. 2-1634—2-1640. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 17. - GRANT AGREEMENTS ADHERING TO SPECIAL GRANTOR REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 2-1641. - Requirements. 
(a)  Conditions for use. The chief procurement officer may enter into contracts issued by the city pursuant to grant agreements adhering to special grantor requirements independent of the requirements of division 4 and 8 of this article. However, contracts issued by the city pursuant to grant agreements adhering to routine procurement requirements shall be prepared subject to the provisions of divisions 4 and 8 of this article. 
(b)  Requisitions. Using agencies which administer contracts issued by the city pursuant to grant agreements shall file with the department of finance, grant accounting division, detailed requisitions concerning the needs in such manner and at such times and for future periods as the chief procurement officer and the chief financial officer shall prescribe in writing. 
(c)  Operating procedures. Consistent with this article, and after consultation with the using agencies, the chief financial officer and the commissioner of the department of administrative services, the chief procurement officer shall develop such standard operating procedures as may be necessary and proper for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this division and the preparation of agreements for grants adhering to special grantor requirements. These operating procedures shall be consistent with financial reporting requirements as required by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-78(09-O-1876), § 17, 12-15-09) 
Secs. 2-1642—2-1650. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - FIRST SOURCE JOBS PROGRAM[24] 
Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 1, approved February 13, 2013, repealed former Art. XI, §§ 2-1651—2-1657, 2-1676—2-1679, which pertained to First Source Jobs Policy. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted provisions designated as a new Art. XI to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 2-1651. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apprentice means any person who is enrolled in a certified apprentice program and who has resided in the city for a period of at least two years preceding commencement of employment under a construction contract pursuant to which such person will be employed pursuant to this article, at either the construction contractor or subcontractor level. 
AWDA means the Atlanta Workforce Development Agency. 
Beneficiary means the immediate recipient of any industrial revenue bonds, commercial or industrial abatement, urban redevelopment action grants or community development block funds administered by the city or agencies substantially controlled by the city, including the economic development corporation, urban residential finance authority. The term shall only apply to those entities benefiting from such city funds or administered funds in the amount of $25,000.00 or more with 15 or more employees. 
Certified apprentice program means a program that is registered with the U.S. Department of Labor that trains participants in construction skills related to specific trades and occupations and that enters into a written agreement with a pre-apprenticeship program to admit and place substantial numbers of trainees into employment in the construction trades. 
City means the City of Atlanta, Georgia. 
City agencies means departments, entities, agencies, or authorities, including, but not limited to, the Atlanta Development Authority and its affiliated and interlocking agencies and authorities, such as: Atlanta BeltLine, Inc., the Downtown Development Authority of Atlanta and the Urban Residential Finance Authority, over which the city or its elected officials exercise administrative or policymaking authority. 
City resident means any person who resides in the city and has continuously been a resident of the city for at least two years immediately preceding their participation in the First Source, Pre-Apprenticeship Program or such individuals' work participation as an apprentice or skilled construction worker on a construction contract or subcontract. 
Construction contract means a contract entered into by the city or a contract funded by the city for the performance of work which requires construction or building trades skills and has a face value that is at or greater than the threshold amount. 
Construction contractor means any person, firm, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, joint venture, proprietorship, trust, unincorporated association or other entity, whether profit or nonprofit, that enters into a construction contract. 
Contract means a contract entered into with the city for the performance of work on an eligible project that is greater than $20,000.00. 
Contractor means any person, firm, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, joint venture, proprietorship, trust, unincorporated association or other entity, whether profit or nonprofit, that enters into a contract. 
Employment agreement means a contract executed by the city and a beneficiary or contractor, the terms of which shall include, among other provisions, details as to the number and description of each entry-level job for which the beneficiary or contractor is required to use the First Source Register and other applicable sections of this article. 
Entry-level job means any nonmanagerial, nonprofessional or nontechnical position for which little or no prior work experience or vocational skill training is required to successfully perform the job tasks. 
First source register means a listing of low-income city residents, including graduates of programs funded by the Workforce Investment Act (WIA), which is compiled and maintained by ADWA pursuant to section 2-1657 below. 
Low-income city resident means any city resident who meets one of the following criteria: (i) resides in a census tract within the city with a rate of unemployment in excess of 100 percent of the city's unemployment rate; (ii) resides in a household with a family income at or below the poverty level as defined by the Federal Office of Management and Budget (OMB); (iii) has a major barrier to employment such as disability status, veteran status, teenage parents, lacking a high school diploma or a GED, homeless, dislocated, laid-off or older workers. Such individuals must be at least 18 years old and, if not a high school graduate, must not have been enrolled in a secondary school or below within the past six months. 
Pre-apprenticeship program means a job training program a majority of whose enrollees are low-income city residents and that prepares individuals to enter into a certified apprenticeship program by providing them with skills training that provides an initial introduction to the construction industry, that increases literacy and mathematical skills, and that increases life skills. 
Program means the Atlanta First Source, Job Training and Employment Placement Program established by this article. 
Skilled construction worker means any person who has completed a certified apprentice program, who resides in the city and who has continuously resided in the city for a period of at least two years prior to such individual's work participation on a construction contract or subcontract. 
Threshold amount means as to each construction contract a face amount of $500,000.00 and as to each subcontract under a face amount of $250,000.00. 
Trainee means a low-income city resident that is enrolled in a pre-apprenticeship program listed on the registry established pursuant to section 2-1660. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1652. - Severability. 
If any provision of this article shall be held invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not invalidate or render unenforceable any other provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
DIVISION 2. - FIRST SOURCE JOBS POLICY 

Sec. 2-1653. - AWDA duties. 
The duties of AWDA shall include the following: 
(1)  Administration of this division. 
(2)  Establishment of written procedures to effectuate this division. 
(3)  Approval of employment agreements. 
(4)  Provision of all necessary forms, applications, documents and papers necessary to comply with this article. 
(5)  Establish training programs that include pre-apprenticeship programs, entrepreneurial skills programs and upgrade training for skilled workers. 
(6)  Establish training programs that may include apprenticeship programs provided nothing in this provision shall require that participants join a labor union. 
(7)  Make determinations whether or not bidders have complied with executing the First Source jobs agreement and First Source job information sheet. 
(8)  Provide recruitment efforts for both entry level job workers and skilled construction workers provided said skilled construction workers fit within the definition of low income city resident. 
(9)  Meet with City of Atlanta user agency representatives and the chief procurement officer (or his/her designee) prior to the issuance of any bid solicitation sourced from that user agency which may appropriately include First Source requirements to discuss whether the inclusion or exclusion of the First Source provision is appropriate for said solicitation. 
(10)  The director of AWDA shall provide an annual report to the Mayor and City of Atlanta Council outlining the efforts in complying with the goals of this article, the number of jobs created, the skill sets demanded by employers and any other metric as may be requested by the mayor and the city council consistent with federal, state and local law. 
(11)  The director of AWDA (or his/her designee) shall provide notices of workshops, training and employment opportunities (including anticipated job position requirements, full or part-time nature, employee benefits offered, if any, employer's promotion policy, possibility of advancement, employees expected hours and other policies related to the winning bidders project). Said notices shall be provided in hard copy form and electronic form to community based organizations, Centers of Hope and any other local venue which may effectively inform local economically disadvantaged participants and low income city residents. 
(12)  The director of AWDA shall, consistent with the One Stop delivery system as designated by WIA and other WIA provisions, determine an effective training program which may include utilization of local colleges in order to provide an adequate pool of trained, ready and able economically disadvantaged participants and low income city residents for employers. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1654. - Office of contract compliance duties. 
Working in conjunction with AWDA, the office of contract compliance duties are: 
(1)  Once notified by AWDA that an employer is not compliant with this article, make determinations as to whether any of the penalties set forth in section 2-1657 for noncompliance are appropriate. 
(2)  Notify a non-compliant employer by registered mail that the party has the right to appeal a determination of noncompliance with this article to the contract compliance hearing officer within seven days of receipt of the notice of noncompliance. 
(3)  Notify the chief procurement officer, the head of the affected using agency and any other appropriate city officials of any determination of noncompliance with the requirements of this article and any appeal from such determination of noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1655. - User agency duties. 
City of Atlanta user agencies may meet with AWDA personnel, as designated by the director of AWDA, and the chief procurement office (or his/her designee), prior to the issuance of bid solicitations to discuss the inclusion of First Source requirements in any forthcoming bid solicitations. Said user agency representative shall provide a list of potential positions and skill sets to allow AWDA to train and present an adequate pool of trained, ready and available potential participants who meet the definition of low income city residents. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1656. - Employer duties. 
Winning bidders on solicitations which include First Source requirements shall meet with the director of AWDA (or his/her designee) after award but prior to execution of the contract to provide appropriate notification of available entry level, apprentice and skilled labor positions prior to interviewing applicants to allow AWDA time to train and refer an adequate pool of economically disadvantaged participants to employers for consideration. Said notification shall include the following information: 
(1)  Skill sets required for any entry level jobs. 
(2)  Employer's recruitment, hiring and retention goals consistent with an employment agreement which the winning bidder will execute. 
(3)  Occupational title of the entry level job. 
(4)  Hours required for the entry level job. 
(5)  Expected duration of the entry level job. 
(6)  Any English language proficiency requirements, or absence thereof. 
(7)  Projected schedule, and procedures for hiring entry level jobs. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1657. - First source register. 
(a)  AWDA shall compile and maintain a First Source Register. 
(b)  In compiling and maintaining the First Source Register, AWDA shall contact the Georgia Department of Labor, community-based organizations, welfare agencies and any other agency whose primary target group is the economically disadvantaged. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1658. - Employment agreement required. 
Under this article, the city shall require each employer for every applicable project that is subject to this article, to enter into an employment agreement with the city in the form to be required by AWDA. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1659. - First source hiring guidelines. 
Prior to hiring any entry-level jobs, each employer will review job applicants exclusively from the First Source Register for a period of at least 30 days prior to reviewing job applicants from any other source. 
(a)  Each employer will maintain as a goal that 50 percent of entry-level jobs under that employer's control will be filled with individuals from the First Source Register. 
(b)  Each employer will make best efforts to attain the above goal. 
Each employer will make best efforts to hire low-income city residents for all entry-level jobs that are under the employer's control. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
DIVISION 3. - ATLANTA CITYBUILD PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-1660. - Program. 
(a)  Subject to funding as stated in section 2-1665, there is hereby established within AWDA a program named the Atlanta CityBuild Program. This program shall have the following purposes: 
(1)  To administer the Atlanta CityBuild Program; 
(2)  To increase the number of low income city residents who enroll in, participate in, and completing pre-apprenticeship programs; 
(3)  To monitor the effectiveness of pre-apprenticeship programs serving low income city residents; 
(4)  To increase the number of low income city residents who complete pre-apprenticeship programs and then enroll in, participate in and complete certified apprenticeship program; 
(5)  To facilitate and ensure that construction contracts provide training and employment opportunities for city residents, including low income city residents who participate in certified apprenticeship programs; 
(6)  To work in conjunction with the department of procurement, to make a forecast of the construction and building trades skills to be required under construction contracts projected to be let by the city in specified future time periods for purposes of identifying in advance the construction skills training and employment opportunities likely to be generated by such contracts; 
(7)  To inventory the construction and building skills available in certified apprenticeship programs; 
(8)  To assist in the enforcement of the requirements of the programs; 
(9)  to prepare and issue annual reports to the mayor, the city council and the public on the effectiveness of the Atlanta CityBuild Program; and 
(10)  To work closely with the First Source Program Director and Atlanta CityBuild Advisory Board in determining how the program can be improved and made more effective. 
(b)  The program shall be led by a director of the Atlanta CityBuild Program. The director of the Atlanta CityBuild program shall report to the department head of AWDA. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1661. - Appropriations for Atlanta CityBuild, Pre-Apprenticeship, Apprenticeship and Skilled Labor Programs. 
Funding up to $500,000 for the Atlanta CityBuild, Pre-Apprenticeship, Apprenticeship and Skilled Labor Programs shall be made at such time funds are available and such funding is subject to the discretion of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1662. - Pre-apprenticeship programs. 
AWDA shall develop and maintain a registry of pre-apprenticeship programs. To be listed on the pre-apprenticeship programs registry, such program must provide reasonable evidence to the director of the Atlanta CityBuild Program that it is able to meet the objective of preparing students to enter a certified apprenticeship program. Such evidence must include a minimum of a 120-hour curriculum that covers the topics of the occupational health and safety administration ten-hour construction safety training, CPR and first aid training and certification, blueprint reading, orientation, math skills, industry history, industry awareness, and tools and materials. AWDA shall have the authority to develop whatever programs it deems desirable to identify, encourage, assist, and support the establishment and maintenance of pre-apprenticeship programs in the city and to monitor the performance of such pre-apprenticeship programs in fulfilling the mission of preparing low-income city residents for entry into certified apprentice programs. 
In the event that AWDA determines that its direct participation in a pre-apprenticeship program is in the best interest of the CityBuild Program, then the mayor is hereby authorized to negotiate, all intergovernmental agreements with any unit of the University System of Georgia located within the City, DeKalb County, or Fulton County to establish or join a pre-apprenticeship program to facilitate and assist the city in accomplishing the objectives of this article. Any such intergovernmental agreement, once negotiated, shall be presented to the Atlanta City Council for its approval, provided however, that the city shall not be authorized to participate in any pre-apprenticeship program which requires membership in a union as a condition to individuals' participation in such pre-apprenticeship program. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1663. - Certified apprenticeship programs. 
AWDA shall develop and maintain a registry of certified apprenticeship programs. Such registry shall include information, as to each certified apprenticeship program, the construction and building trades within the scope of the program, whether such program is union or nonunion, and the number of city residents, including low income residents, who are enrolled in such programs. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1664. - Utilization requirements. 
For each construction contract the following utilization requirements shall apply: 
At least ten percent of all construction work hours performed under a construction contract or a subcontract shall be performed by apprentices. In determining compliance with this provision, construction work hours performed by individuals who are residents of states other than Georgia shall be excluded from the calculation. 
In construction contracts, construction contractors shall use good faith efforts to ensure that 25 percent of construction and building trade work hours performed under a construction contract being performed by skilled construction workers. In determining compliance with this provision, construction work hours performed by individuals who are residents of states other than Georgia shall be excluded from the calculation. 
This article is not intended to and shall not limit any contractors, construction contractors or subcontractor's ability to assess the qualifications of prospective workers, and to make final hiring and retention decisions. No provision of this article shall be interpreted so as to require a contractor or subcontractor to employ a worker not qualified for this position in question, or to employ or retain any particular worker. Further, this article shall not be interpreted to require any construction contractor or subcontractor to hire any worker as a result of such worker's membership in a labor union. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1665. - Recordkeeping requirements. 
The city shall be entitled to audit the books and records of a contractor, construction contractor or subcontractor. Such books and records shall be maintained by the contractor for a period of three years from the date of final payment under the prime contract and by the subcontractor for a period of three years from the date of final payment under the subcontract, unless a shorter period is authorized in writing. Each construction contractor and subcontractor shall keep, or cause to be kept records of certified payroll and basic records, including time cards, tax forms, and superintendent and foreman daily logs, for all workers within each construction and building trade and skill utilized under such construction contract or subcontract. Such records shall include the name, address and social security number of each worker who worked under the construction contract or subcontract, his or her classification, a general description of the work each worker performed each day, the apprentice or skilled construction worker of each worker, daily and weekly number of hours worked, the self-identified race, gender and ethnicity of each worker, whether or not the worker was a low income resident, and the certified apprentice program through which the worker was hired. All records described in this section shall at all times be open to inspection and examination by the duly authorized officers and agents of the city, including representatives of the Office of Atlanta CityBuild. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1666. - Subcontractor compliance. 
Each construction contractor shall ensure that all subcontractors agree to comply with applicable requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1667. - Good faith efforts to comply. 
Where a construction contractor has not met the requirements of section 2-1664 above, or has not attained the goal specified in section 2-1665, that construction contractor may be deemed to be in compliance by making a showing that it attempted in good faith to comply by demonstrating that it did all of the following: 
(a)  Contacted all certified apprentice programs on the AWDA registry to identify and request apprentices and skilled construction workers, on a form to be provided by the city; 
(b)  Convened pre-bid and pre-construction meetings to educate its managers and subcontractors on the requirements of this policy; 
(c)  Developed and submitted a detailed hiring plan for meeting the targeted utilization requirements; 
(d)  Contacted AWDA to seek its assistance with identifying apprentices and skilled construction workers; 
(e)  Provided regular reports to AWDA on its compliance prior to and during its work on the Construction Contract; and 
(f)  Documented why, despite these efforts, it was unable to meet the requirements of section 2-1664. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
DIVISION 4. - ATLANTA FIRST SOURCE AND CITYBUILD ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-1668. - Composition; qualifications; terms of office. 
(a)  The First Source Policy Advisory Board shall be hereby reconstituted and renamed the Atlanta First Source and CityBuild Advisory Committee. The committee shall be composed of five members who shall select a chair from the membership of the board. The mayor shall select three members of the committee. 
The President of the Atlanta City Council shall have one appointment. The chair of the community development and human resources committee shall have one appointment. AWDA shall provide the staff necessary to support the activities and functions of the Committee. 
Said board shall exist for two years from the date this article shall come into effect and upon the second anniversary of its effective date said board shall terminate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1669. - Purposes and functions of advisory committee. 
The advisory committee shall have the following purposes and functions: 
(a)  To assess the First Source and CityBuild Programs and to offer advice and guidance on ways to improve the effectiveness of such programs; 
(b)  To seek out best practices related to First Source, Construction Skills and Local Hire programs around the country and to bring such best practices to the Atlanta CityBuild program; and 
(c)  To seek out potential funding sources from governmental, philanthropic and charitable sources to increase the resources available to the First Source and the CityBuild Programs. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1670. - CityBuild reporting. 
The CityBuild Director working in conjunction with the chief procurement officer shall establish reporting procedures for construction contractors and subcontractors to submit to AWDA and the department of procurement. Such reports shall be for the purposes of allowing the city to monitor compliance with and effectiveness of this policy. All reports submitted by construction contractors and subcontractors shall be accompanied by a statement of compliance indicating that such reports are accurate and complete. Based upon the reports received from construction contractors, subcontractors and other sources of information, the CityBuild Director shall issue on or before March 1st of each calendar year an annual report setting forth pertinent details regarding the city's progress under this article, statistics showing the utilization of apprentices and skilled construction workers under construction contracts. The CityBuild Director shall issue this annual report to the committee, to all members of the Atlanta City Council and the Mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 2-1671. - Monitoring. 
From time to time and in its sole discretion, AWDA and the office of contract compliance may monitor and investigate compliance of construction contractors and subcontractors working on a construction contract with requirements of this policy. AWDA and awarding departments shall have the right to engage in random inspections of job sites, subject to construction schedule and safety concerns. Each construction contractor and subcontractor shall allow representatives of AWDA and awarding departments, in the performance of their duties, to engage in random inspections of job sites and to have access to the employees of the construction contractor or subcontractor and the records required to be kept pursuant to section 2-1666. The office of contract compliance shall establish an administrative procedure for monitoring of compliance with this policy. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
DIVISION 5. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 2-1672. - Penalties. 
Upon a determination by the office of contract compliance that a construction contractor, has failed to comply with any portion of this article, the city may impose any or all of the following penalties, based upon a determination of the severity of the noncompliance by the construction contractor: 
(1)  Withholding from the construction contractor in violation ten percent of all future payments under the construction contract until it is determined that the construction contractor is in compliance. 
(2)  Refusal of all future bids on city projects or applications for financial assistance in any form from the city or any of its departments or divisions, until such time as the beneficiary, contractor or construction contractor demonstrates that it has cured its previous noncompliance. 
(3)  Cancellation of the eligible project or the construction contract. 
These penalties are in addition to whatever additional remedies may be available to the city under other provisions of the City Code, the terms of the construction contracts or subcontracts, or at law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06(10-O-0928), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Secs. 2-1673—2-1700. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - CITY-OWNED OR CITY-LEASED MOTORIZED EQUIPMENT[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Charter reference— Bureau of motor transport services, app. IV, § 10. 
Cross reference— Self insurance and waiver of governmental immunity for motor vehicle accidents, § 2-4; bureau of motor transport services director, § 2-424. 

Sec. 2-1701. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department head means the head of any city department or the designated official of any city department not within the executive branch of city government. 
Director means the director, office of fleet services. 
Manage or management means the processing of researching, planning and coordinating fleet maintenance, equipment procurement and city-wide fleet operating problems and issues and preparing recommendations in consultation and coordination with city department heads for adoption by city officials. 
Specialized motorized equipment means motorized equipment that because of its character is not used in a regular, recurring manner but for which an infrequent but necessary need exists to meet the operational requirements of an individual city department or agency. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4012; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 12, 9-24-07) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-1702. - Application of article. 
This article shall apply to the motorized equipment fleet of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4011) 
Sec. 2-1703. - Maintenance and management of motorized equipment fleet. 
The maintenance and management of the motorized equipment fleet of the city shall be in accordance with procedures as prescribed by this article and such administrative procedures as the director shall adopt for the management and operation of the office of fleet services. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4013; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 12, 9-24-07) 
Sec. 2-1704. - Duties and responsibilities of director. 
In addition to any other authority and responsibilities, the director shall: 
(1)  Develop and periodically review city-wide priorities, goals and objectives relating to management of the city motorized equipment fleet. 
(2)  Prepare motorized equipment specifications and evaluate bids for the acquisition of motorized equipment and automotive supplies in response to departmental requisitions. 
(3)  Develop and apply standards and formulas for evaluation of the need to acquire replacement of motorized equipment. 
(4)  Develop standards and procedures for the retirement of equipment and for the preparation of such equipment for disposal. 
(5)  Develop and apply equipment operator certification standards, procedures, rules and instruction methods governing the safe operation and utilization of motorized equipment. 
(6)  Provide effective and efficient maintenance and cost control of motorized equipment, parts inventory, tools, materials, fuel, work methods and all real and personal property acquired and utilized for motorized equipment fleet management. 
(7)  Develop for application by city departments and the office of fleet services, as appropriate, standards and procedures for the effective and efficient operation, maintenance and repair of motorized equipment. 
(8)  Remain informed of current developments in the field of motorized equipment fleet management and secure for the city benefits of improved motorized equipment fleet management products and procedures. 
(9)  Cooperate with the department of finance to secure for the city maximum efficiency in budget execution and administration. 
(10)  Maintain an inventory of all city automotive equipment at all times and periodically reconcile the inventory to the fixed assets inventory maintained by the chief financial officer in concert with the department of finance and maintain records as to identifying numbers, departmental assignments, work location, usage and utilization of each vehicle. The assignments of vehicles to departments and to central pools maintained by the office of fleet services shall be reported to the mayor and chief operating officer and committee on finance of the council quarterly. 
(11)  Prescribe and maintain such forms as shall be reasonable and necessary to accomplish the purposes of this article. 
(12)  Assist in identifying equipment surplus to the needs of individual departments, in consultation with affected departments, and establish and maintain control over such surplus equipment; carry out transfers of such equipment to other departments or to the loan pool, upon the concurrence of the department of finance, or execute surplus forms to dispose of such equipment at the earliest auction of surplus city property. 
(13)  In conjunction with the department of finance, establish a user charge back system and mechanism to apportion the costs of the office of fleet services to those departments and agencies which are served by the office of fleet services, with billings to be rendered monthly. 
(14)  Maintain and operate a computerized equipment management information system for the motorized fleet under the control of the office of fleet services, and establish policies and procedures for the operation of the management information system. 
(15)  The director shall take delivery of all new motorized equipment purchased by the city and shall not release such equipment to the ordering department until any equipment replaced by such new equipment has been turned in to the director by the ordering department. Such replaced equipment shall in each case be placed on the surplus lot and disposed of at the next auction of surplus city property, except that the director may, upon the concurrence of the department of finance, transfer such vehicles to the fleets of other departments or to the loan pool. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4014; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 12, 9-24-07) 
Sec. 2-1705. - Reports. 
The director shall maintain such records as the director deems necessary for the efficient management of the office of fleet services. The director shall make an annual report to the mayor describing the operations of the office of fleet services in the preceding year, which shall include measures of performance; an inventory of materials, equipment, parts, motorized equipment and tools; and reports as to the costs of damage to city motor equipment due to accidents, operator abuse and negligence. The director shall also: 
(1)  Report monthly, to the department head and the chief financial officer, the cost of labor, fuel and parts associated with motorized equipment fleets for the individual departments and agencies of city government; and 
(2)  Report annually to the chief financial officer an inventory of motorized equipment, parts, fuel, tools and any other tangible personal property under the control and jurisdiction of the director. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4017; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 12, 9-24-07) 
Sec. 2-1706. - Specialized equipment pool. 
The director shall manage and operate a pool of specialized motorized equipment for the use of city departments or agencies. Such specialized motorized equipment shall be made available, upon request, to city departments or agencies for use during a stated period of time. The director, in conjunction with the department of finance, shall establish a schedule of charges for use of specialized motorized equipment. Such charges shall be designed to recover from and properly apportion to using agencies the acquisition cost of the equipment and the cost of maintaining and operating the equipment. Charges levied by the director for use of specialized motorized equipment shall be billed monthly to using agencies. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4020) 
Sec. 2-1707. - Files of state certificates of title. 
(a)  The director shall maintain files of state certificates of title and registration on city-owned motorized equipment and shall sign as owner upon sale of such vehicles. 
(b)  The director shall maintain a permanent file on all state certificates of title (form T-1) with respect to all motorized equipment of the year 1963 or subsequent year models, requiring a license tag, purchased by or for the city by any department of the city or any person acting for such department. 
(c)  With respect to the purchase of such motorized equipment, all departments of the city or persons acting for the departments shall be required to show on the application for the state certificate of title (form T-1) the owner's name as the city, the name of the department initiating the purchase, the city motorized equipment number and the address as "Director, Office of Fleet Services, 23 Claire Drive S.E., Atlanta, Georgia" or such other address as shall be appropriate. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the department or the person acting for such department, as to such motorized equipment being purchased, to verify that such certificate of title is filed with the director. 
(e)  The director shall retain such certificate of title in the permanent files of the office of fleet services, and the director or the director's duly designated representative is further authorized, after the bureau of purchasing and real estate has approved the subsequent sale of any motorized equipment, to sign, as owner for the city, an assignment and warranty of title and to deliver such to the purchaser of such motorized equipment. Before any such motorized equipment is subsequently sold, such sale must be approved by the bureau of purchasing and real estate. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4019; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 12, 9-24-07) 
Sec. 2-1708. - Identification of city-owned motorized equipment. 
The name "City of Atlanta" shall be stenciled or painted in some visible way on each piece of motorized equipment coming under this article. There shall be no exception to this section, except cars used by the mayor and cars used in the department of police for the purpose of detecting crime and cars used by the department heads or the chief operating officer or chief of staff in the administration of their duties. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4018) 
Sec. 2-1709. - Supplies and repairs. 
(a)  Generally. All motor equipment owned and operated by the city shall receive gasoline, oil and other supplies at the municipal garages, and all repairs shall be made at the municipal garages, except as may otherwise be directed by the director, office of fleet services. 
(b)  Furnishing limited to city vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any employee to seek to obtain, obtain or furnish to any automobile or other motor vehicle, at the municipal garage, any gasoline, oil, tires, repairs or other equipment or supplies, when the title to such automobile is not in the name of the city. However, the director may authorize the furnishing of gasoline, oil, tires, repairs or other equipment or supplies to properly leased or rented vehicles or other vehicles lawfully in the possession of the city. 
(c)  Report of excessive use of gas and oil. The director, office of fleet services shall report to the chief operating officer and the appropriate department head excessive use of oil or fuel by the driver of any vehicle owned and maintained by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4021; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 12, 9-24-07) 
Sec. 2-1710. - Speedometers or odometers required. 
All automotive equipment of the city shall be equipped with speedometers, odometers or, if appropriate, hourmeters. It shall be the responsibility of the director to establish appropriate procedures to ensure that such devices are present and operable on all appropriate equipment. It shall be the duty of each department head to ensure that accurate end of month readings of all speedometers and odometers are submitted to the director. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4022) 
Sec. 2-1711. - Automotive accessories for city vehicles. 
No automotive accessories, other than those on a city vehicle when purchased, shall afterwards be put on any city car except by written order of the director, office of fleet services and a record shall be kept thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4023; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 12, 9-24-07) 
Sec. 2-1712. - Use of city-owned vehicles by city employees. 
(a)  No city employee who does not possess a valid state driver's license shall drive a city vehicle. 
(b)  Every employee in charge of any vehicle owned by the city shall exercise care in the operation of that vehicle and avoid accidents. Disregard of this obligation shall be grounds for discharge. Each head of a department shall notify in writing each person within the department entrusted with the operation of motor vehicle of this section. 
(c)  City employees driving or riding in city-owned vehicles in seats for which seat belts are provided must wear seatbelts at all times. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4025) 
Sec. 2-1713. - Qualifications of city commercial motor vehicle operators. 
(a)  Application of section. This section shall apply to every employee of the city who holds or is required to hold a commercial driver's license during the scope of the employee's employment with the city or whose function or duty is to regularly operate or drive commercial motor vehicles during the scope of employment with the city. This section shall not apply to private employers or private commercial motor carriers. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the state Uniform Commercial Driver's License Act (O.C.G.A. § 40-5-140 et seq.) and the federal Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986, title XII of Public Law 99-570, as amended. This section is designed to reduce or prevent accidents, fatalities and injuries involving commercial motor vehicles driven by city employees. This section is a remedial law and shall be liberally construed to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens and employees of the city. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial driver's license (CDL) means a license issued in accordance with the requirements of the state Uniform Commercial Driver's License Act (O.C.G.A. § 40-5-140 et seq.), which authorizes an individual to drive a class of commercial motor vehicle. 
Commercial motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to transport passengers or property if the vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds or such lesser rating as determined by federal regulations or if the vehicle otherwise meets the requirements of the state Uniform Commercial Driver's License Act, as amended. 
(d)  Requirements for issuance of commercial driver's license for city employees. 
(1)  No employee may be issued a commercial driver's license unless that person complies with the provisions of the state Uniform Commercial Driver's License Act (O.C.G.A. § 40-5-140 et seq.), is a resident of this state, is at least 18 years of age, has passed a knowledge and skills test for driving a commercial motor vehicle which complies with minimum federal standards established by federal regulations enumerated in 49 CFR 383, subparts G and H, and has satisfied all other requirements of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986, title XII of Public Law 99-570, in addition to any other requirements imposed by state law or federal regulation, as amended. 
(2)  In addition to satisfying a road test or knowledge and skills test, as required by state and federal law, every city employee who holds or is required to hold a commercial driver's license during the scope of employment with the city shall submit to a physical examination which shall be administered by a city-authorized licensed physician. This physical examination shall include a screen for drugs or other substances as defined in subsections (2), (3) and (4) of the definition of substances in section 114-567. A positive test result for these substances shall constitute cause for which disciplinary action may be imposed, up to and including dismissal. The physical examination may be performed in accordance with the minimum federal regulations as set forth in 49 CFR 391, as amended. 
(3)  Every city employee who holds or is required to hold a commercial driver's license during the scope of employment with the city shall be given 24 hours' written notice before the date of the physical examination, which shall include the screen for drugs or other substances as outlined in subsection (d)(2) of this section. An employee who refuses to be tested as scheduled under this section shall not be permitted to operate a commercial motor vehicle, and the refusal shall constitute cause for which disciplinary action may be imposed, up to and including dismissal. 
(4)  A city employee is physically qualified to receive a commercial driver's license if that person: 
a.  Has no loss, impairment or limitation of a limb or body part which interferes with the employee's ability to perform normal tasks associated with controlling and operating a motor vehicle; 
b.  Has no established medical history or clinical diagnosis of a disease, condition or disorder, including but not limited to alcoholism, likely to interfere with the employee's ability to control and operate a motor vehicle; and 
c.  Tests negative for drugs or other substances as defined in subsections (2), (3) and (4) of the definition of substances in section 114-567. 
(e)  General qualifications to physically operate commercial motor vehicles. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other section of this article, no city employee may drive, operate or be in physical control of a city commercial motor vehicle while having any measurable alcohol in the employee's system or while the employee is under the influence of drugs or any other substances as defined in section 114-567 of the city's substance abuse policy. 
(2)  Any city employee who drives, operates or is in physical control of a city commercial motor vehicle while having any measurable alcohol in the employee's system or while under the influence of drugs or any other substances as defined in section 114-567 of the city's substance abuse policy shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal. 
(3)  Once every two years, every city employee who holds or is required to hold a commercial driver's license during the scope of employment with city shall submit to a physical examination, which shall be administered by a city-authorized licensed physician. This physical examination shall include a screen for drugs or other substances as defined in subsections (2), (3) and (4) of the definition of substances in section 114-567. The physical examination may be performed in accordance with the minimum federal regulations as set forth in 49 CFR 391, as amended. A positive test result for these substances shall constitute cause for which disciplinary action may be imposed, up to and including dismissal. 
(4)  Every city employee who holds or is required to hold a commercial driver's license during the scope of employment with the city shall be given 24 hours' written notice before the date of the physical examination, which shall include the screen for drugs or other substances as outlined above in subsection (d)(3) of this section. An employee who refuses to be tested as scheduled under this subsection shall not be permitted to operate a commercial motor vehicle, and the refusal shall constitute cause for which disciplinary action may be imposed, up to and including dismissal. 
(5)  A city employee is physically qualified to drive or operate a commercial motor vehicle if that person: 
a.  Has no loss, impairment or limitation of a limb or body part which interferes with the employee's ability to perform normal tasks associated with controlling and operating a motor vehicle; 
b.  Has no established medical history or clinical diagnosis of a disease, condition or disorder, including but not limited to alcoholism, likely to interfere with the employee's ability to control and operate a motor vehicle; and 
c.  Has no measurable alcohol in the employee's system nor is the employee under the influence of drugs or any other substances as defined in section 114-567 of the city's substance abuse policy. 
(6)  All city commercial motor vehicle operators shall be subject to the driver disqualification rules as outlined by state law. Any driver or operator who is disqualified shall not knowingly be permitted by a supervisor to drive a city commercial motor vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4016.1) 
Sec. 2-1714. - Qualifications of equipment operators; examinations. 
(a)  No city employee shall drive a city-owned vehicle if the employee does not possess a state driver's license valid for the type of equipment operated. 
(b)  All drivers of motor equipment owned and operated by the city, except the department of fire motor equipment, shall be subject to an examination and training by the director, which examination shall include investigations as to the mechanical knowledge of drivers and their general knowledge as to the operation of motor vehicles and the traffic laws of the city and state. Should any applicant be rejected by the director, the applicant shall have the right to appeal such decision to the chief operating officer, whose decision shall be final. No person shall be allowed to operate any motor equipment of the city unless the person is at least 18 years of age and unless the requirements of the examination by the director are met. 
(c)  Employees required to drive or operate motorized equipment assigned to the city hall motor pool shall not normally be subject to training under this section. A valid state driver's license shall qualify a city employee to drive or operate such equipment. However, should such city employee be responsible for excessive or frequent incidents of abuse or negligence in the use or operation of city-owned motorized equipment, the director shall require such employee to be subjected to training under the terms of this section. 
(d)  The director shall maintain and provide defensive driving training for city employees required by the chief operating officer or designee to receive such training. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4016) 
Sec. 2-1715. - Private use of municipally owned vehicles. 
(a)  The use of any municipally owned vehicle by any official or employee for any purpose other than the city's business is prohibited. These vehicles must be used solely and exclusively for municipal purposes. No city vehicle shall be driven to the employee's home or residence at night on a regularly assigned basis, unless permission is secured in accordance with this section. No passengers shall be transported in city-owned motor vehicles except when transportation of passengers is necessary for the conduct of the city's business. City employees who are authorized to drive city vehicles home at night may transport other city employees as long as there is no more than a minimal variation between the work station and residence of the city employee so authorized. When city-owned vehicles are driven home at night, they shall be parked off the street and preferably under cover. 
(b)  Authorization to drive a city-owned vehicle home overnight on a regularly assigned basis shall be granted only when the following criteria have been met: 
(1)  A minimum of 30 approved callbacks have been documented for the employee during the preceding six months. The term "approved callbacks" means the employee returning to work after duty hours for nonroutine work essential to the public well being or the employee attending an authorized meeting as an official representative of the city at the direction of the appropriate department head; or 
(2)  Extenuating circumstances exist which make the use of emergency mileage reimbursement impractical. Such circumstances include the following: 
a.  The existence of unique tools, radios or other equipment located in or needing to be transported in the city vehicle, which equipment would be essential to the employee in performing the emergency work; 
b.  Personal circumstances of the employee, such as the unavailability of a personal vehicle; and 
c.  The need for security for the vehicle not obtainable at the work site. 
(c)  Authorization to drive a city-owned vehicle home overnight on a regularly assigned basis shall be granted by the mayor every six months by executive order through such procedure as may be established by the mayor or designee. A list of all authorizations for regular overnight use shall be filed with the municipal clerk and the committee on finance of the council on or within ten days of April 1 and October 1 of each year. This list shall contain the full name and address, work station, position number and classification, city vehicle number, one-way mileage to the employee's home, miles driven for the previous reporting period and the number of callbacks for the previous reporting period or such other basis as may exist for the authorization. Authorization for nonregular, emergency or temporary overnight driving assignments shall be made at the discretion of the department head. Temporary overnight driving assignments shall include those assignments necessary to provide for vacation replacements, employee termination, employee reassignments or other such overnight driving assignments of a temporary nature only. The use of emergency or other temporary overnight authorizations shall be reported by the mayor in the same manner as the authorizations for regular use. 
(d)  Department heads shall be responsible for the compliance with this section by the employees within their departments. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to the mayor or to department heads with respect to vehicles assigned for their personal use. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to the police chief, fire chief and commissioner of corrections. The police chief or designee is authorized to select, at the police chief's discretion, sworn members of the department of police who reside in the city who shall be permitted to drive city-owned marked patrol vehicles home overnight on a regularly assigned basis. Usage of the vehicle shall be restricted to the city. The sworn members who have received permission to drive city-owned vehicles home overnight shall be allowed the full use of the city vehicles; the restrictions of subsection (a) of this section, with the exception of the requirement of a state driver's license to drive a city-owned vehicle, are not applicable to this section. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4026) 
Sec. 2-1716. - Use of municipally owned vehicles outside city. 
(a)  Municipally owned vehicles shall not normally be used outside the city. When any official or employee must travel outside the city limits in a city-owned vehicle, travel must be solely and exclusively for municipal purposes and authorization must have been previously granted in accordance with this section. 
(b)  The department head shall have the authority to permit employees of the department to drive city-owned vehicles outside the city limits on a case basis. This vehicle usage shall be of a limited nature and preferably restricted to the metropolitan area. More specifically, the department head's authority to grant this permission is limited to vehicle usage within the state. This authority shall not be construed to circumvent or be used in lieu of any additional approval that may be required by this Code. 
(c)  Authority to grant use of a city-owned vehicle outside the state shall rest with the mayor or designee. These requests shall be submitted through the department head to the director, office of fleet services. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to the mayor. 
(e)  (1)  All city vehicles used for city administrative purposes shall be emblazoned upon the driver and passenger doors of said vehicles with the official seal of the city in a size no smaller than nine inches in diameter, in conformance with the following specifications. The seal shall be printed in white on a black background, or in black on a white background, whichever color most significantly contrasts with the body paint color of the vehicle. Above the official seal on both doors shall also be printed "City of Atlanta". Below the official seal shall be printed "For Official Use Only." Lettering shall be no smaller than 1½ inches in height. Lettering shall be either black or white, whichever color most significantly contrasts with the body paint color of the vehicle. 
(2)  Each vehicle will be further identified with a seven-digit tracking number. Said number shall correspond with information maintained by the department of administrative services, office of fleet services, regarding the official or employee to whom the vehicle is assigned and shall be displayed on the back of the vehicle, and shall be either black or white, whichever color most significantly contrasts with the body paint color of the vehicle. 
(3)  Marking of all vehicles covered hereby shall be accomplished by September 1, 1996. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4027; Ord. No. 1996-38, § 1, 6-12-96; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 12, 9-24-07) 
Sec. 2-1717. - Duty to take names of witnesses to accidents. 
All employees of the city engaged in work where accidents occur shall immediately obtain the names of persons witnessing them or who may have knowledge relating thereto and shall at once transmit a copy of those names of witnesses to the heads of their respective departments, who shall in turn transmit them immediately to the department of law. This section embraces officers, as well as other employees of the city. Any failure to comply with this section shall be a breach of duty. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4024) 
Sec. 2-1718. - Motorized equipment accidents or injuries. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each department head to promptly report on standard, numbered forms established by the director any accident or injury in which city-owned motorized equipment is involved. The report shall be made in three copies. One copy each shall be forwarded to the director, the chief financial officer and the city attorney. 
(b)  The report shall include the name and employee number of the driver or operator; the time, date and location of the accident or injury; the name and address of any other involved persons and witnesses; a brief description of the circumstances of the accident or injury; a layout of the accident scene; a brief description of any damages and injuries; and the vehicle number of the involved motorized equipment. 
(c)  The director shall, upon receipt of the report, cause to be made an inspection of any damages to city motorized equipment to determine if the equipment should be repaired, giving consideration to the estimated useful life of the equipment, historical and projected maintenance and operating costs compared to acquisition of replacement equipment and the estimated value of the equipment upon disposal in a repaired or unrepaired condition. 
(d)  The director may, upon receipt of the report, cause to be made an investigation as to whether operator abuse or negligence is indicated as a cause or contributing factor to the accident or injury. Operator abuse or negligence may consist of but not be limited to willful damage; carelessness; unauthorized use; use in an improper manner; failure to observe rules, signs or instructions; violation of traffic regulations; or other improper operation. 
(e)  If such abuse or negligence is indicated, the director shall make a report and forward a copy of such report to the city attorney, the department head and to the operator. 
(f)  The director shall periodically review the reports of accidents, injuries, abuse or negligence in the operation of motorized equipment to determine: 
(1)  General trends and causes of motorized equipment accidents, injuries, abuse or negligence. 
(2)  Excessive or frequent accidents or injuries due to driver or operator fault or employee abuse or negligence. 
(3)  The cost of damage to city motor equipment due to abuse or negligence. 
(g)  If any employee is found by the chief operating officer or designee through administrative hearing to have been responsible, through negligence or abuse, for any accident or damage, such employee shall be required to reimburse the city for the damages to the city property. An employee may appeal such requirement as provided in the civil service rules and regulations. 
(h)  If any city employee is found responsible for any injury or accident and does not discharge the obligation to the city to the satisfaction of the chief financial officer, the employee shall be immediately dismissed from the employ of the city. 
(i)  If parties not connected with the city are found to be responsible for any injury or accident, the director shall request the city attorney to file suit therefor and shall furnish the city attorney with all facts ascertained by investigation. 
(Code 1977, § 5-5015) 
Sec. 2-1719. - Prohibition against the use of cell phones by city employees while operating a vehicle in the performance of city business; exemptions. 
(a)  Any city employee responsible for operating a city-owned vehicle or privately owned vehicle in the performance of city business shall not use a city issued or private cell phone to talk or text during the operation of said vehicle while conducting city business. 
(b)  City employees required to operate a vehicle in the performance of city business shall provide the cell phone number of any city issued or privately owned cell phone that will be used while conducting city business to the head of the department. 
(c)  Any employee who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be subject to disciplinary action as provided in Chapter 114 of the Code of Ordinances. Further, in the event that any employee is found to be responsible for causing a vehicular accident while using a cell phone or texting in violation of this section, shall be subject to dismissal. 
(d)  This policy shall not apply to sworn members of the Atlanta Police Department, Atlanta Fire and Rescue Department and the Department of Corrections. 
(Ord. No. 2012-39(10-O-2228), § 1, 8-29-12) 
Secs. 2-1720—2-1740. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - RISK MANAGEMENT[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-906 et seq. 
State Law reference— Interlocal risk management agencies, O.C.G.A. § 36-85-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-1741. - Policy. 
It shall be the policy of the city to minimize the financial burden incurred by its citizens and taxpayers as a result of fortuitous or accidental loss to which the city is exposed and to protect the assets, operations and employees of the city to the maximum extent from the adverse consequences of such loss, including such loss as may result from vehicular accidents, physical damage to property, injury in the workplace, fraud, criminal acts or liability to members of the public, which may arise out of the operations of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3041) 
Sec. 2-1742. - Implementation and maintenance of policy. 
The risk management policy shall be implemented and maintained through the application of the risk management process, which includes but is not limited to a systematic and continuous effort to: 
(1)  Identify exposures to fortuitous or accidental loss. 
(2)  Analyze and evaluate those exposures in terms of probable frequency and severity. 
(3)  Measure incurred losses against appropriate loss ratio standards. 
(4)  Develop and implement the most appropriate combination of risk control and risk financing techniques, consistent with the primary objectives and activities of the operating units of the city, thereby reducing and controlling the adverse human and financial consequences of risk. 
(5)  Monitor the effectiveness of the program, adjusting as deemed appropriate and necessary to attain the risk management objectives. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3042) 
Sec. 2-1743. - Responsibility of chief financial officer. 
(a)  The chief financial officer is assigned the overall responsibility for the development, implementation and maintenance of effective and responsible risk management program within the city government. Authority is granted for the utilization of any combination of risk financing and risk control techniques which in the chief financial officer's best judgment will most effectively protect the assets and operations of the city. 
(b)  The chief financial officer shall employ a risk manager for the purpose of carrying out the risk management duties and responsibilities as stated in this section. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3043) 
Sec. 2-1744. - Applicability to all operations of the city. 
Each department head, agency head, bureau director and supervisor is charged with the duty and responsibility to actively support and enforce the risk management policy adopted by the city, and to implement and enforce all risk management directives, standards, reporting requirements and procedures recommended by the risk management executive committee. All employees shall be held responsible for carrying out all risk management procedures, for practicing safe work habits in the performance of duty and for reporting all unsafe conditions, actions or procedures to their supervisors for the purpose of preventing accidental loss to any person or property. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3044) 
Sec. 2-1745. - Risk management identification, measurement and analysis of loss exposures. 
(a)  The risk manager shall develop and maintain procedures for conducting risk management reviews which include but are not limited to regular physical inspections of facilities, investigations and analyses of incurred losses, checklists, personal contact with managers and employees and periodic review of the financial records of the city. 
(b)  The risk manager shall develop and implement procedures for measuring the frequency and severity rate of losses on a citywide and departmental basis and establish mutual goals and timetables to assist the various departments in developing a management plan for achieving and maintaining those acceptable loss levels. 
(c)  A risk management executive committee shall be established and shall review and determine appropriate corrective action based on safety committee reports and recommendations. The risk management executive committee shall have as members persons on the level of department head or bureau director. The risk management executive committee shall be responsible for the review and implementation of specific recommendations that result in a citywide policy or procedure change. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3045(a), (b), (d)) 
Sec. 2-1746. - Claims administration. 
The risk manager is responsible for all workers' compensation claims. All other insured or self-insured claims resulting in loss or damage to city property or loss resulting from fraud or employee dishonesty shall be the responsibility of the risk manager. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3046) 
Sec. 2-1747. - Risk management and claims information system. 
The risk manager shall be responsible for developing and maintaining a comprehensive, computerized risk management and claims information network and information on all accidents which result or may result in financial loss to the city and for communicating the resulting statistical loss data as necessary and desirable for effective risk management. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3047) 
Sec. 2-1748. - Contractual transfer of risk. 
The risk manager shall review and approve insurance provisions and requirements to hold the city harmless in city contracts prior to execution of the contracts, monitor insurance requirements in city contracts and establish and modify procedures to ensure compliance with those requirements. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3048) 
Sec. 2-1749. - Risk management communications. 
(a)  The risk manager shall develop, distribute and maintain a risk management policy and procedures manual. 
(b)  The risk manager shall prepare an annual risk management report to the office of the mayor and city council which summarizes the major activities of the risk management programs, including but not limited to identified loss exposures, actual losses incurred, insurance coverage and cost, loss control procedures implemented or recommended and savings resulting from such procedures. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3049) 
Secs. 2-1750—2-1780. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[27] 

Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
Cross reference— Duty of municipal clerk to keep books and accounts and television tapes of council meetings, § 2-270; charges for copies of documents by clerk, § 2-273; transfer of historical records to Atlanta Historical Society, § 2-274; fees for copy of certain police records, § 98-44; fee for criminal history records, § 98-45. 
State Law reference— Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq.; records management program for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99. 

Sec. 2-1781. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative committee means a committee composed of the mayor or designee, the commissioner, department of enterprise assets management or designee, the municipal clerk or designee, the chief financial officer or designee and the city attorney or designee. 
Department means all departments of government of the city. 
Records means all documents, papers, letters, maps, books (except books in informally organized libraries), microfilm, magnetic tape or other material regardless of physical form or characteristics made or received pursuant to law or ordinance or in performance of functions by any department. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4002; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 10, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 7, 8-29-18 ) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-1782. - Purpose. 
It is declared that the purpose of this article is to prevent the proliferation of records in original form maintained by the city, except to the extent that the records may be necessary. Further, it is the purpose of this article to comply with the Georgia Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq.), enacted by the general assembly in 1972, and as the act may from time to time be amended. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4001) 
Sec. 2-1783. - Records management officer. 
There is designated a records management officer whose duties shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Establishing and maintaining an active and continuing program for the economical and effective management of records, including but not limited to a microfilm and retrieval system; 
(2)  Implementing any rules and regulations issued by the administrative committee; 
(3)  Assisting each department in the implementation of a program for records management; 
(4)  Conducting training in records management to designees of departments; 
(5)  Reporting annually to the state records committee, as is set forth in the Georgia Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq.), the progress and savings from the records management officer's efforts; 
(6)  Recommending the appointment of subordinate records officers to the administrative committee; 
(7)  Preserving records of continuing value; 
(8)  Removing records not in common and current use from high cost office space to the several city facilities and removing other records upon the expiration of their day-to-day utility in the office in accordance with approved disposition standards; and 
(9)  Eliminating systematically all other records in accordance with approved disposition standards. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4003) 
State Law reference— Records management officer, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99(e)(1). 
Sec. 2-1784. - Duties of administrative committee. 
Under this article, the duties of the administrative committee shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Adopt and utilize rules and regulations set forth in the State Records Act as the basis of establishing a records management program; 
(2)  Develop and issue procedures, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the purpose of this article, and, with the guidance of the state records committee and the department of archives and history, establish standards for economical and efficient management relating to the creation, utilization, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposition of records, filing and copying equipment, supplies, microfilming of records and vital records program; 
(3)  Meet from time to time at the call of the commissioner, department of enterprise assets management; 
(4)  Receive communications from department heads concerning any proposed changes in the rules and regulations to be promulgated; 
(5)  Review the activities of the records management officer; and 
(6)  Recommend fees for copying records requested by the public. Such fees may include the following: 
a.  Copies per page or portion thereof. 
b.  Certification. 
c.  Zoning ordinance. 
d.  Zoning maps. 
e.  Housing code. 
f.  Transcripts of tapes or portion of tapes of city council meetings. 
Any fees so collected by the municipal clerk or city departments shall be paid into the general fund through the medium of miscellaneous receipt. Whenever such rates are recommended by the administrative committee, they shall be subject to review and approval by the committee on the executive. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4004; Ord. No. 2007-56(07-O-1899), § 11, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 2018-36(18-O-1479), § 7, 8-29-18 ) 
Cross reference— Boards, councils, commissions and authorities, § 2-1851 et seq. 
Sec. 2-1785. - Duties of department heads. 
Under this article, it shall be the duty of each department head to: 
(1)  Cause to be made and preserved records containing adequate and proper documentation of the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures and essential transactions of the office so designed to furnish the information necessary to protect the legal and financial rights of the city government and of persons directly affected by the office's activities; 
(2)  Cooperate fully with the records management officer in complying with this article and the provisions of the Georgia Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq.); 
(3)  Implement records management procedures and regulations issued by the records management officer, the state records committee and the department of archives and history; 
(4)  Submit to the records management officer, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the administrative committee, a recommended disposition standard for each records series in the department head's custody; and 
(5)  Establish necessary safeguards against removal or loss of records and such further safeguards as may be required by regulation of the administrative committee. Such safeguards shall include notification to all officials and personnel that: 
a.  City records are public property and as such shall constitute a record of public acts; 
b.  Such records shall not be placed in the custody of private or semipublic institutions unless authorized by the city council or turned over to private individuals; and 
c.  No records in the custody of a city officer are to be destroyed or otherwise alienated except in accordance with this article and the Georgia Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq.). 
(Code 1977, § 5-4005) 
Sec. 2-1786. - Municipal clerk designated records certifying officer. 
The municipal clerk is designated as the records certifying officer and is charged with the responsibility of certifying records for use by the public and the courts and shall charge a fee as recommended by the records management administrative committee and approved by the committee on the executive. Any fees so collected shall be paid into the general fund through a miscellaneous receipt. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4006) 
Cross reference— Municipal clerk, § 2-266 et seq. 
Sec. 2-1787. - Furnishing copies of records for additional compensation. 
No officer or employee shall furnish copies of the books of record of the city or any information concerning them to others and receive compensation for such services in addition to the usual salary of such officer or employee, unless the records manager be first notified of the description of work that is to be furnished. Any such compensation is the property of the city. It shall be the duty of the heads of the respective departments to see that this section is enforced. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4007) 
Secs. 2-1788—2-1810. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - SISTER CITIES PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-1811. - Findings and statement of purpose. 
(a)  The people-to-people program was inaugurated by the President of the United States in 1956 to establish greater friendship and understanding between the people of the United States and the peoples of other nations through the medium of direct contact. 
(b)  All succeeding U.S. Presidents have endorsed the program to be conducted for the broad purposes of the exchange of ideas and people between the citizens of the United States and the peoples of other nations. 
(c)  To implement this program, the city and other communities in the United States have been requested by the Town Affiliation Association of the U.S., Inc., to affiliate with cities in other nations of similar characteristics and mutual interest. 
(d)  The city, through its mayor and city council, does recognize and endorse this program. 
(e)  There is an abundance of requests by cities wishing to affiliate with the city as a sister city. 
(f)  The city wishes to maximize the diversity of cultures represented in its sister city relationships as well as to control the number of cities chosen for this program in order to heighten the significance of its purpose. 
(g)  There should exist a logical area of mutual interest and involvement with the prospective city in the areas of culture and business. 
(h)  Strong consideration shall be given to factors which contribute to a good balance between the cities: geographic location, government structure, comparable size, population composition and education. 
(i)  There should be evidence of strong local community support for the prospective sister city relationship in order to ensure a strong financial base and interest in exchanges. 
(Code 1977, § 18-5001) 
Sec. 2-1812. - Selection criteria for sister city relationship. 
(a)  Every city chosen to affiliate with the city as a sister city must be located in a country that has established diplomatic relations with the United States, provided that should such diplomatic relations between the two countries be terminated at any time, the sister city relationship may also be terminated. 
(b)  Preference may be given to a city requesting a sister city relationship with the city where such city has no other sister city in the United States. 
(c)  The city shall establish a sister city relationship with only one city per country. 
(d)  The city shall give preference to those cities that are directly linked by air transportation to the city. 
(e)  The city shall give preference to those cities or nations that maintain a career consulate or trade mission office in the city. 
(f)  The city and the proposed sister city shall be of roughly similar size, either absolutely or in relation to its region. 
(g)  A minimum of one activity per year must be planned. 
(h)  When it is determined by the council that an established sister city relationship is no longer active, the council may terminate the relationship. 
(Code 1977, § 18-5002) 
Sec. 2-1813. - Sister city commission. 
(a)  There is created and established a commission to be known as the sister city commission to consist of one representative from each sister city committee, two members to be appointed by the council president and three members to be appointed by the mayor. All members shall be residents of the city. Appointments made by the mayor and council president shall be confirmed by the council. 
(b)  Each member of the sister city commission shall serve a term of office of three years. 
(c)  The sister city commission shall have the duty to: 
(1)  Adopt bylaws to govern its actions. 
(2)  Set commission goals for each year for the sister city programs and meet regularly to implement these goals. 
(3)  Facilitate exchange programs in cities which have been identified by both corresponding cities as mutually important and desirable. 
(4)  Assist the sister city committees to ensure that their exchange programs are effective, reciprocal and sustained and encourage the sister city to form a corresponding sister city committee. 
(5)  Encourage the participation of a broad cross section of the community in the sister city programs. 
(6)  Raise the necessary funds through grants, donations, in-kind services and membership to implement the identified programs of the commission and the sister city committees. 
(d)  The mayor, upon review of the recommendations made by the commission, shall determine with which cities the city shall establish sister cities relationships and shall forward recommendations relative thereto the city council. 
(e)  A sister city relationship shall be established upon recommendation by the mayor and confirmation by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 18-5003) 
Cross reference— Boards, councils, commissions and authorities, § 2-1851 et seq. 
Sec. 2-1814. - Sister city committees. 
Any sister city committee formed as a result of an established sister city relationship shall submit an annual report to the committee on the executive and then to the city council detailing the accomplishments of the previous year and outlining the work program for the current year. The report shall be submitted to the council no later than the second meeting of the council in the month of February. 
(Code 1977, § 18-5004) 
Secs. 2-1815—2-1850. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - BOARDS, COUNCILS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES[28] 
Footnotes: 
--- (28) --- 
Editor's note— 1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1017), page 4174 (compiled in pt. I, ch. 26 of the Fulton County Code) creates a Fulton County Library System, in which the city participates. The mayor of the City of Atlanta appoints members to the library board of trustees. 
Charter reference— Boards and commissions, § 3-401. 
Cross reference— Board of ethics, § 2-806; first source jobs policy advisory board, § 2-1676 et seq.; records management administration committee, § 2-1784; sister city commission, § 2-1813; license review board, § 30-26; board of astrology examiners, § 30-487; vending review board, § 30-1403; fund appeals review committee, § 42-40; FHA 221 housing technical committee, § 54-26; urban homesteading application review board, § 54-58; fire prevention code board of appeals, § 78-57(b)(104.5); human relations commission, § 94-36 et seq.; parks council, § 110-2; civil service board, § 114-79; water and sewer appeals board, § 154-26; tree conservation commission, § 158-61 et seq. 
Land development code references— Planning committees, § 6-3014; planning advisory board, § 6-4001 et seq.; zoning review board, § 6-4001 et seq.; board of zoning adjustment, § 6-4021 et seq.; urban design commission, § 6-6043; building code advisory board, app. A, § 107; electrical advisory board, app. B, § 1(107); plumbing advisory board, app. C, § 1(107); heating and air conditioning advisory board, app. D, § 1(107), app. F, § 1(107); housing appeals board, app. E, § 15; in rem review board, app. E, § 31. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-1851. - Oath. 
No member of any board, council, commission, authority or similar body established by the council shall assume office until the member shall have executed and filed with the municipal clerk an oath or affirmation in the following form: 
"I swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully and impartially perform the duties imposed upon me by reason of my appointment as an officer or member of (insert here the name of the board, council or commission to which appointed). I have not, in order to influence, my appointment to this position, directly or indirectly, expressly or by implication, promised my vote or support to any person. In all things pertaining to my position, I will be governed by what is my conviction for the public good. I further swear that I will uphold and support the Constitution and laws of the United States, of the State of Georgia and the City of Atlanta. I further swear that I will uphold and support the Ethics Code of the City of Atlanta." 
(Code 1977, § 1-1045; Ord. No. 2002-53, § 1, 6-20-02) 
Charter reference— Oath required, § 3-401(e). 
Sec. 2-1852. - Procedure for the appointment by the full council of individuals or councilmembers to boards, commissions and authorities. 
The following procedure shall be used whenever it becomes necessary for the full council to appoint an individual or a council member to a board, commission or authority; provided however, that by two-thirds vote of the total membership of the council, the council may waive the requirements of this ordinance and consider the appointment at the same meeting at which it is introduced, sounded or announced. Action on the appointment shall only require a simple majority vote. 
(1)  Notice of vacancy. 
(a)  Whenever a position on a board, commission or authority shall be or becomes vacant, notice of such vacancy shall be submitted in writing to the Municipal Clerk from the city board within 30 business days, who shall then notify the Chair of the Committee on Council, with a copy of said notice being submitted to the president of the city council, within 14 business days of receiving the notice of vacancy. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such written notice, the chair of the committee on council shall provide written notice to all council members that nomination of an individual or individuals or when applicable, of a council member or council members shall be submitted to the chair of the committee on council by a specified deadline. 
(c)  In the case of council member appointments, a council member may submit her/his own name or the name of another council member, for appointment to any such vacancy. 
(2)  Procedure for appointments. 
(a)  One vacancy, one nominee. 
(i)  When only one vacancy and only one nominee has been submitted, the chair of the committee on council shall have a resolution prepared naming that individual or council member for appointment to the vacant position. 
(ii)  Said resolution shall be submitted by the chair of the committee on council to the committee of purview. The committee of purview shall introduce, consider, recommend and refer said resolution to the committee on council for its consideration, recommendation and forwarding to the full council for final action. 
(b)  One vacancy, more than one nominee. 
(i)  Should there be only one vacant position and more than one nominee is submitted, the chair of the committee on council shall, prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, distribute biographical information and qualifications of all nominees to all council members for consideration at the next regular meeting of the city council, provided however, if the date of the next regular council meeting is less than five business days from the date of the required deadline, all information shall be provided for consideration at the next following regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. 
(ii)  At the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council after distribution of the biographical information and qualification of said nominees, or at the next following regularly scheduled meeting of the city council should the five-day condition set forth in (b) (i) above be applicable, the municipal clerk or deputy municipal clerk shall issue a paper ballot which contains the names of all nominees for said vacant position, to all council members present at said meeting and who have not been excused. 
(iii)  Councilmembers shall circle the name of the nominee of her/his choice, sign the ballot and return it to the municipal clerk or deputy municipal clerk. Such ballots shall become a part of the official record for said council meeting. 
(iv)  The municipal clerk or deputy municipal clerk shall tally the ballots or cause them to be tallied and announce the results. The nominee receiving the majority of votes shall be recommended for appointment and the chair of the committee on council shall subsequently have a resolution prepared naming that individual or council member for appointment to the vacant position. 
(v)  The chair of the committee on council shall submit said resolution to the committee of purview. The committee of purview shall introduce, consider, recommend and refer said resolution to the committee on council for its consideration, recommendation and forwarding to the full council for final action. 
(c)  More than one vacancy. 
(i)  Should there be more than one vacant position and more than one nominee is submitted, the chair of the committee on council shall, prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, distribute biographical information and qualifications of all nominees to all council members for consideration at the next regular meeting of the city council, provided however, if the date of the next full council meeting is less than five business days from the date of the required deadline, all information shall be provided for consideration at the next following regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. 
(ii)  When more than one vacancy exists, the municipal clerk or deputy municipal clerk shall issue a paper ballot which contains the names of all nominees for said vacant positions to all council members present at said meeting and who have not been excused. 
(iii)  Council members shall circle the names of the nominees of her/his choice; in correlation to the number of vacant positions, sign the ballot and return it to the municipal clerk or deputy municipal clerk. Such ballots shall become a part of the official record for said council meeting. 
(iv)  The municipal clerk or deputy municipal clerk shall tally the ballots or cause them to be tallied and announce the results. The nominees receiving the highest number of votes; in correlation to the number of vacant positions, shall be accordingly recommended for appointment to the available positions. The chair of the committee on council shall subsequently have a resolution prepared naming those individuals or council members for appointment to the vacant positions. 
(v)  The chair of the committee on council shall submit said resolution to the committee of purview. The committee of purview shall introduce, consider, recommend and refer said resolution to the committee on council for its consideration, recommendation and forwarding to the full council for final action. 
(d)  Single nominee failing to receive a majority vote or multiple nominees receiving an equal number of votes. In the event that a single nominee fails to receive a majority vote of the council members present at the meeting of the city council, or there is a tie among two or more nominees who receive the highest identical number of votes, then a second ballot shall be issued. This ballot process shall be continued until such time as one person receives a majority vote or the tie fails to be broken. 
(e)  Tie failing to be broken initially. 
(i)  All subsequent ballots shall be comprised of the two or more nominees who received the highest number of votes. 
(ii)  The balloting process shall continue until only two nominees remain, whereupon a final ballot shall be issued. 
(iii)  After the vote is taken, the procedures set forth in (b) (iv) and (v) above, shall then be followed. 
(f)  Tie remaining unbroken. In the event that the tie still fails to be broken, separate resolutions shall be prepared containing the name of each nominee, which resolutions shall be submitted to the committee of purview for the recommendation of one nominee to said vacant position; with the previously outlined process to be followed accordingly. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1046; Ord. No. 2007-21(06-O-1597), § 1, 3-28-07; Ord. No. 2010-11(10-O-0495), § 1, 3-23-10; Ord. No. 2014-03(14-O-1002), § 1, 2-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-1853. - Councilmembers representing city on regional or state boards or commissions. 
(a)  Any councilmember who is elected by the city council to represent the city on a regional or state board or commission shall convey the position of the city council as a whole in all instances in which that will has been expressed by ordinance or resolution. 
(b)  Minutes of proceedings shall be distributed to members of the council, upon request, by the appointees to regional or state boards or commissions. 
(c)  Each member or the council president representing the Atlanta City Council on a board or commission shall make quarterly reports to the committee on council in cooperation with the chair of the committee on council. These include but are not limited to Invest Atlanta, Atlanta Regional Commission, Atlanta-Fulton Library Board of Trustees, Solid Waste Management Authority, Turner Field Redevelopment Task Force, the city's various pension boards, Piedmont Park Conservancy Board of Directors. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1051; Ord. No. 2014-02(14-O-1001), § 1, 2-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-1854. - Terms of office for appointments to boards and commissions. 
(a)  Unless otherwise indicated in the authorizing legislation of the specific board or commission, all persons appointed to any board, commission, council, authority, or other similar body, pursuant to the authority of Charter Section 3-401, whether such appointments and confirmations occurred before the enactment of this section, shall be limited in consecutive years of service as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Upon reappointment of a person who fulfills the unexpired term of a board or commission member who fails to serve a complete term of office, the time served during the unexpired term shall not be charged against such person when determining the maximum number of terms or maximum years of service such person may serve. 
(c)  The terms of office, as established in the applicable Code section for each board and commission, and the maximum consecutive number of terms shall be as follows: 

 
(d)  No person shall serve on more than three boards, commissions, councils, authorities or other similar bodies at the same time. 
(Code 1977, § 18-6001; Ord. No. 2007-69(07-O-2131), § 1, 11-14-07; Ord. No. 2008-31(08-O-0998), § 1, 5-27-08) 
Sec. 2-1855. - Confirmations by council of department/agency heads and appointments and reappointments to boards, councils, commissions and authorities. 
(a)  When required to confirm department/agency heads, the council shall be governed by the following policy. 
(1)  Nominee communications shall be referred to both the committee of purview and the committee on council. 
a.  Committee of purview. The committee of purview shall be responsible for the performance expectation/evaluation of the nominee. 
b.  Committee on council. The committee on council shall be responsible for all general information on the nominee. This shall include a criminal background, education verification, reference checks, and assurance that the nominee meet minimum code requirements. 
(i)  This policy shall apply to all new appointments and reappointments. 
(ii)  No background checks shall be necessary for reappointments. 
(2)  Before the council confirmation can begin, the following information shall have been received by the administration: 
a.  Updated resume. 
b.  Statements from higher education institutions certifying that the nominee has completed the indicated coursework that is listed on the resume. 
c.  Statement of physical fitness. 
(3)  The president of council, all council members and the municipal clerk shall receive an official appointment letter from the mayor, which shall be accompanied by the documentation noted below: 
a  Documentation to accompany official appointment letter: 
(i)  Copy of the role (job description) posted and used during the selection process; 
(ii)  Written document containing the mission, vision and goals of the department, agency or organization for which the appointee is to be accountable; 
(iii)  Statement of appointee's qualifications (can be incorporated into the official appointment letter); 
(iv)  Resume or vitae of the appointee. 
(4)  The municipal clerk shall read the appointment letter into the record as an official communication at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the council. 
(5)  The communication shall be referred to the committee of purview and the appointee shall appear before said committee at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The research staff shall send a notice to the council president and to all members of council of the date that the appointee is scheduled to appear before the committee of purview. At such committee meeting, the appointee will be formally presented by the administration. Council members will have an opportunity to direct any questions relevant to the appointment to the candidate and/or the administration's representative(s). If requested by the committee of purview, the appointee shall participate in an executive session. An evaluative questionnaire shall be used by council members as an evaluative guideline for each question. The public will have an opportunity to comment regarding the appointee and ask related questions of committee members. 
(6)  At any time after the formal introduction of the appointee and prior to the appointee's appearance before the committee of purview, any council member may provide written questions and/or comments regarding the appointee or the process, to the chair of the committee of purview who shall forward a compilation of the questions and/or comments to the administration at least 24 hours prior to the meeting. 
(7)  The administration shall contact each member of council to schedule an individual meeting with the appointee. If the council member so desires an opportunity for dialogue with the candidate, the scheduled meeting may occur at any time after the official appointment letter and the accompanying documents have been submitted to the city council and prior to the appointee's confirmation by council. 
(8)  The committee of purview shall consider each appointment and shall forward the communication to the committee on council. Members of the committee on council will have an opportunity to direct questions to the candidate and the administration's representative(s). The public will have an opportunity to comment regarding the appointee and ask related questions of committee members. 
(9)  The committee on council shall consider each appointment and may hold the communication in order to complete and/or update information regarding the appointee or may forward the communication to the full council with a favorable, adverse or no recommendation or with a recommendation to file. 
(b)  When required to confirm appointments or reappointments to boards, councils, commissions, and authorities, the council shall be governed by the following policy. 
(1)  The appointing authority shall submit to the municipal clerk an appointment/reappointment letter, the appointee's biographical information or curriculum vitae, and a contact form (provided by the municipal clerk). 
(2)  The municipal clerk shall read the appointment letter into the record as an official communication at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the council. 
(3)  The communication shall be referred to the committee of purview and the committee on council. 
(4)  The research staff shall send a notice to the appointee informing them that they are required to appear before the committee of purview as part of the confirmation process. 
(5)  The appointee shall appear before the committee of purview and the committee shall consider the appointment and provide a recommendation. The communication shall then be referred to the committee on council where the members of the committee on council shall provide a final recommendation to the full council. 
(Ord. No. 1998-66, §§ 1, 2, 9-29-98; Ord. No. 2010-66(10-O-1912), § 1, 11-24-10; Ord. No. 2011-18(11-O-0775), § 1, 5-25-11; Ord. No. 2011-29(11-O-0987), § 1, 7-14-11; Ord. No. 2018-16(18-O-1258), § 1, 5-30-18 ) 
Secs. 2-1856—2-1875. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - KEEP ATLANTA BEAUTIFUL COMMISSION[29] 

Footnotes: 
--- (29) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, approved November 12, 2014 , amended Div. 2, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 2, §§ 2-1876—2-1892, pertained to "Clean City Commission." See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 2-1876. - Established; composition. 
The Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission is established and created pursuant to section 3-401 of the Charter and the commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council to empower communities to safeguard and enhance the city's aesthetic appeal as embodied and reflected in the built and natural environments in an effort to help improve quality of life, and stimulate economic growth and development opportunities within the city. The Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission shall be composed of 18 members representing business and professional groups, trade unions, educational groups, civic clubs, the chamber of commerce, other groups and the general public. The Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission shall operate under the purview of the department of public works. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ; Ord. No. 2016-30(16-O-1441) , § 1, 9-15-16) 
Sec. 2-1877. - Appointment of members. 
The 18 members of the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission shall be appointed as follows and said appointments shall be confirmed by the city council: 
(a)  Ten members shall be appointed by the mayor: Six of which shall be employed or affiliated with corporate entities located within the city of Atlanta and four of which shall be members of the Atlanta community. 
(b)  One member shall be appointed by the president of council; 
(c)  One councilmember shall be appointed by the Atlanta City Council; 
(d)  One member shall be appointed by councilmembers from Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, and Post 1 from the community; 
(e)  One member shall be appointed by councilmembers from Districts 5, 6, 7, 8, and Post 2 from the community; 
(f)  One member shall be appointed by councilmembers from Districts 9, 10, 11, 12, and Post 3 from the community; 
(g)  One member shall be appointed by the Atlanta Public Schools; 
(h)  One member shall be appointed by the Atlanta Planning Advisory Board; 
(i)  One member shall be the commissioner of the department of public works or his designee. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-49(15-O-1437), § 1, 10-14-15 ) 
Sec. 2-1878. - Time limit on appointments 
For all appointments of members to the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission, the appropriate appointing party shall submit, in writing, names of those individuals to be considered for membership to the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission within 60 days prior to the expiration of the term of any member. For any existing vacancies, the appropriate appointing party shall submit, in writing, the names of those individuals to be considered for membership to the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission within 30 days of the effective date of this division. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-1879. - Terms of office. 
Every member of the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission shall serve for a term of two years commencing from the time of the member's initial appointment. If at the expiration of two years a successor is not appointed, the member shall continue as a member of the commission until a successor is appointed and qualifies to serve. An individual may have succession with consecutive terms as a member. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-1880. - Vacancies. 
Any membership vacancies created on the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission by any reason whatsoever shall be filled in accordance with the procedure outlined in section 2-1877. However, the appointing procedure shall be limited to the mayor, the city council president or the appropriate city councilmember so that the representation and membership classification as indicated in section 2-1877 shall be maintained. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-1881. - Organization; rules; consultations. 
The Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission shall hold an organizational meeting in January of each year to elect officers and transact any other authorized business. At such meeting and thereafter from time to time on the call of the chair of the commission, the commission shall adopt and promulgate or amend such bylaws, rules and regulations as are deemed necessary or convenient to the conduct of the affairs of the commission. The commission and its members may consult with city officials, department heads and the advisory board, established pursuant to section 2-1186, in the performance of the business and duties of the commission. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-1882. - Officers. 
(a)  The membership of the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission shall elect eight officers. These officers shall be the following: 
(1)  The chair; 
(2)  The vice-chair; 
(3)  The secretary; and 
(4)  The chairs of the five committees created pursuant to section 2-1884. 
(b)  The chair of the commission shall appoint an assistant secretary, parliamentarian and timekeeper. 
(c)  Elected officers shall serve one-year terms from the time of their election at the annual meeting. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-1883. - Compensation; conflict of interest. 
(a)  Members of the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission shall serve without compensation from the city but shall be eligible for reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(b)  The Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission shall recommend one finalist for the executive director from a pool of qualified applicants for the position, who shall be confirmed by the city council. The finalist shall be referred to both the committee of purview and the committee on council for review and report at the next regular council meeting. Action on the appointment or removal shall only require a simple majority of city council. 
(c)  A member of the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission may contract to provide services to the city in the ordinary course of the business or profession of such member. No member shall participate as a member in the review and recommendations of the commission on any proposed work or work done by any such member or any corporation, partnership or other legal entity in which such member has any financial interest. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ; Ord. No. 2016-30(16-O-1441) , § 2, 9-15-16) 
Sec. 2-1884. - Standing committees. 
(a)  There are created five standing committees of the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission. Each committee is authorized to establish any and all task forces which are necessary to achieve the goals and purposes of the commission. These committees shall include the following: 
(1)  Business and industry committee; 
(2)  Community organizations committee; 
(3)  Municipal operations committee; 
(4)  Education committee; and 
(5)  Communications committee. 
(b)  Each committee shall have the powers given to it under the bylaws adopted by the commission. 
(c)  The members of the commission shall have authority to establish any other committees which in their discretion are necessary for the purposes of the commission. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-1885. - Executive committee. 
There is established an executive committee of the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission. The executive committee shall be comprised of all elected officers and elected committee chairs. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-1886. - Advisory board. 
The members of the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission shall be empowered to select no more than ten persons to constitute an advisory board to the commission. Members of the advisory board shall represent an economic cross section and representation of the community and shall be distinguished residents of the city to whom the members of the commission shall look for suggestions and consultation. An advisory board member shall serve in the discretion of the commission members. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-1887. - Removal of members. 
Any member of the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission who accumulates three successive absences from regularly scheduled meetings of the commission or who fails and refuses to perform the duties of a member of the commission in good standing shall be recommended by a majority vote of the entire commission's membership to be removed. This recommendation shall be forwarded to the council who shall then consider removal of the member from the commission. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-1888. - Voting. 
All members of the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission, except its chair, have one vote equal in weight. The chair shall vote only to break a tie. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-1889. - Meetings. 
Meetings of the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission shall be held once per month on the date and time designated by the commission members. It shall be the responsibility of the chair to ensure that meeting agendas and material shall be received by all commission members at least one week before any regularly scheduled commission meeting. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-1890. - Duties. 
Within the stated purpose of this article, the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission shall perform the following duties: 
(a)  Develop proactive strategies to promote sustainable change with the goal of eliminating littering and improper handling of solid waste materials, and encouraging on-going community improvement efforts in the built and natural environments; 
(b)  Seek to modify public attitudes and behavior toward littering and the proper handling of solid waste and beautification through education and example; 
(c)  Encourage citizens to conserve natural elements, and improve air and water quality of the communities; 
(d)  Serve as an educational resource for community environmental information, activities, and techniques; 
(e)  Other activities consistent with the mission and purpose to serve and educate the community on built and natural environmental matters; 
(f)  Consult with the various city departments to achieve any and all goals established by this article and the commission membership; 
(g)  Seek active community involvement in the control of solid waste and recycling projects and education of the entire community in regard to abating, controlling and reducing solid waste in the city; 
(h)  Work with communities in a continuous effort to attract participation and volunteers and enforce projects to abate, control and reduce solid waste by conducting educational briefings throughout the community; 
(i)  Work with city agencies and departments to review solid waste and sustainability related ordinances and make recommendations to improve laws; and 
(j)  Work with the Atlanta Public School system on awareness about solid waste programs in schools throughout our community. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-1891. - Powers. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission shall be empowered to: 
(1)  Initiate, plan, direct and coordinate the community effort to abate, control and reduce litter; 
(2)  Adopt bylaws to facilitate the attainment of its purposes and functions; 
(3)  Solicit and accept donations and appropriations of money, services, products, property and facilities for expenditure and use by the commission for the accomplishment of its objectives, subject to the limitations of subsection (5) of this section and section 2-1892. 
(4)  Employ and terminate the employment of such staff as may be approved by the council; 
(5)  Procure goods and services necessary for its purposes in accordance with procedures as approved by the city's chief procurement officer; however, such procurement practices shall be subject to any specific requirements as set forth in any contract the commission enters into with the city; 
(6)  Establish and maintain bank accounts separate from the city's accounts for the sole purpose of executing financial transactions pursuant to the attainment of its purposes and functions prescribed by this article; all accounts and financial transactions of the commission shall be subject to an annual audit and examination conducted by the city; and 
(7)  Exercise all other powers expressed in this article or given to the commission by the council. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-1892. - Funding. 
The Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission shall submit budget requests annually in a manner prescribed by the commissioner of the department of public works, as established by ordinance or regulation of the city. The annual budget requests of the Keep Atlanta Beautiful Commission are subject to approval by the commissioner of the department of public works and the city council. The commission may make application for state, federal or private funds and grants and may use any funds so received in the performance of duties and functions prescribed by this article. The commission shall not be authorized to make application for state, federal or private funds and grants over $20,000.00 without prior official approval of the city council for a gift, grant, bequest or devise of real property, money or personal property to be applied, principal or income, for either permanent or temporary use for commission purposes if the acceptance of any such gift, grant, bequest or devise will subject the city to additional expense of any nature or obligation of any kind. The commission may also request assistance, through the commissioner of the department of public works, from other city departments such as the office of resilience, which assistance will be provided subject to funding, availability and feasibility. The commission, on a bi-annual basis, shall report to the city council committee of purview and in writing to the full council, its activities in connection with each project or undertaking. 
( Ord. No. 2014-50(14-O-1025), § 1, 11-12-14 ; Ord. No. 2016-30(16-O-1441) , § 3, 9-15-16; Ord. No. 2017-45(17-O-1424), § 1, 7-26-17 ) 
Secs. 2-1893—2-1925. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMPUTER APPLICATIONS PRIORITY BOARD[30] 

Footnotes: 
--- (30) --- 
Cross reference— Bureau of management information systems director, § 2-423. 

Sec. 2-1926. - Created. 
There is hereby created a computer applications priority board. 
(Code 1977, § 5-7009(a)) 
Sec. 2-1927. - Membership. 
(a)  The computer applications priority board shall consist of the following members: 
(1)  Chief operating officer, who shall serve as chair of the board. 
(2)  Four bureau directors or four department heads from a city department or any combination of bureau directors or department heads, so long as the combinations shall not exceed four in number as designated yearly by the chief operating officer. 
(3)  Chief financial officer. 
(4)  Director, bureau of management information systems, who shall provide staff support and assistance to the board. 
(5)  Municipal clerk. 
(6)  Chair of the committee on the council and one other councilmember to be appointed by the council president. 
(7)  Fire chief and police chief or their designees. 
(Code 1977, § 5-7009(a)) 
Sec. 2-1928. - Functions. 
The computer applications priority board shall continually review the nature and scope of the application of information systems, which includes the use of computer systems, word and document processing, hardware and software systems process automation, stand-alone mini- or micro-computers and related peripheral equipment in the government, and shall make recommendations to the mayor and council, for their consideration, on the most appropriate acquisitions and applications of information systems. It shall be the duty of the board to: 
(1)  Annually prepare, adopt and monitor the development and implementation of a one- and five-year information systems plan; 
(2)  Analyze potential applications of information systems technology and determine relative costs and benefits of alternative information systems; 
(3)  Advise the mayor on the consistency and appropriateness of the budget request relative to the one- and five-year information systems plan; and 
(4)  Approve or disapprove all requests for systems development, data processing consultant services, stand-alone computers or peripherals and other hardware systems requests by any department. 
(Code 1977, § 5-7009(b)) 
Sec. 2-1929. - Consideration of recommendations. 
The mayor and council shall consider the plan and recommendations of the board in developing the priorities applications of computer technology. The plan and priorities for computer technology shall be adopted as part of the comprehensive development plan. 
(Code 1977, § 5-7009(c)) 
Secs. 2-1930—2-1955. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MAYOR'S COMMITTEE ON DRUG CONTROL[31] 

Footnotes: 
--- (31) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 86; law enforcement, ch. 98; social services, ch. 126. 

Sec. 2-1956. - Established. 
There is established a committee to be known as the mayor's committee on drug control. 
(Code 1977, § 2-5001(a)) 
Sec. 2-1957. - Composition, terms, vacancies. 
The mayor's committee on drug control shall consist of three members who shall serve staggered terms for three years. The mayor is authorized to name the members of such committees by appointment from time to time as vacancies may occur. Any member may be eligible to serve for any number of terms. 
(Code 1977, § 2-5001(a)(1)) 
Sec. 2-1958. - Expenditures. 
The mayor's committee on drug control is authorized to make grants, payments and other disposition of available funds, all such expenditures to be within the constraints imposed on funds placed under its control. The committee shall determine the purposes for which any such expenditure shall be made, the conditions on which such funds shall be expended by the recipient, the persons to whom the funds shall be dispersed and shall likewise be authorized to terminate or cancel any such dispersement or any part thereof before fully paid. The committee's decision as to such matters shall be final and shall not be subject to review. 
(Code 1977, § 2-5001(a)(2)) 
Sec. 2-1959. - Meetings, records. 
The mayor's committee on drug control shall meet from time to time as may be necessary, shall record its decisions and shall forward a record of all such decisions to the mayor and to the chief financial officer who is authorized and directed to implement by disbursement and other action all lawful decisions of the committee. 
(Code 1977, § 2-5001(a)(3)) 
Sec. 2-1960. - Gifts, donations and bequests. 
The chief financial officer is authorized to accept all gifts, donations, bequests and devises that may or might, from time to time, be tendered to the city and designated for use by the mayor's committee on drug control. 
(Code 1977, § 2-5001(b)) 
Secs. 2-1961—2-1980. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS[32] 

Footnotes: 
--- (32) --- 
Cross reference— Office of international affairs, § 2-238. 

Sec. 2-1981. - Established, composition. 
(a)  There is established an advisory committee on international relations, which shall consist of: 
(1)  The mayor or designee; 
(2)  One member of the council to be appointed as chair by the president of the council; the president of the council may appoint other council members as non-voting members; and 
(3)  The following organizations: 
a.  Metro Atlanta Chamber of Commerce. 
b.  Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau. 
c.  Georgia Council of International Visitors. 
d.  Consular Corps. of Atlanta. 
e.  Southern Center for International Studies. 
f.  Institute of International Business at Georgia State University. 
g.  Institute of International Affairs and Development, Clark Atlanta University. 
h.  Emory Center for International Studies. 
i.  Atlanta Sister Cities Commission. 
j.  Atlanta Public Schools Student Ambassador Exchange Program. 
k.  National Association of Asian American Professionals. 
l.  International Association of Caribbean Organizations. 
m.  Southern Latino Foundation, Inc. 
n.  African Association of Georgia, Inc. 
o.  The Friendship Force of Greater Atlanta. 
p.  The Atlanta Development Authority 
q.  The City of Atlanta Department of Aviation 
r.  International Association of European Organizations 
s.  CIF AL Atlanta 
(b)  The city may allocate funds in the city's annual budget for the activities and programs of the advisory committee on international relations. 
(Code 1977, § 2-5002; Ord. No. 1998-33, 5-12-98; Ord. No. 1998-78, § 1, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 1998-83, § 1, 11-20-98; Ord. No. 1998-90, § 1, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 2003-94, § 1, 10-14-03; Ord. No. 2005-13, § 1, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2007-64(07-O-2142), §§ 1, 2, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 2009-41(09-O-0370), §§ 1, 2, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 2010-24(10-O-0778), § 1, 5-25-10) 
Sec. 2-1982. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the advisory committee on international relations shall be to establish a more meaningful dialogue between the various international groups and the city's elected officials and to facilitate and coordinate the functions of the organizations serving the international community; to work in concert with the Mayor's Office of Intergovernmental Affairs and International Relations and the Atlanta City Council, government agencies, nonprofit organizations and private industries to generate and promote new international trade and cultural opportunities for private and public businesses, academic institutions and individuals based in the City of Atlanta; to encourage the implementation of economic trade and development initiatives between private and public businesses, academic institutions and individuals based in the City of Atlanta; to work to increase Atlanta's visibility in the international arena; to increase and support international economic development initiatives resulting in new investment, job growth and economic impacts the City of Atlanta. 
(Code 1977, § 2-5002; Ord. No. 2009-41(09-O-0370), § 3, 7-28-09) 
Sec. 2-1983. - Officers, bylaws, reports. 
The advisory committee on international relations shall elect its own officers, establish its own bylaws and provide a written report each year to the mayor and council. 
(Code 1977, § 2-5002; Ord. No. 2009-41(09-O-0370), § 4, 7-28-09) 
Note— Formerly § 2-1984. 
Secs. 2-1984—2-2010. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED[33] 

Footnotes: 
--- (33) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-49(10-O-1421), § 1, adopted August 24, 2010, repealed Div. 6, §§ 2-2011—2-2015, which pertained to the criminal justice coordinating Council. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 2-2011—2-2045. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RESERVED[34] 

Footnotes: 
--- (34) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-75, § 1, approved Oct. 15, 2002, repealed div. 7, §§ 2-2046—2-2059, in their entirety. Formerly, said division pertained to the Community Relations Commission as adopted by the 1977 Code, as amended. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 2-2046—2-2080. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SINKING FUND COMMISSION[35] 

Footnotes: 
--- (35) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-906 et seq. 
State Law reference— Sinking fund commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-38-23. 

Sec. 2-2081. - Created. 
A sinking fund commission for the city is created in conformity to the law of the state. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6001) 
Sec. 2-2082. - Composition. 
The sinking fund commission shall be composed of the mayor and the chair of the committee on finance. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6002) 
Sec. 2-2083. - Terms of office. 
Members of the sinking fund commission shall hold office only during their terms of office as mayor and chair of the committee on finance, respectively. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6002) 
Sec. 2-2084. - Clerk designated, duties. 
The chief financial officer shall be the clerk of the sinking fund commission and shall keep minutes of its proceedings. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6004) 
Sec. 2-2085. - Accounts. 
The chief financial officer shall keep the accounts of the sinking fund commission on official books as ex officio treasurer of the city and shall receive and keep an account of moneys of the city in the sinking fund provided for the redemption of bonds, but shall keep such account separate from accounts of the general funds of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6005) 
Sec. 2-2086. - Order for payment of maturing bonds. 
In ample time before the maturity of any bonds, the payment of which has been provided for by the creation of a sinking fund, the sinking fund commission shall instruct the chief financial officer to transfer a sufficient amount from the sinking fund account to the bond account to pay such maturing bonds. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6006) 
Sec. 2-2087. - Investment of funds. 
It shall be the duty of the clerk of the sinking fund commission to invest any sums in the sinking funds in security instruments as authorized by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6007) 
Sec. 2-2088. - Safekeeping of investments. 
All investments bought by the sinking fund commission shall be held in safekeeping by a designated depository of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6008) 
Sec. 2-2089. - Custody of funds awaiting investments. 
Funds awaiting investment by the sinking fund commission shall be kept in the city treasury or other designated depository of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6009) 
Sec. 2-2090. - Withdrawals for investment purposes. 
No funds shall be drawn on the sinking fund account except at the request of the clerk of the sinking fund commission. Such vouchers shall contain an accurate description by name, number and principal amount and accrued interest of the investment to be purchased for the sinking fund. The vouchers shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the chief financial officer. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6010) 
Sec. 2-2091. - Authority to change investments; receipt, report required. 
Whenever the clerk of the sinking fund commission desires to change any investment, the money obtained by any sale for reinvestment must immediately be deposited in the sinking fund treasury. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6011) 
Sec. 2-2092. - Accretions to sinking fund. 
All accretions to the sinking fund from interest or from premiums on bonds sold shall be added to the sinking fund and invested in interest-bearing securities as provided in this division. Such accretions shall be deposited with the chief financial officer and reported to the sinking fund commission the same day such deposit is made. The report shall be accompanied by the chief financial officer's duplicate receipt. However, all premiums from the sale of bonds of the city and all interest on bonds of the city registered and held by the sinking fund commission in trust for the city may be paid to the sinking fund commission or may be retained by the mayor and council and used in the payment of the current expenses of the city. All accretions other than those obtained from city bonds shall go to the credit of the sinking fund. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6012) 
Sec. 2-2093. - Payment of principal on bonds. 
It shall be the duty of the mayor, the chief financial officer and the committee on finance to pay from the sinking fund the principal of each and every series of bonds of the city issued under authority of the constitution and laws pursuant thereto, as such bonds mature. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6013) 
Sec. 2-2094. - Article as part of contract with bondholders. 
This article shall be held and considered as part of the contract between the city and the acceptors or holders of bonds sold by the sinking fund commission and of bonds sold by the city to which the sinking fund laws are applicable. The city shall not alter this article, except to make provision for such additions to the sinking fund from time to time as may be necessary to fully meet the requirements of laws with respect to outstanding bonds to be sold. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6014) 
Sec. 2-2095. - Duty to require compliance with laws relating to sinking funds. 
It shall be the duty of the sinking fund commission to require the mayor and council at all times to comply with the Charter and related state laws, this Code and other ordinances of the city and the laws of the state relating to sinking funds. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6015) 
Secs. 2-2096—2-2125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - YOUTH COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-2126. - Creation; purpose. 
The youth commission is hereby created for the purpose of acting as a clearinghouse/think tank for ideas and concepts as well as to provide advice, assistance, counsel, coordination, resource development and economic development to the mayor and city council on youth issues, including but not limited to the development and encouragement of youth programs which will foster personal growth and enrichment through leadership, citizenship and scholarship in the city. Because of the significance of family involvement (i.e. parents, grandparents, relatives, church, school, etc.) in building a solid foundation for youth development into adult, it is imperative that family values and morals be a key ingredient in the fiber of this commission's framework. The commission will be charged with the task of developing and implementing a comprehensive plan of action (POA) that will empower the youth with the necessary skills and resources to reach their own level of potential. The commission will interact with all agencies (state, local, churches, schools and private) to determine the course of action that is needed to ensure that the youth are given every opportunity to achieve their goal whatever it may be. This charge/task will be ever changing as is society and it will be the responsibility of this commission and all those involved not lose sight of this very important obligation to our youth. 
(Ord. No. 1995-70, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 2-2127. - Composition. 
The youth commission shall be comprised of four components: The governing board, youth advisory board, the youth action coalition and the youth commission partners. The youth commission shall make an annual report to the mayor and council consistent with respective charges/tasks given to the youth advisory board and the youth action coalition not later than December 31st of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1995-70, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 2-2128. - Governing board—Composition. 
The governing board shall be composed of residents of the City of Atlanta with a total membership not to exceed 15 members to serve two-year terms each. The members shall be selected as follows: 
Six (6) members appointed by the mayor: 
(1)  The chief of police or his/her designee, 
(2)  The commissioner of the department of parks and recreation or his/her designee, 
(3)  Two youth members nominated by the Superintendent of the Atlanta Public Schools, 
(4)  And two laypersons. 
One (1) member appointed by the President of the Atlanta City Council. 
Six (6) members each appointed by members of the Atlanta City Council groups: 
(1)  Council Post 1 At-Large and Districts 1, 2. 
(2)  Council Post 1 At-Large and Districts 3, 4. 
(3)  Council Post 2 At-Large and Districts 5, 6. 
(4)  Council Post 2 At-Large and Districts 7, 8. 
(5)  Council Post 3 At-Large and Districts 9, 10. 
(6)  Council Post 3 At-Large and Districts 11, 12. 
Two (2) members appointed by the Atlanta Board of Education. 
(Ord. No. 1995-70, § 1, 11-14-95; Ord. No. 2014-38(14-O-1379), § 1, 8-27-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-48(14-O-1517), § 1, 11-12-14 ) 
Sec. 2-2129. - Same—Duties. 
The governing board shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Select staff for the commission; 
(2)  Establish policy for the commission to operate under; 
(3)  Conduct annual audits on all programs; 
(4)  Direct research and public policy initiatives and fundraising activities; 
(5)  The board shall make recommendations on the selection of the youth commission partners; 
(6)  Seek to increase the public awareness of the plight of youth in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1995-70, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 2-2130. - Youth advisory board—Duties. 
The youth advisory board shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Explore the ideas and opinions of the public regarding youth; 
(2)  Address issues identified by the youth action coalition; 
(3)  Propose to the mayor and city council plans of action (POA) related to Atlanta's youth. The youth advisory board is encouraged to interface with other city, county and state offices, bureaus and other commissions which may have as part of their own charge dealing with youth-related issues and programs; 
(4)  Review all youth-oriented programs which receive or request city funding and support; 
(5)  Recommend evaluation criteria for city funded youth programs which will assess the accomplishments of their mission and goals. This evaluation will determine the continuation of funding for these programs and activities should they meet or exceed their goals; 
(6)  Provide the mayor and governing body with recommendations which promote the coordination of city programs and services to optimize youth opportunities; 
(7)  Review existing city, county and state services to identify needs of youth that are not being addressed at any level; 
(8)  Seek new sources of revenues through grant proposals (federal, state and local) and private donations (UPS, Coca Cola, Woodruff Foundation, etc.); 
(9)  Seek to implement O.O.P.S., KIDPEACE, Rich's Academy, P.E.C.E., Ujamma Urban Village and A.R.O.P.U.K. type programs in all city schools; 
(10)  Seek to reduce the number of incidents of youth violence in city schools and school-related activities; 
(11)  Get involved with schools and churches to see what their need and concerns are; 
(12)  Convene an annual youth conference at all levels from kindergarten to college; 
(13)  Encourage academic adoption of housing complexes, individual students or school classrooms by private groups or organizations. 
(Ord. No. 1995-70, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 2-2131. - Same—Composition. 
The youth advisory board shall be composed of residents of the city between the ages of 12 and 22, with the total membership not to exceed 30 members. Consideration should be given to class school presidents who have exhibited leadership skills to serve a term of four years. They shall be selected as follows: 
(1)  Six members appointed by the mayor; 
(2)  Nineteen members appointed by the city council, one from each council district, at-large and council president; 
(3)  Five members appointed by the general body of the youth commission. 
These appointments will not require Council confirmation. 
(Ord. No. 1995-70, § 1, 11-14-95; Ord. No. 2017-22(17-O-1175), § 1, 5-1-17 ) 
Sec. 2-2132. - Youth commission partners. 
The youth commission partners shall be composed of youth serving agencies as designated by the governing board to serve a term of four years. 
(Ord. No. 1995-70, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 2-2133. - Appointed ex-officio members of the youth advisory board. 
A representative from the mayor's office and the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and city council respectively to serve as ex-officio members of the youth advisory board, and shall attend all meetings of the youth commission. 
(Ord. No. 1995-70, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 2-2134. - Youth advisory board—Terms; compensation. 
Members appointed to the youth advisory board by the mayor and the city council shall serve for a term of two years. All other appointees will serve a one-year term. Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1995-70, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 2-2135. - Youth action coalition—Duties. 
The youth action coalition shall exist to study, research, monitor and objectively evaluate youth-related issues on behalf of the city. The youth action coalition shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Provide a forum for youth reaction to proposed issues; 
(2)  Develop recommendations for innovative youth initiatives for presentation to the mayor and city council; 
(3)  Aid in permitting the city to benefit from youth-oriented resources to realize full self actualization for all Atlanta youth. 
(4)  Write grant proposals and seek private donations. 
(Ord. No. 1995-70, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 2-2136. - Same—Composition. 
The youth action coalition shall be composed of individuals of any age who have demonstrably committed themselves to the goals of the youth commission, but who do not serve on the youth advisory board. Members may be selected based upon recommendations from the mayor, members of the city council, and NPU chairpersons to ensure representation from every area of the city; however, membership will not be limited to residents of the city. The total membership of the youth action coalition shall not exceed 52 members. They shall be selected as follows: 
(1)  Four members appointed by the mayor; 
(2)  Nineteen members appointed by the city council, one from each council district, at-large and council president; 
(3)  Five members appointed by the general body of the youth commission; 
(4)  Twenty-four members, one appointed by each NPU chairperson. 
(Ord. No. 1995-70, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 2-2137. - Same—Terms; compensation. 
Members of the youth action coalition shall serve for a term of one year. Some of the original members should be appointed for two years so as to maintain some continuity on the commission. Appointees shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1995-70, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 2-2138. - Same—Committee system operation. 
Members of the youth action coalition shall operate on a committee system pursuant to the following divisions: 
(1)  Middle school division will focus on issues related to youth age 14 and under; 
(2)  High school division will focus primarily on issues related to youth above the age of 14 who are enrolled in high school; 
(3)  Collegiate division will focus upon issues related to youth above the age of 17 who are enrolled in college. 
(4)  Nontraditional division will focus primarily on issues related to youth age 14 and above who are outside of the traditional education system; 
(5)  NPU/district division will focus on issues related to specific NPU's or council districts; 
(6)  General division will focus on issues related to youth in general which are not location or age specific. This division will consist of the entire youth action coalition organized into committee or committees to address such issues. 
(Ord. No. 1995-70, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 2-2139. - Youth commission—Election; bylaws; meetings. 
The youth commission, membership shall elect its own officers, establish its own by-laws and shall meet once per month or more frequently if it becomes necessary and prudent. 
(Ord. No. 1995-70, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 2-2140. - Use of private funds. 
In the event that private funds are made available for special projects, surveys, and educational programs, the mayor is authorized, upon recommendation of the youth commission and a resolution passed by the city council, to enter into such contract or contracts with private individuals, associations, or groups desiring to promote the purposes of the commission by furnishing funds for said purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1995-70, § 1, 11-14-95) 
Sec. 2-2141. - Criminal background checks for employees/volunteers in direct contact with children; required. 
All organizations, for profit and non-profit, that apply for and receive funding from the City of Atlanta for activities involving direct contact with children under the age of 16, shall be required to perform criminal background checks on all employees and volunteers involved in such funded activities to assure that those convicted of crimes involving either cruelty to, exploitation of, enticement of, or molestation of children are not participants in such programs. 
For purposes of this ordinance, the term direct contact shall include, but not be limited to: (1) all situations in which an employee or volunteer has supervisory or disciplinary power over a child or children, and (2) all situations in which an employee or volunteer performs their duties and responsibilities in the immediate vicinity of and/or has the opportunity to interact with a child or children while at a site designated to facilitate the organization's funded activities. 
Upon an organization's approval for funding by the City of Atlanta, each organization shall submit to the City of Atlanta a list certifying the names of those employees and volunteers who have successfully undergone a criminal background check and who have been approved by the organization to participate in those activities funded by the City of Atlanta which involve direct contact with children under the age of 16. 
Each organization shall have 30 days from the date it is notified of its approval for city funding to provide all required documentation to the City of Atlanta certifying its fulfillment of the criminal background check requirements. Failure to comply with this requirement shall render such organization ineligible for city funding until the next calendar year. 
Thereafter, each organization shall have a continuing duty to prohibit any employee or volunteer that has not successfully undergone a criminal background check from participating in any activity funded by the City of Atlanta which involves direct contact with children under the age of 16. 
Each organization shall provide an amended list to the City of Atlanta within 30 days of hiring any new employee or volunteer certifying that such individual has undergone a criminal background check and has been approved by the organization to participate in those activities funded by the City of Atlanta which involve direct contact with children under the age of 16. 
Each organization shall maintain such criminal background check records and employee/volunteer activity lists for a minimum of five years after an employee or volunteer's service with such organization terminates, whether voluntarily or involuntarily. Upon request, all such records shall be made available for review by the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2003-74, § 1, 5-15-01) 
Secs. 2-2142—2-2200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - CITIZEN REVIEW BOARD[37] 

Footnotes: 
--- (37) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-05(16-O-1072), § 1, approved March 30, 2016 , repealed the former Div. 11, §§ 2-2201—2-2213, and enacted a new Div. 11 as set out herein. The former Div. 11 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2007-13(07-O-0141), § 1, approved March 13, 2007. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 2-2201. - Establishment of the Atlanta Citizen Review Board. 
(a)  The Atlanta Citizen Review Board (the "board") is established to provide a permanent agency in the City of Atlanta through which: 
(1)  Complaints lodged by members of the public regarding alleged abuse of authority, abusive language, appropriate action required, conduct, discrimination, discriminatory reference, failing to provide identification, false arrest, false imprisonment, harassment, retaliation, use of excessive force, serious bodily injury, death and violation of department standard operating procedures which is alleged to be the result of the actions of a sworn employee of the police department or department of corrections, shall be processed, investigated under section 2-2213 of this chapter, and evaluated; and policies of a law enforcement unit may be reviewed. 
(2)  The board shall have the jurisdiction to investigate and mediate citizen's complaints with regard to the above described matters. 
(3)  Complaints shall be filed in writing and under oath with the board no later than 180 days following the date of the alleged infraction. All complaints filed with the board will be submitted to OPS by the board for their review. There shall be no filing fee and complainants shall be provided any necessary assistance in completing a complaint form. 
(4)  Anonymous sources, professing first-hand knowledge of alleged police misconduct. shall be allowed to file complaints anonymously when the complainant requests anonymity based upon a credible belief that the complainant will face prosecution or harassment. The determination of whether the request for anonymity is based upon a credible belief of prosecution or harassment shall be within the reasonable discretion of the executive director. However, all information provided to the board is subject to the Georgia Open Records Act as codified in O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(b)  Jurisdiction of the board shall extend only to complaints against police and/or corrections officers with respect to abuse of authority, abusive language, appropriate action required, conduct, discrimination, discriminatory reference, failing to provide identification, false arrest, false imprisonment, harassment, retaliation, use of excessive force, serious bodily injury, death and violation of department standard operating procedures which is alleged to be the result of the actions of employee of the police department or department of corrections defined in section 2-2202 of this chapter and by the law enforcement unit's rules and regulations. 
(c)  An explanation of the board's complaint procedures shall be made to all police and corrections officers in a general order to be included in the manual of rules and procedures of a law enforcement unit, and shall be included in the training program for new corrections and police officers. 
(d)  Each member of the board shall receive training on the issues of abuse of authority, abusive language, appropriate action required, conduct, discrimination, discriminatory reference, failing to provide identification, false arrest, false imprisonment, harassment, retaliation, use of excessive force, serious bodily injury, death and violation of department standard operating procedures which is alleged to be the result of the actions of an employee of the police department or corrections. 
(e)  Board shall be composed of 13 members who represent the diversity of this community, and who reside within the City of Atlanta and who shall be appointed as provided in section 2-2203. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05(16-O-1072), § 1, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 2-2202. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have or include the following meanings. 
"Abuse of authority" shall mean using their authority as a police department or department of corrections employee to abuse, harass, oppress, or persecute any person. 
"Appropriate action required" shall mean that employees shall respond in an appropriate manner to all situations by: 
(a)  Being considerate of the rights, feelings, and interests of all persons. 
(b)  Taking action in each situation to provide the necessary and appropriate service and insuring proper notification of the proper superiors or supervisors when indicated by the circumstances. 
(c)  Requesting the assistance of supervisors when the appropriate action required is unclear or not possible given the circumstances, or not within the scope of authority of the employee of whom such action was requested. Conversely, a supervisor will not direct a subordinate employee to undertake an action which is not within the scope of the supervisor's authority. 
(d)  Performing official acts in a lawful, restrained, dignified, impartial, and reasonable manner. 
"Abusive language" shall mean harsh, violent, profane, or derogatory language which would demean the dignity of an individual and which shall include profanity and racial, ethnic, or sexist slurs. 
"Board" shall mean the Atlanta Citizen Review Board as established in section 2-2201 of this chapter. 
"Chief" shall mean the head of the Police Department or Department of Corrections of the City of Atlanta. 
"Civilian employees" shall mean all unsworn members of the police department or department of corrections. 
"Corrections" shall mean the Department of Corrections of Atlanta. 
"Corrections officer" shall mean all Atlanta Department of Corrections officers certified by the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST) Council. 
"Conduct" shall mean that employees shall not act in an official or private capacity in a manner that shall bring discredit upon the police department or department of corrections, or themselves. Employee misconduct is considered but not limited to engaging in offensive, unprofessional, lewd and/or unethical behavior toward the public, inmates/detainees, fellow employees and/or supervisory personnel. 
"Discrimination" shall mean actions or decisions affected by prejudice of gender, race, color, religion, sexual orientation, social class, position or standing in the community, or political belief. 
"Discriminatory references" shall mean reference to any person in a derogatory manner because of their gender, race, color, religion, sexual orientation, social class, position or standing in the community, or political preference. 
"Excessive force" shall mean the use of more force than what is reasonable and necessary to affect an arrest, prevent an escape, necessarily restrict the movement of a prisoner, defend himself or another from physical assault, or to accomplish other lawful objectives. 
"Failure to provide identification" shall mean failure to provide name and badge number upon request while on duty or performing their official duties. Sworn employees at the rank of investigator or above shall provide, upon request, the badge number that was initially assigned to them at the rank of officer. 
"False arrest" shall mean arrest by a police officer of a person without probable cause to believe a crime has been or is about to be committed. 
"False imprisonment" shall mean the unlawful detention of the person of another, for any length of time, whereby such person is deprived of his personal liberty. 
"Harassment" shall mean a course of unwanted, unwelcomed and uninvited behavior which annoys, demeans, threatens, intimidates, alarms, or puts a person in fear of their safety. 
"Hearing" shall mean a preliminary examination of the basic evidence and charges by the "board" of an accused person at which testimony is taken from a witness. 
"Investigation" shall mean the act or process of investigating or the condition of being investigated; also a detailed inquiry or systematic examination. 
"Mediation" shall mean an informal process, voluntarily agreed to by a complainant and the subject officer and conducted with the assistance of a certified, neutral third party, engaged in for the purpose of fully and frankly discussing alleged misconduct and attempting to arrive at a mutually agreeable resolution of a complaint. 
"OPS report" shall mean the official file of an investigation conducted by the Office of Professional Standards (OPS) as the result of a complaint against a police officer. 
"Police officers" shall mean all Atlanta Police Department officers certified by the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST) Council. 
"Retaliation" shall mean the act of interfering, harassing, or intimidating a person who filed a complaint, attempted to file a complaint, expressed a desire to file a complaint, or participated in the investigation of a complaint. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05(16-O-1072), § 1, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 2-2203. - Appointment of members. 
(a)  The 13 members of the board shall be appointed as follows and said appointments shall be confirmed by the city council: 
(1)  One member shall be appointed by the mayor; 
(2)  One member shall be appointed by the city council; 
(3)  One member shall be appointed by the president of council with previous experience as a law enforcement professional; 
(4)  One member shall be appointed by Neighborhood Planning Unit ("NPU") group A—F; 
(5)  One member shall be appointed by NPU group G—L; 
(6)  One member shall be appointed by NPU group M—R; 
(7)  One member shall be appointed by NPU group S—Z; 
(8)  One member shall be appointed from the Gate City Bar Association; 
(9)  One member shall be appointed from the Atlanta Bar Association; 
(10)  One member shall be appointed by the League of Women Voters of Atlanta—Fulton County; 
(11)  One member shall be appointed by the Atlanta Business League; 
(12)  One member shall be appointed by the Georgia Coalition for the People's Agenda; 
(13)  One member shall be appointed by the Urban League of Greater Atlanta; and 
(b)  "NPU groups", for this purpose, are recognized by alphabetically arranged groups of six or seven. The Atlanta Planning and Advisory Board ("APAB") shall be responsible for developing a process and coordinating the appointment of said board members. 
(c)  All appointments shall be confirmed by city council. All confirmed appointees should be inaugurated no more than 30 days after council confirmation. 
(d)  The members of the board may make recommendations to the mayor, president of council, and council members of prospective members to be appointed to the board. 
(e)  Nominees to the board shall be subject to an employment background check as well as a criminal history check. Nominees shall execute all releases necessary for the executive director and the police department to accomplish the same. With regard to all nominees who have any employment history as law enforcement officers, such information shall also include: 
(1)  Relevant data and reports from the Peace Officers Standards and Training Council (POST) for nominees formerly or presently employed in Georgia, and from equivalent state entities or agencies for nominees employed in law enforcement in other states, and 
(2)  All available personnel files and disciplinary records from law enforcement or public safety employers of such nominees whenever they are available. 
(3)  If the nominee is determined to have committed a felony, the nomination will be withdrawn. 
(f)  The executive director shall review all reports described in subsection (e) above that are received, and shall then deliver said reports to the chairperson of the public safety and legal administration committee in a timely manner. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05(16-O-1072), § 1, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 2-2204. - Composition of board. 
(a)  For the purposes of subsection 2-2203(a)(3), experience as a law enforcement professional shall include experience as a police officer, criminal investigator, special agent, or a managerial or supervisory employee who exercised substantial policy discretion on law enforcement matters, in a federal, state, or local law enforcement agency, other than experience as an attorney in a prosecutorial agency. 
(b)  Others selected shall have skills and experience in areas relevant to the work of the board. Areas that should be represented are: civil rights work and litigation; community and business leadership; and relevant academic expertise. 
(c)  No member of the board shall hold any other public office or hold employment with the City of Atlanta. 
(d)  At the February meeting of the board, the chair of the board will be elected by the board from among its members. 
(e)  To enable the board to conduct its work, the board is hereby authorized to hire its own executive director and appropriate investigative and clerical staff. Additional staff support to the board shall be provided by the office of the mayor, the city attorney, the police department and department of corrections upon the request of the board. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05(16-O-1072), § 1, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 2-2205. - Time limit on appointments. 
(a)  For all appointments of members to the board, the appropriate appointing party shall submit, in writing, names of those individuals to be considered for membership to the Atlanta City Council within 60 days prior to the expiration of the term of any member. 
(b)  Board members may serve a maximum of two consecutive terms. After which, the member shall not be reappointed for at least one year. A partial term of 18 months or more counts as a full term. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05(16-O-1072), § 1, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 2-2206. - Terms of office. 
All board member terms will be three years. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05(16-O-1072), § 1, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 2-2207. - Training of board members. 
(a)  All board members shall participate in annual training sessions as arranged by the executive director. 
(b)  All new board members shall complete training in the following subject areas as arranged by the executive director: board orientation, use of force, criminal procedure, Open Meetings Law, Ethics, Conflicts of Interest, the Fourth Amendment, and Police Department and Department of Corrections Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) as identified by the executive director and approved by the board. 
(c)  All board members shall participate in an Atlanta Police Department ride-a-long within one year of their appointments to the board. 
(d)  Within one year of their appointment to the board, all new board members shall complete the portions of the Atlanta Police Department Citizen's Academy that are determined by the executive director and approved by the board to be relevant to the members' board duties and responsibilities. Members shall be paid $50.00 for each Citizen's Academy session attended. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05(16-O-1072), § 1, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 2-2208. - Vacancies. 
(a)  Any membership vacancies created on the board by any reason whatsoever shall be filled in accordance with the procedure outlined in section 2-2203. 
(b)  Should an appointing entity fail to nominate a prospective member of the board as outlined in section 2-2203, and a vacancy exists for more than 90 days from the date of the notice of vacancy provided to the appointing entity by the executive director, then the city council may make an appointment to the board for the remainder of the vacant term. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05(16-O-1072), § 1, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 2-2209. - Organization; rules; consultations. 
The board shall hold an organizational meeting in February of each year to elect officers and transact any other authorized business. At such meeting and thereafter from time to time on the call of the chair of the board, the board shall adopt and promulgate or amend such bylaws, rules and regulations as are deemed necessary or convenient to conduct the affairs of the board. The board and its members may consult with city officials, department heads in the performance of the business and duties of the board. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05(16-O-1072), § 1, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 2-2210. - Officers. 
(a)  The membership of the board shall elect the following officers: 
(1)  The chair; 
(2)  The vice-chair; and 
(3)  The secretary. 
(b)  Elected officers shall serve one year terms from the time of their election at the organizational meeting. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05(16-O-1072), § 1, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 2-2211. - Compensation; conflict of interest; removal. 
(a)  Members of the board shall be paid $50.00 for all monthly board meetings and training sessions attended. Further, board members shall be eligible for reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. Compensation shall not exceed the budgeted amount for the fiscal year. 
(b)  A member of the board may not contract to provide goods and services to the city in the ordinary course of the business or profession of such member. No member shall participate as a member in the review and recommendations of the board on any proposed work or work done by any such member or any corporation, partnership or other legal entity in which such member has any financial interest. 
(c)  A member of the board may be recommended for removal for good cause. Good cause may be found for the following: 
• incompetence. 
• neglect of duty, 
• misconduct, 
• malfeasance, or 
• failure to participate in training requirements. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05(16-O-1072), § 1, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 2-2212. - Quorum; voting. 
(a)  Five members of the board shall constitute a quorum for each board meeting. 
(b)  Decisions of the board shall be made by vote of a majority of the members present at the meeting. 
(c)  The board shall use "the preponderance of the evidence" as the standard of proof for all decisions. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05(16-O-1072), § 1, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 2-2213. - Powers and duties of the board. 
(a)  The board shall advise the mayor, the president of city council, city council members and the chief of police and the chief of corrections on policies and actions of the police and corrections department with the purpose of improving the ability of police personnel to carry out their duties, and to improve the relationship between the police department, department of corrections and the community. 
(b)  The board shall have the responsibility of informing the public about the board and its duties, and shall develop and administer an ongoing program for the education of the public regarding the provisions of this Code section. In addition, the chiefs of police and corrections or a designee shall meet with the, board periodically to aid in its fact-gathering function and pursuant to the provisions of the Atlanta Code of Ordinances. 
(1)  Board members shall participate in a minimum of three community outreach activities each calendar year. 
(2)  Any board member failing to meet three community outreach activities during any calendar year may be recommended for removal from the board for neglect of duty. The executive director shall maintain a record of board member community outreach activities. 
(3)  Each board member shall file a quarterly written report with the board member's appointing entity. The executive director shall maintain a record of all board member written reports to appointing entities. 
(c)  The board shall have the power to conduct investigations and hold public hearings. 
(d)  The board shall have full discretion to select appropriate individual incidents to review from any person with personal knowledge of alleged misconduct committed by either the Atlanta Police Department or Department of Corrections. Additionally, the board shall have the discretion to review broader issues to study which may be of concern to the community, the police department and department of corrections, or the chiefs of police and corrections; provided, however, that the board shall, to the best extent possible, minimize duplication of effort between the board and any other existing agencies which have jurisdiction over the same matter. The mayor, the president of city council, city council members and the chiefs of police and corrections, and other responsible officials shall ensure that all such agencies cooperate to the greatest extent possible in the performance of their respective activities, studies, and operations. 
(e)  The board may initiate studies upon request to the board by any member of the public or the police department and the department of corrections, or at the board's own discretion. The board may review specific complaints or incidents of misconduct against individual police officers; including those involving language related to race, ethnicity, religion, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability. 
(f)  In order to accomplish its goals as set forth above, the board shall have full access in order to interview relevant police department and department of corrections personnel and to obtain copies of and to review and examine relevant documents, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  OPS files, citizen complaints, and determinations made pursuant thereto; department and corrections review files; ethics and accountability files, and the files of any other internal investigative agency charged with investigating police misconduct incidents; 
(2)  Police paperwork (e.g., police documents and other paperwork produced by the police department and department of corrections for the purpose of investigating suspects or to aid in their prosecution); 
(3)  Information related to past assignments and disciplinary action; 
(4)  Police department and department of corrections directives and other documents that the board deems relevant to the issue under review; 
(5)  All general summaries, statistical compilations, and other internal reports on shootings, injuries, and complaints of abuse, training, and any other issues related to the work of the board. 
(6)  The board, at its discretion, may make specific recommendations at any time, and shall issue a public report summarizing its activities and recommendations not less than once a year to the mayor, the president of city council, city council members, the chiefs of police and corrections, and the city ethics officer, and shall make copies of the report available to the public in the office of the Municipal Clerk of the City of Atlanta. 
(7)  No board finding or recommendation shall be based solely upon an unsworn complaint or statement, nor shall prior unsubstantiated, unfounded, or withdrawn complaints be the sole basis for any such finding or recommendation. 
(g)  The board shall acknowledge receipt of complaints filed by individuals alleging police or corrections officer misconduct within ten business days of receiving any such complaint. Such response shall indicate whether, in the exercise of its discretion, the board shall study the allegations made, not study them, or request additional information to enable the board to make a decision on its options. 
(h)  All employees of Atlanta City Government are hereby directed to fully cooperate with the board by promptly producing documents, records, files, and any other information that the board may request. In addition, employees, on request of the board, shall be available to meet with and be interviewed by, the board or its representatives, and/or to testify before the board. Upon notification by the executive director of the board that an employee has not cooperated as requested, the police chief or corrections chief shall cause appropriate disciplinary action to be instituted against the employee, and shall notify the board of the outcome of such action. 
(i)  The board may exercise subpoena power by majority vote, and compel access to or production of such materials or the appearance of such person as may be relevant to investigate or study or review matters within the board's authority and discretion. The board shall pay a $25.00 witness fee to Atlanta Police Department and Department of Corrections employees subpoenaed by the board to appear during any hours except the regular duty hours to which the employee is assigned. 
(j)  Failure to comply with a subpoena pursuant to this section shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-8 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances. 
(k)  Corrections or police personnel who are designated as the subject of a related criminal investigation by a local law enforcement agency may elect not to appear until the conclusion of that investigation. Hearings shall be informal and strict rules of evidence shall not be applied. Testimony under oath shall be received from all persons who appear and purport to have information which is material to the complaint. A record shall be kept and shall be made available, upon payment of costs, to any person requesting same. 
(l)  All hearings shall be open to the public, except when, in the opinion of the board, and in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, executive sessions are required. 
(m)  The board shall have the power to recommend that the chief of police and the chief of corrections take certain actions. 
(1)  The board may recommend general reforms (such as changes in training, changes in the preservation of records, changes in counseling available to officers) or specific actions directed at individual officers (including, but not limited to, hiring, firing, promotion, demotion, punishment, or commendation); 
(2)  Provided, however, that the chiefs of police and corrections shall retain full and ultimate authority, power, discretion, management prerogatives, and responsibility to set disciplinary policies or take other lawful actions they deem appropriate relative to the police department and department of corrections under the provisions of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances; 
(3)  Provided, further, that nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the rights of members of the police department and department of corrections with respect to disciplinary action, including but not limited to the right to notice and a hearing, which may be established by any provision of law or otherwise. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prevent or hinder the investigation or prosecution of members of the police department or department of corrections for violations of law by any court of competent jurisdiction, a Federal or State Grand Jury, the United States Attorney for the State of Georgia, the Fulton County District Attorney, or other authorized officer, agency, or body. 
(4)  The chief shall not accept a recommendation from the board that shall punish the same officer more than once for the same act or omission that constitutes misconduct for which the officer has already been punished by the city. 
(n)  The board shall report a summary of findings semi-annually to the public safety committee. 
(o)  Within 30 days of the submission of a recommendation for action by the board to the chief of police or corrections, the chief of police or the chief of corrections shall respond in writing regarding which recommendations are accepted, rejected, held due to a pending OPS investigation or will be implemented with modifications. The responses from the chief of police and chief of corrections shall provide a legal or factual justification, or indicate a managerial prerogative that clearly states the reason for the acceptance, rejection, or implementation with modifications of the board's recommendations. For those recommendations held by the chief of police or chief of corrections because the investigation has not been completed, the police department and department of corrections shall provide a status update in writing every 45 days from the date of the initial notification letter. Once a final decision is reached, the chief of police or chief of corrections shall respond to the board no later than 90 days with a final decision and action on the recommendation. 
(p)  The board may operate a mediation program to handle certain complaints against police and corrections officers that will allow for greater understanding of incidents between citizens and officers. 
(1)  Complaints involving, but not limited to courtesy, language (excluding race, gender, and sexual orientation), abuse of authority, appropriate action (minor detainments without legal authority), and harassment, shall be eligible for mediation. 
(2)  The executive director may refer appropriate complaints to mediation as an option to resolution of the citizen complaint, subject to agreement being obtained from the complainant and officer(s) as well as no litigation pending regarding the incident to be mediated. 
(3)  The board shall be permitted to contract for mediation services. 
(4)  Once referred to mediation, the complainant and the subject officer(s) shall be required to participate in good faith in the mediation process. The mediation process shall continue for as long as the mediator believes it may result in the resolution of the complaint, except that it shall not extend beyond 30 days from the date of the initial mediation session, without approval of the executive director. 
(5)  The complainant and the subject officer(s) shall attend the mediation session and sign the Atlanta Citizen Officer Mediation Program's Memorandum of Agreement. If mediation is successful, the mediator and the parties shall sign a mediation agreement and the complaint will be closed as mediated. A letter indicating the successful resolution of the complaint will be forwarded to the chief of police or chief of corrections. 
(6)  If mediation is unsuccessful, the complaint shall be referred back to the executive director for further investigation if the complainant chooses to move forward under the normal investigative authority procedures. 
(7)  If, after agreeing to participate in mediation, the complainant fails or refuses to participate in mediation in good faith and/or fails to attend the mediation session at the appointed date and time without a valid excuse, the executive director shall dismiss the complaint. 
(8)  If, after agreeing to participate in mediation, a subject officer fails or refuses to participate in mediation in good faith, such failure or refusal shall constitute misconduct and grounds for disciplinary action. If warranted by the evidence, the chief of police or corrections shall cause appropriate disciplinary action to be initiated against the officer and shall notify the board of the outcome of such action. If a police officer fails or refuses to participate in mediation in good faith, the executive director shall refer the complaint for further investigation under the investigative authority procedures. 
(9)  Mediation tolls the timelines established for the investigation and subsequent process. 
(10)  No record will be made of the mediation proceedings. No information discussed will be used in any subsequent investigation or proceedings. 
(11)  The mediators shall be neutral trained mediators unaffiliated with the board or any other department of the City of Atlanta. The mediators shall be certified through the State of Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05(16-O-1072), § 1, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 2-2214. - Finding of necessity. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police department and department of corrections to provide such assistance as the board may reasonably request, to cooperate fully with studies by the board, and to provide to the board upon request records, personnel, and other materials which are necessary for the work of the board. It shall be unlawful for any document or information obtained through this process, or created by the board or any member of its staff, to be released to the public unless such document is a public record under the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(b)  The board and its members shall not make public any confidential police or corrections document, or information derived from any such confidential police or corrections document. The findings of the board as they may relate to conclusions drawn from interviews, study, and review of documents, shall remain confidential until the board officially releases such findings. Any findings and conclusions of the board will be by majority vote by the board members, and voting by board members will be conducted in public. Said findings will be provided to the mayor, the president of city council, city council members and the chief of police or corrections, within a period of three business days from the date of the vote. 
( Ord. No. 2016-05(16-O-1072), § 1, 3-30-16 ) 
Chapter 3 - TRANSPARENCY 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter is enacted to ensure compliance with the requirements of the Georgia Open Records Act and also compliance with the spirit and intent of that Act to provide access to public records to "foster confidence in government and so that the public can evaluate the expenditure of public funds and the efficient and proper functioning of its institutions" as described in O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70(a). 
( Ord. No. 2018-41(18-O-1266), § 1, 9-25-18 ) 
Sec. 3-2. - Compliance with chapter required. 
All employees shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal, or termination of a contract, in conformance with the provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Atlanta, Georgia for failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter. In addition, if applicable, violations of the requirements of this chapter by employees, vendors, or contractors may be referred to the appropriate authorities for criminal prosecution or civil enforcement. Any employee or official who properly reports that she or he has been directed to disregard the requirements of this chapter in violation of the Georgia Open Records Act shall be protected by the Georgia Whistleblower Act (O.C.G.A. § 45-1-4). 
( Ord. No. 2018-41(18-O-1266), § 1, 9-25-18 ) 
Sec. 3-3. - Designation of official records custodians; open records coordinators. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority provided by O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(b)(1)(B)(2), the head of each city department, office, bureau or similar entity is hereby designated as the official custodian of that entity's records for the purposes of compliance with the requirements of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(b)  Each official records custodian shall have the authority to designate a person or persons within their respective department, office, bureau or similar area of purview, as an open records coordinator whose responsibility it shall be to receive and respond to requests for public records with the assistance and oversight of the transparency officer. 
(c)  The mayor shall have the authority to designate a person or persons as an open records coordinator whose responsibility it shall be to receive and respond to requests for public records within the custody of the Office of the Mayor with the assistance and oversight of the transparency officer. 
(d)  The city council shall have the authority to designate a person or persons as an open records coordinator whose responsibility it shall be to receive and respond to requests for public records within the custody of the Atlanta City Council with the assistance and oversight of the transparency officer. 
( Ord. No. 2018-41(18-O-1266), § 1, 9-25-18 ) 
Sec. 3-4. - Receipt of record requests by the city. 
(a)  Electronic requests for records should be submitted through the portal on the city open records website or via email to the appropriate city open records coordinator. 
(b)  Written requests for records should be sent or delivered to the appropriate city open records coordinator. 
(c)  It is strongly encouraged that verbal requests for records be made to the appropriate city open records coordinator. 
( Ord. No. 2018-41(18-O-1266), § 1, 9-25-18 ) 
Secs. 3-5—3-15. - Reserved 
ARTICLE II. - TRANSPARENCY OFFICER 

Sec. 3-16. - Authority of the transparency officer. 
There shall be created a transparency officer who shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Oversee and assist in enforcement of citywide compliance with the requirements of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(2)  Hire assistant transparency officers as needed to fulfill the duties and responsibilities authorized in this Chapter. 
(3)  Promulgate policies and procedures for compliance with the Georgia Open Records Act. 
a.  Such policies and procedures shall be reviewed and updated as needed to ensure compliance with state law, or at minimum on an annual basis. 
b.  All updates or modifications to the policies and procedures shall be communicated to the mayor and the Atlanta City Council within 30 days after implementation. 
(4)  Promulgate policies and procedures regarding the use of private email accounts, private cellular devices, and private messaging applications by city employees and officials to conduct official business, including policies and procedures governing the retrieval and retention of such public records. 
(5)  Investigate allegations of non-compliance with the Georgia Open Records Act in consultation with the city attorney when necessary in accordance with section 2-398 of the Atlanta Code of Ordinances. 
(6)  Alert the appropriate appointing authority, department head, or other similar individual to any potential failure to comply with the policies and procedures established pursuant to this chapter or any violation of the Georgia Open Records Act, including any interference with the response to any records request. 
(7)  Evaluate the city's compliance with the Georgia Open Records Act and report the results of such evaluation to the mayor and council on a quarterly basis. 
(8)  Establish and implement a mandatory training program regarding Georgia Open Records Act compliance for all employees, elected officials, and council staff. 
a.  Mandatory training for current employees, elected officials, and council staff shall occur annually. 
b.  Mandatory training for new employees and council staff shall occur within the first 30 days of employment. 
c.  A record shall be kept of the name of each individual attending training and the date on which the training occurred. 
(9)  Establish and implement a mandatory training program regarding the Georgia Ethics in Government Act for all elected city officials and employees currently required to file disclosures of income and financial interests in accordance with section 2-814 of the Atlanta City Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2018-41(18-O-1266), § 1, 9-25-18 ) 
Sec. 3-17. - Transparency officer's power of appointment and removal of personnel; accountability; term; removal. 
(a)  The transparency officer shall have the power of appointing and removing all or any of the assistant transparency officers. 
(b)  The transparency officer shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by council. It is the expectation that the transparency officer shall serve for period of at least three years. 
(c)  Removal of the transparency officer shall only be for cause by either (i) written recommendation of the mayor and a majority vote of the members of the city council or (ii) a vote of two-thirds of the members of city council. The reasons for a "for cause" removal shall be provided in writing to the transparency officer upon termination. 
( Ord. No. 2018-41(18-O-1266), § 1, 9-25-18 ) 
Sec. 3-18. - Qualifications. 
An individual under consideration for the position of transparency officer must meet at least one of the following criteria: 
(1)  A Juris Doctor degree, at least three years of legal experience, and demonstrated knowledge of the Georgia Open Records Act; or 
(2)  At least five years of experience managing public records law compliance for a government agency. 
( Ord. No. 2018-41(18-O-1266), § 1, 9-25-18 ) 
Secs. 3-19—3-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRANSPARENCY WEBSITE 

Sec. 3-31. - City of Atlanta open records website. 
The city shall create and maintain a website dedicated to open records compliance, which shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name and contact information for the transparency officer and any assistant transparency officers; 
(2)  A list of all designated city records custodians and city records coordinators; 
(3)  Contact information, both telephone number and email, for all designated city records custodians and city records coordinators; 
(4)  An online form or portal for submitting a request for open records; 
(5)  A link to the most current open records policies and procedures as promulgated by the transparency officer; 
(6)  A copy of the city's internal Georgia Open Records Act compliance training materials; 
(7)  A link to the city hotline email and telephone number for reporting alleged violations of the Georgia Open Records Act; 
(8)  A link to the city's records retention schedule; 
(9)  A link to the website of the Georgia Attorney General's Office. 
(10)  Frequently asked questions related to requesting and receiving open records; and 
(11)  Copies of any reports, assessments, or evaluations generated by the transparency officer. 
( Ord. No. 2018-41(18-O-1266), § 1, 9-25-18 ) 
Sec. 3-32. - Posting of responsive records on the City of Atlanta open records website. 
(a)  A description of all requests for records received by the City of Atlanta, the date that each request was received, a link to the city's response to each requester, a description of any charges assessed for the fulfillment of each request, and all responsive records provided in response to each request shall be available on the City of Atlanta open records website. 
(b)  The items described in paragraph (a) above shall be available on the City of Atlanta open records website within 30 days of the fulfillment of each request. The uploading of information to the City of Atlanta open records website shall not interfere with the timely fulfillment of a Georgia Open Records Act request. 
(c)  The information described in paragraph (a) above related to all requests received in any manner other than electronically, included but not limited to, verbally, via hand delivery, via facsimile, or via US Mail, shall be added to the City of Atlanta open records website by the city open records coordinator who received the request. 
( Ord. No. 2018-41(18-O-1266), § 1, 9-25-18 ) 
Secs. 3-33—3-50. - Reserved. 
Chapter 6 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30; consumer protection, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; outdoor advertising, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Use of interior of city hall in advertising. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use the interior of city hall, its rooms or offices in any type of advertisement of commercial products and political campaigns without first obtaining express permission from the city council. This prohibition shall apply to the filming or photographing of the interior of city hall for use in such advertisements; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the filming or photographing of the interior of city hall for news coverage purposes by newspapers, magazines and television. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1007) 
Sec. 6-2. - Placing advertising matter in or upon motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a motor vehicle which is parked on a public street, to place on or inside that parked motor vehicle any placard, handbill, card or advertising matter. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1003) 
Secs. 6-3—6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate signs, § 1-102(c)(20). 
Cross reference— Flags, banners, signs and displays across streets, § 138-8; fixing signs within right-of-way, § 138-9. 
Land development code references— Planning, § 6-3001 et seq.; building regulations, § 8-2001 et seq.; zoning generally, § 16-01.001 et seq.; supplemental zoning sign regulations, § 16-28A.001 et seq. 

Sec. 6-26. - Advertising of drug-related objects on billboards. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "drug-related object" means any machine, instrument, tool, equipment, contrivance or service which an average person would reasonably conclude is intended to be used for one or more of the following purposes, which shall be to: 
(1)  Introduce into the human body any dangerous drug or controlled substance under circumstances in violation of the laws of this state; 
(2)  Enhance the effect on the human body of any dangerous drug or controlled substance under circumstances in violation of the laws of this state; 
(3)  Conceal any quantity of any dangerous drug or controlled substance under circumstances in violation of the laws of this state; or 
(4)  Test the strength, effectiveness or purity of any dangerous drug or controlled substance under circumstances in violation of the laws of this state. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, display or exhibit upon any billboard any drug-related object. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1008) 
Sec. 6-27. - Location of advertising structures near freeway or expressway system. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, the term "lot" means any parcel or tract into which land adjoining the expressway has been or may be subdivided by the owner, but which shall not consist of less than 25 feet of frontage on the expressway. 
(b)  Restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person to build, use or maintain, within a distance of 660 feet from any portion of the limited access freeway or expressway system within the city, any animated sign, any flashing sign, any changing sign or any rotating sign as defined in part 16 of this Code. Any sign which involves direct or indirect illumination shall have the approval of the director, bureau of traffic and transportation prior to the issuance of a building permit or the erection of the sign. 
(c)  Exception. However, after actual development of property within 300 feet of a limited access highway has commenced on the premises and during the period of construction thereon, one sign not to exceed 40 square feet may be placed thereon for a period not to exceed one year from the erection of the sign. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1002) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 138. 
State Law reference— Location restrictions for certain signs, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 
Sec. 6-28. - Hearing objections to billboard erection, revoking permit. 
The director, bureau of buildings, may hear and decide upon any and all objections which may be made to the erection of any billboard or like structure and may revoke any permit given by the director if, in the director's judgment, the objections are valid and should be sustained, subject to revision and final action of the council. 
(Code 1977, § 14-1006) 
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; general powers of municipalities relative to alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-2, 3-3-7, 3-4-49, 3-4-50, 3-4-80 et seq., 3-5-40 et seq., 3-5-80 et seq., 3-6-40, 3-6-60, 3-7-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adequate parking means parking that meets the requirements of the Code. 
Adequate parking for a nightclub means one lawful parking space for each 75 square feet of floor area within the licensed premises. Such parking space shall be exclusively available to the nightclub's patrons between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 2:30 a.m. the following day on days on which alcoholic beverages may be lawfully sold for on premises consumption at a nightclub. Parking spaces on a street or within any part of the right-of-way shall not be included within this definition of adequate parking for a nightclub. The term "floor area" as used in this definition means, in addition to those areas defined in section 16-29.001(13)(b) of the Code, areas within the existing building footprint where the walls have been removed and a permanent roof remains. 
Alcoholic beverages means and includes but is not limited to malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits. 
Applicant means the person who files an application to obtain a license to sell alcoholic beverages and: 
(1)  If a corporation, the chief executive officer, or some other person with written authority from the corporation to bind the corporation as to its business operations within the city; 
(2)  If a partnership, the partner with the greatest proprietary interest; 
(3)  If an individual, that individual; 
(4)  If a firm or association, the person with the greatest proprietary interest. 
Auditorium means a permanent building or hall used for concerts, speakers, plays and similar activities and that has a seating capacity in excess of 3,500. 
Bar means an establishment having a minimum capacity of 25 persons and a maximum capacity of 100 persons per the City of Atlanta Fire Code that does not meet the definition of a restaurant, nightclub, lounge, farm, winery, convention center, hotel, brewpub, open air café or sidewalk café, that is primarily devoted to selling and dispensing alcoholic beverages by the drink for on-premises consumption. The bar must make food available to its patrons. 
Brewpub means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises. As used herein, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. Neither barrels of beer sold to licensed wholesale dealers for distribution to retailers and retail consumption dealers, as authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36(2)(D),or retail sales by the package or growler, shall be used when determining the total annual gross food and beverage sales. A Brewpublicensed as a brewer or manufacturer of beer in accordance with section 10-60(a)(2)(a) may secure an additional and separate license for the retail sale of beer for off premises consumption, so long as the malt beverages that are sold by the package by a brewpub must be manufactured onsite. 
Broker means any person who purchases or obtains an alcoholic beverage from an importer, distillery, brewery, or winery and sells the alcoholic beverage to another broker, importer, or wholesaler without having custody of the alcoholic beverage or maintaining a stock of the alcoholic beverage. 
Business area means any street length between intersections where 50 percent or more is in use for business purposes. 
Church means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
City food market means a retail grocery supermarket which (a) does not sell or offer for sale any of the following: gasoline, diesel fuel or tire, distilled spirits, tobacco products, lottery tickets or related games of chance or malt beverages by the keg; (b) does not provide for the on premises use of coin operated amusements; (c) maintains at all times that it is open to the public, an inventory of saleable food products, including meat, dairy, vegetable, fruit, dry goods and beverages, with a minimum, cumulative cost of goods sold of such food. products of at least $225,000.00; (d) has an interior floor area of at least 10,000 square feet and not more than 30,000 square feet, of which more than 50 percent of such interior floor area is devoted to the display for sale of food products; (e) employs not less than 50 employees who work at least 35 hours per week on the premises, and (f) derives less than 20 percent of its gross receipts from the sale of malt beverages and wine. 
City park organization means a nonprofit entity which is organized for the purposes of preserving, restoring, developing, rehabilitating, enhancing, improving, and/or maintaining a park owned by the City of Atlanta; and which assumes complete or partial responsibility for improving and/or maintaining said park, and the majority of the organization's park services are provided without cost to the city, pursuant to a current memorandum of understanding or other agreement with the City of Atlanta. 
College means only state, county, city, church or other colleges that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state and does not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business. music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Continuing education center means any facility offering adult education which is operated by a unit of the University System of Georgia and which has housing facilities capable of accommodating 200 people and banquet facilities capable of serving 400 people. The sale of alcoholic beverages shall only be incidental to the principal business of a continuing education center licensed under this chapter. 
Convention center means premises that are operated exclusively for the purpose of providing accommodations for conventions, trade shows and other similar activities, as well as some social events such as wedding receptions, bar mitzvahs, banquets and meetings. The facility must be available to public or private groups of persons for monetary consideration on a rental, fee, percentage or similar basis; be used primarily for special occasions, including but not limited to the events mentioned in this definition; be open to or attended by invited or selected guests or paying patrons; and the premises shall contain a minimum occupancy load of 200 persons for each show, event, reception or activity as permitted by the department of fire. The term "convention center" shall not include premises that provide adult entertainment, as that term is defined and used in Part 16 of this Code, either regularly or occasionally, nor shall convention centers licensed to sell alcoholic beverages under this Code provide such adult entertainment on their licensed premises. All convention center licensees holding a valid city license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this amended definition derives (January 21, 1992) shall be deemed to have complied with all requirements for a convention center. 
Courtyard market shall mean a commercial center consisting of one or more structures on one or more contiguous tracts or parcels of land, having a minimum of at least ten acres and at least 400,000 square feet of structures, having a minimum of 40,000 square feet of retail uses and not less than 45,000 square feet of outdoor areas used for public and private events, entertainment, farmer's markets, exhibitions, performances, shows, events, concerts and community events occurring on plazas, lawns, parks, rooftops, and streets (when not open to vehicular traffic) and sidewalks that are in the dominion and physical control of the owner of the courtyard market, the owner's agent or the owner's lessee, provided however that no adult entertainment as that term is defined and used in Part 16 of this Code, shall be permitted. The applicant for a license of a courtyard market shall show by plat or survey submitted with the application for a license, the physical delineation of the area in which alcoholic beverages will be sold, consumed and stored and such area shall be included as part of the premises as defined in this section. Licenses to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in a courtyard market may be issued to the owner or property manager of the courtyard market. 
Distance means the measurement in linear feet from the front door of the structures from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale in a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route to the front door of the building or to the nearest portion of the ground, whichever is applicable. For the purposes of this chapter, distances shall be measured along the pedestrian route of travel to and from the premises. 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquors means all beverages containing alcohol obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including fortified wines. 
Domestic wine means any and all wines produced by a farm winery within this state. 
Entertainment means the live performance by any person, whether such person be a musician, dancer or otherwise, which occurs upon the premises of a licensed establishment. 
Family means and includes any person related to the holder of a license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity, as determined according to civil law. 
Farm winery means a domestic winery located on premises, a substantial portion of which is used for agricultural purposes, including the cultivation of grapes, berries or fruits to be utilized in the manufacture or production of wine by the winery, or a domestic winery which: 
(1)  Makes at least 40 percent of its annual production from agricultural produce grown in the state where the winery is located; 
(2)  Is owned and operated by persons who are engaged in the production of a substantial portion of the state agricultural produce used in its annual production, and for this purpose such production of a substantial portion of such state agricultural produce shall be determined by the state commissioner of revenue; 
(3)  Produces less than 100,000 gallons per year; and 
(4)  Has been certified and licensed as a farm winery by the state commissioner of revenue. 
Government center means a building owned or leased by and operated by the state or the county and which contains a lobby or atrium area or other room which is used for group functions. The city is specifically excluded from this definition. If a license is issued for premises within a government center, a government official or employee shall be the named licensee. All government centers, while being used for the serving of alcoholic beverages, shall have posted the following sign visible to persons being served: 
"No person may purchase and/or consume within a government center more than three regular servings of alcoholic beverages within a two-hour period. Violations of this ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or imprisonment up to 30 days." 
Growler means a bottle capable of being sealed with a tamper-proof or other seal for the purposes of complying with open container laws, that is filled with a malt beverage from a tank, keg, cask, barrel or other container. 
Hotel means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 50 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of these guests, and having one or more public dining rooms, with an adequate and sanitary kitchen and a seating capacity of at least 40 where meals are regularly served to those guests, the sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge, restaurant or nightclub in their premises and the holder of the franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel. 
Importer means any person who imports an alcoholic beverage into the State of Georgia from a foreign country and sells the alcoholic beverage to another importer, broker, or wholesaler and who maintains a stock of the alcoholic beverage. 
License means the authorization by the council to engage in the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises or to engage in the retail sale of packaged alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises. 
Licensee means a person, real or artificial, holding any class of license issued under this chapter. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or located in a hotel or located in any airport owned by the city, with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and shall have a seating capacity for at least 50 persons. However, lounges located in any airport owned or operated by the city shall be exempt from the seating capacity requirement. A lounge that is operated on a different floor in the premises or in a separate building or that is not connected to or adjacent to a restaurant shall be considered a separate establishment and an additional license fee shall be paid therefore. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  For distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  For malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  For wine, any vintner. 
Microbrewery means an establishment in which not more than 10,000 barrels of beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed on the licensed premises in a calendar year and in which such manufactured or brewed beer or malt beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises and consumption off premises, subject to the limitations prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-24.1. As used in this definition, the term "barrel" shall be defined as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1. 
Microdistillery means an establishment in which not more than 10,000 barrels of distilled spirits are manufactured on the licensed premises in a calendar year and in which such manufactured distilled spirits may be sold for consumption on the premises and consumption off premises, subject to the limitations prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-24.2. As used in this definition, the term "barrel" shall be defined as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-4-1. 
Nightclub means an establishment having a capacity of at least 100 persons per the City of Atlanta Fire Code, with all booths and tables unobstructed and open to view, dispensing alcoholic beverages and in which music, dancing or entertainment is conducted. All such establishments shall be equipped with air conditioning. The principal business of a nightclub shall be entertaining, and the serving of alcoholic beverages shall be incidental thereto. 
Open air café means an establishment which serves food during all hours of operation and which has a seating capacity of at least 40 and which is located within the pedestrian court area of a shopping and retail entertainment center. Such an establishment may be licensed for on-premises consumption only. 
Outdoor dining area means a space in which a licensee serves food and beverages as part of the operation of the licensed premises as a sidewalk café. An outdoor dining area must be located directly in front of a licensed restaurant and may only be separated from the licensee's premises by a sidewalk. No part of a sidewalk café shall be located within a public right-of-way. The width of an outdoor dining area shall not exceed the width of the licensed premises. An outdoor dining area shall contain no more than 50 percent of the premises total seating capacity. The space within an outdoor dining area shall he enclosed within a clearly delineated area, which is surrounded by a continuous physical barrier no less than 36 inches and no more than 40 inches in height. An outdoor dining area shall have a single point of ingress and egress that is controlled by the licensee. Music and/or live entertainment shall not be provided within an outdoor dining area. 
Outdoor market shall mean a retail center with a structure of at least 1,000,000 square feet, having a minimum of 100,000 square feet of retail uses and not less than 40,000 square feet of outdoor areas used for public and private events, entertainment, farmer's markets, exhibitions, performances, shows, events, concerts and community events occurring on plazas, lawns, parks, rooftops, and streets (when not open to vehicular traffic) and sidewalks that are in the dominion and physical control of the owner of the outdoor market, the owner's agent or the owner's lessee, provided however that no adult entertainment as that term is defined and used in Part 16 of this Code, shall be permitted. The applicant for a license of an outdoor market shall show by plat or survey submitted with the application for a license, the physical delineation of the area in which alcoholic beverages will be sold, consumed and stored and such area shall be included as part of the premises as defined in this section. Licenses to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in an outdoor market may be issued to the owner or property manager of the outdoor market. 
Package store means an establishment engaged in the retail sale of packaged alcoholic beverages, such as ale, beer. wine, and whiskey for consumption off the premises and at which on-premises consumption is specifically prohibited, whether the alcoholic beverage is purchased at the package store or brought onto the premises thereof by a patron, as distinct from a bar, restaurant or similar establishment which is licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages of any type by the drink and/or for consumption on the premises. The term "package store" is considered synonymous with the term "liquor store." A package store shall include any premises classified as Industry No. 5921 in the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual 1972, prepared by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget. The term "package store" shall not include a "wine specialty shop" and shall not include a city food market. 
Park means ally public lands owned or controlled and operated by the city, the state or any county of the state, in and upon which play facilities are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Park facility means any city-owned premises (as defined in this section with the modifications set forth in section 10-58(d) of this chapter) that is leased, managed, and/or operated by a city park organization, and that is located in a city-owned park that is completely or partially improved and/or maintained by the city park organization, pursuant to a current memorandum of understanding or other agreement with the City of Atlanta. 
Pharmacy means any place of business of a pharmacist, which also sells cosmetics, stationary and other such products. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned-in locality, whether room, shop or building, wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. Premises also includes any area or patio immediately adjacent to the main licensed facility and located on property owned or leased by such licensee. The area or patio need not be covered, but must be completely enclosed, except for entrances and exits, by a wall, fence, shrubbery or other decorative material no less than 30 inches in height. Premises of an open air café need not be completely partitioned, and patios attached to such an establishment must be enclosed, except for entrances and exits, by a wall, fence, shrubbery or other decorative material no less than 30 inches in height or by a body of water at least three feet wide and one foot deep or by some other architectural or landscaping barrier which would prevent access to the premises. Open air cafés shall be subject to all other requirements contained in this definition. 
Private club means a corporation chartered, organized and existing under the laws of the state, exempt from federal income taxes pursuant to section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, actively and continuously in operation within the city as a nonprofit corporation for at least one year immediately prior to the application for a license under this chapter and during which time such corporation shall have had continuously not less than 250 members whose names, current addresses and current telephone numbers shall be kept listed on the club premises and made available for inspection on the premises by the Atlanta Police Department during all hours during which the private club is open for business, which members shall have regularly paid monthly, quarterly, semiannual or annual dues. In no event shall dues be paid on a daily basis. All applications for either a new or renewal license to sell alcoholic beverages by a private club for the year 2001 and all years thereafter must he accompanied by proof from the Internal Revenue Service that the corporation seeking such license is deemed exempt from federal income taxes by the Internal Revenue Service at the time of application for the new or renewal license. In addition, the corporation shall be required to submit its most recent Form 990 Return of Organization Exempt from Income Tax as certified by a certified public accountant. Furthermore, the corporation shall maintain on its premises any additional federal and state income tax returns filed by the corporation within the past three years and shall make such documents available for inspection upon request by the Atlanta Police Department during all hours during which the private club is open for business. In the event that a corporation licensed as a private club for any given year loses its 501(c) exemption, such private club must inform the licenses and permits unit in writing of such change in status within 15 days of the change in status. The failure to provide in writing notification of such change in status within 15 days, in addition to the violation of any other provision of this chapter, shall be grounds for the denial, suspension or revocation of said license and/or the implementation of a fine of up to $1,000.00 against the corporation. The corporation shall be operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofitable purposes, but in no event shall the corporation have as its primary purpose the operation of an establishment licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages. No part of the net earnings of the corporation shall inure to the benefit of any member, director or officer. During the period of time prior to the time of application, the corporation shall have owned, hired or leased a building having kitchen and dining room space therein for the reasonable use of its members and shall have maintained sufficient personnel and equipment to prepare on the premises and serve hot meals, which hot meals shall have been served and shall continue to be served at least once per day at least six days per week. After an establishment has been granted private club status from the city, these requirements as to meal preparation, kitchen equipment and dining room facilities shall continue in effect. No member, director, officer, agent, or employee of the club shall be paid or directly or indirectly, receive, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages by or to the club or its members or guests, except such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. The nonprofit corporation must be the sole owner and operator of the private club. Prior to the date of application, no nonprofit corporation shall have transferred, either directly or indirectly, by sale, lease or otherwise, any ownership, or any interest in the nonprofit entity or its assets (other than in the ordinary course of business), or the right to manage the private club in order to obtain its license to sell alcoholic beverages nor shall any nonprofit corporation transfer, during the time that the nonprofit corporation holds a license pursuant to this chapter, any such interest or right. 
Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one or more than three families customarily reside and does not include a mobile home, an apartment house having facilities for housing more than four families, a boardinghouse or roominghouse where there are five or more boarders or roomers or any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of an application. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and seating capacity of at least 40 people, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. However, restaurants located in any airport owned or operated by the city shall be exempt from the seating capacity requirement. At least one meal per day shall be served at least six days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating, and the serving of those meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. 
Retail grocery supermarket means any retail market or supermarket selling a full range of food products including meat, dairy, vegetable, fruit, dry goods and beverages. 
Retail sale means selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public. 
School means only such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state and does not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Sexual orientation means the state of being heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual. 
Shopping and retail entertainment center means a structure containing five or more retail establishments and three or more eating establishments, which has a court area for pedestrian use covered and enclosed on at least three sides. Such a court must extend vertically two or more floor levels and must constitute a minimum of 10,000 square feet. This definition shall also include single floor level shopping and retail entertainment centers which are completely enclosed and which meet all other requirements contained in this definition. 
Sidewalk café means an establishment that serves food during all hours of operation, has a seating capacity of at least 30 people, operates an outdoor dining area, and is located within a mixed-use development (as that term is defined in section 16-29.001(24)) that has zoning approval for at least 50,000 square feet of retail space, 100,000 square feet of office space and 300 residential units. A sidewalk café shall not provide any outdoor seating or any other outdoor service unless it is within an outdoor dining area. When interpreting the hours of operation listed in section 10-209(c) and 10-209(d) of this Code, sidewalk cafés shall be subject to the same limitations as restaurants. Sidewalk cafés must operate in compliance with the city's noise ordinance, found in chapter 74 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances, and with section 10-60(a)(4)b.3). [As provided for in section 10-109(a)(17)) of this part.] 
Specialty food shop means a retail establishment that: 
(1)  Deals in the sale of foods. specialty foods, and wine, fortified wine, port, sherry. and malt beverages for consumption off the premises and at which on premises consumption of alcoholic beverages is specifically prohibited, except that if a specialty food shop is the holder of a license under section 10-60(a)(1)c. of this Code, that licensed retail establishment shall be authorized to hold wine tastings in conjunction with educational programs on the subjects of enology or viticulture; 
(2)  Does not offer check cashing services; does not maintain a drive-thru window; and does not maintain on the premises for sale any of the following: distilled spirits, malt beverages containing more than six percent alcohol by volume, gasoline, diesel fuel, tires, lottery tickets or related games of chance, or tobacco; 
(3)  Offers prepared food, made and packaged on the premise available for on and off premises consumption; 
(4)  Maintains an inventory of saleable food products including, but not limited to, prepared foods, packaged foods, meat, dairy, vegetables, fruits, dry goods, and beverages; 
(5)  Has an interior floor area of not more than 5,000 square feet (inclusive of storage), of which more than 60 percent of interior floor area is devoted to the display for sale of food products; and 
(6)  Derives less than 30 percent of its gross receipts from the combined sale of malt beverages and wine. 
Sports coliseum means premises operated exclusively for the purpose of providing major league sporting events of basketball, hockey or similar athletic or amusement events for attendance by the public and where such premises contain a minimum of 3,000 square feet. 
Suite hotel means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where 50 or more suites, each consisting of at least one bedroom, a living room and a bathroom, are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, and where alcoholic beverages are served and the price of such beverages is included in the suite rates. 
Tasting room means an outlet operated by a farm winery for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing complimentary samples of such wine to the public and for the sale of such wine at retail. 
Wholesaler means any person engaged in distribution or selling of alcoholic beverages to retailers for the purpose of resale. 
Wine or vinous liquors means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes but is not limited to all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The tern does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to this definition of wine. 
Wine specialty shop means a retail establishment: 
(1)  Which shall deal in the sale of table wine, fortified wines, port, sherry for consumption off the premises and/or wine accessories; and at which on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages is specifically prohibited, except that if a wine specialty shop is the holder of a license under section 10-60(a)(1)c. of this Code, that licensed retail establishment shall be authorized to hold wine tastings in conjunction with educational programs on the subjects of enology or viticulture; 
(2)  Which shall not maintain on the premises or offer for sale malt beverages or distilled spirits; 
(3)  Which shall maintain on the premises and offer for sale at all times a variety of wines from not less than 100 nor more than 200 manufacturers or importers of wine or any combination thereof the total of which shall not fall below 100 nor exceed 200; 
(4)  Which shall maintain and replenish an inventory of at least 36 bottles of wine from each manufacturer or importer of wine referred to in subsection (3) above; provided however, that any inventory which is depleted to less than 36 bottles of wine must be replenished to at least 36 bottles of wine within 15 days of the date that the inventory falls below 36 bottles; 
(5)  Which shall submit an inventory list of all wines maintained on the premises and offered for sale to the licenses and permits unit of the police department. Such inventory list shall be submitted to the licenses and permits unit on a quarterly basis by the first day of each of the following months: January, April, July and October; and 
(6)  Whose total interior floor area, inclusive of storage area, shall not exceed 2,000 square feet. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2001; Ord. No. 1995-43, § 1, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 1999-6, § 1, 1-27-9; Ord. No. 1999-48, § 1, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 2001-26, § 1, 3-27-01; Ord. No. 2001-43, § 2, 6-13-01; Ord. No. 2001-60, § 1, 8-13-01; Ord. No. 2001-88, § 1, 11-28-01; Ord. No. 2004-46, §§ 1, 2, 7-22-04; Ord. No. 2004-68, §§ 1, 2, 10-8-04; Ord. No. 2004-83, §§ 2, 3, 11-19-04; Ord. No. 2005-40, § 1, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 2005-56, § 1, 9-27-05; Ord. No. 2006-87, §§ 1, 2, 12-13-06; Ord. No. 2007-60(07-O-1897), §§ 1, 2, 10-8-07; Ord. No. 2007-61(07-O-1900), § 1, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 2009-12 (08-O-0843), § 1, 3-25-09; Ord. No. 2010-27(10-O-0780), § 4, 6-16-10; Ord. No. 2010-58(10-O-1419), § 1, 10-27-10; Ord. No. 2014-17(14-O-1232), § 1, 5-28-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-18(15-O-1158), § 3, 5-13-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-18(16-O-1277), §§ 1, 2, 6-15-16 ; Ord. No. 2017-25(17-O-1194), § 1, 5-15-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-87(17-O-1787), § 1, 12-13-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-28(18-O-1394), § 1, 7-11-18 ) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions for alcoholic beverage laws generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 10-2. - Purposes of chapter. 
This chapter has been enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community; to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sales of alcoholic beverages to protect and preserve schools and churches; to give effect to land use and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable considerations, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhoods and property values; and to protect against the evils of concentration of the retail outlets for distilled spirits in one family or to prevent undesirable persons from engaging in or having any interest in alcoholic beverage licenses. 
(a)  The purposes of this chapter are not advanced when alcoholic beverages are provided to the general public under the guise that such alcoholic beverages are not being sold but are being given away as part of a business operation or other activity and unless a premises which provides alcoholic beverages to the general public is licensed by the city for that particular purpose, the violation of practices which are regulated this chapter and other applicable law, including without limitation, the serving of alcoholic beverages to under age persons, the serving of alcoholic beverages to intoxicated persons, the serving of alcoholic beverages at times other than those allowed, and the consumption of alcoholic beverages at public places inside of the prescribed distances from churches, schools, libraries and parks are more difficult to enforce. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2002; Ord. No. 2004-68, § 3, 10-8-04; Ord. No. 2011-35(11-O-1137), § 1, 8-24-11; Ord. No. 2014-17(14-O-1232), § 2, 5-28-14 ) 
Sec. 10-3. - Compliance with chapter required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages without having first complied with this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any premises, that performs or undertakes any type of operation or activity for which a occupation tax certificate issued pursuant to Chapter 30 to provide alcoholic beverages to persons on the premises unless a license issued under this chapter allowing on premises consumption of alcoholic beverages has first been obtained. This prohibition shall apply without regard to whether the alcoholic beverages are provided free of charge as a part of any promotion by the owner of the premises or operator of the business, given as prizes in connection with any type of contests or raffles, given as bonuses or inducements offered in connection with the purchases of goods and/or services. 
(c)  Any person employed by the business and who is present at the time when alcoholic beverages are being provided by a non-licensed premises or location may be charged with this offense. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2003; Ord. No. 2004-68, § 3, 10-8-04; Ord. No. 2011-35(11-O-1137), § 2, 8-24-11; Ord. No. 2012-48(12-O-1258), § 1, 11-14-12) 
Sec. 10-4. - Jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall apply to the corporate limits of the city and outside the city limits in all territory to which the jurisdiction of the city extends. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2004; Ord. No. 2004-68, § 3, 10-8-04) 
Sec. 10-5. - [Severability.] 
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid and unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of the provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2005; Ord. No. 2004-68, § 3, 10-8-04) 
Sec. 10-6. - Outstanding licenses; compliance assumed. 
All licensees holding a valid license for the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages issued by the city at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter derives shall be deemed to have complied with all requirements as to application and issuance of licenses under this chapter. The licensees shall, however, meet all other requirements as to regulation and control as set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2142; Ord. No. 2004-68, § 3, 10-8-04) 
State Law reference— Possession, etc., of alcohol by underaged persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 10-7. - Alcohol consumption near package stores. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to consume all or any part of any type of alcoholic beverage within 100 feet of any retail store where alcoholic beverages are sold in package form or within the boundary lines of the property on which such retail store is located, whichever constitutes the greater distance. 
(b)  Enforcement. The department of police shall be responsible for the enforcement of this section. 
(Code 1977, §§ 17-3015, 17-3016; Ord. No. 2004-68, § 3, 10-8-04) 
Sec. 10-8. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any vinous, malt or other alcoholic beverage while on any streets, sidewalks, alleyways, parking areas or other open areas operated and controlled by the city, or while in or on the grounds of any MARTA station. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to drink any vinous, malt or other alcoholic beverage while in any city park except during permitted outdoor festivals pursuant to the provisions of Atlanta Code of Ordinances section 110-76(a)(5), or at other licensed locations within such parks. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the sale and consumption of vinous, malt or any other alcoholic beverage at any convention center or sports coliseum, as defined in section 10-1, or in any golf pro shop which is situated on any golf course owned or operated by the city. 
A licensee may prepare and serve alcoholic beverages to be consumed within an outdoor dining area as part of the operation of a sidewalk cafe. Open containers of alcoholic beverages shall only be transported into or out of outdoor dining areas by the licensees' working employees as part of their work duties. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3018; Ord. No. 2001-88, § 2, 11-28-01; Ord. No. 2004-68, § 3, 10-8-04; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 13, 9-26-06) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 14, provided for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2007. 
Sec. 10-9. - Disorderly while under the influence. 
(a)  Acts constituting violation. It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to be disorderly while under the influence on the streets, sidewalks or other public places. The following acts are declared to be in violation of this section: 
(1)  Any person who acts in a reckless manner so as to create an unreasonable risk of harm to himself, to other persons or to property in the vicinity while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(2)  Any person who shall defecate or urinate on the streets or sidewalks or in the halls or elevators of public or commercial buildings, or on any property open to public view in the city while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(3)  Any person who, without provocation, uses to or of another, in such person's presence, fighting words, or who shall panhandle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(4)  Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(5)  Any person who shall lie down or otherwise obstruct, block or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any sidewalk, street, or entrance or exit to any other public way, house of worship, business, public hall, theater, public conveyance or other public place and who shall refuse to remove themselves when ordered to do so by a city police officer or other lawful authority while under influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(6)  Any person who shall act in a boisterous, turbulent, or agitated manner, or who shall use profane, vulgar, loud or unbecoming language while under the influence of alcohol or other drugs while on the streets, sidewalks, or other public places within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Duty of peace officer. Any peace officer, in accordance with standards set out in standard operating procedures promulgated by the police chief or designee, may take or send an individual under the influence of alcohol or other drugs to such person's home or to a treatment facility in lieu of incarcerating such person for violations of this section or when such person is unresponsive to the officer's communications. Any peace officer so acting shall be considered as carrying out such peace officer's official duty. The standard operating procedures shall set out the circumstances under which a peace officer may send an individual home or to a treatment facility without formally rendering charges against such person. 
(c)  Penalty. Upon a finding of guilty for violation of this section, the offender shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 180 days or by fine not to exceed $1,000.00, either of such penalties to be in the discretion of the municipal judge. Such punishment may be probated by the municipal judge for those offenders desiring to participate in a detoxification program. 
(d)  Habitual abusers. Any person who shall have been convicted or have forfeited collateral under the provisions of subsection (b) of this section three times in the preceding 12 months may be deemed a habitual alcohol abuser and may be probated by the court to an outpatient treatment resource for a period of not more than 180 days. 
(e)  Alcoholics. It is the policy of the city that alcoholics may not be subjected to criminal prosecution solely because of their consumption of alcoholic beverages but rather should be afforded a continuum of treatment in order that they may lead normal lives as productive members of society. It is the intent of this section to provide for the identification and referral to treatment of persons who are alcoholic and who may be charged with violations of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3019; Ord. No. 2004-68, § 3, 10-8-04) 
Sec. 10-10. - Furnishing to, purchasing of, or possession by persons under 21 years of age of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Except as otherwise authorized by law: 
(1)  No person directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age; 
(2)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase, drink or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage; 
(4)  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age; 
(5)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage; or 
(6)  No person shall keep or maintain a place where persons under 21 years of age are allowed and permitted to come and purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (1), (2) and (4) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase or possession of alcohol beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; or 
(2)  At a religious ceremony. 
(c)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (1), (2) and (4) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with respect to the possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption by a person under 21 years of age when the parent or guardian of the person under 21 years of age gives the alcoholic beverage to the person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(d)  The prohibition contained in subsection (1) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with respect to sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(e)  If such conduct is not otherwise prohibited pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person under 21 years of age from: 
(1)  Dispensing, serving, selling or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishments; 
(2)  Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; or 
(3)  Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
(f)  Testimony by any person under 21 years of age, when given in an administrative or judicial proceeding against another person for violation of any provision of this section, shall not be used as an admission in any administrative or judicial proceedings brought against such testifying person under 21 years of age. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to modify, amend or supersede O.C.G.A. tit. 15, ch. 11 (O.C.G.A. § 15-11-1 et seq.). 
(h)  Any person convicted of violating any prohibition contained in subsection (a) of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the city jail or stockade for not more than 180 days or both; except that any person convicted of violating subsection (a)(2) of this section shall be punished by not more than 30 days' imprisonment or a fine of not more than $300.00 or both. Any defendant charged under this section shall be entitled upon request to have the case against such defendant transferred to the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged offense occurred. Any person charged with a second or subsequent offense under this section shall be punished as for a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature in the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged offense occurred. 
(i)  Whenever any person who has not been previously convicted of any offense under this section or under any other law of the United States or this or any other state relating to alcoholic beverages pleads guilty to or is found guilty of a violation of subsection (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of such person, may defer further proceedings and place such person on probation upon such reasonable terms and conditions as the court may require. The terms of probation shall preferably be such as require the person to undergo a comprehensive rehabilitation program, including, if necessary, medical treatment, not to exceed three years, designed to acquaint such person with the ill effects of alcohol abuse and to provide such person with knowledge of the gains and benefits which can be achieved by being a good member of society. Upon violation of a term or condition of probation, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed accordingly. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions of probation, the court shall discharge such person and dismiss the proceedings against such person. Discharge and dismissal under this subsection shall be without court adjudication of guilt and shall not be deemed a conviction for purposes of this subsection or for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime. Discharge and dismissal under this subsection may occur only once with respect to any person. 
(j)  Unless the officer has reasonable cause to believe such person is intoxicated, a law enforcement officer may arrest by issuance of a citation a person accused of violating only subsection (a)(2) of this section. The citation shall enumerate the specific charges against the person and either the date upon which the person is to appear and answer the charges or a notation that the person will be later notified of the date upon which the person is to appear and answer the charges. If the person charged shall fail to appear as required, the judge having jurisdiction of the offense may issue a warrant or other order directing the apprehension of such person and commanding that such person be brought before the court to answer the charges contained within the citation and the charge of such person's failure to appear as required. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to invalidate an otherwise valid arrest by citation of a person who is intoxicated. 
(Code 1977, § 17-11010; Ord. No. 2004-68, § 3, 10-8-04) 
State Law reference— Possession, etc., of alcohol by underaged persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 10-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-68, § 3, approved Oct. 8, 2004, renumbered the provisions of § 10-11 as 10-5. 
Sec. 10-12. - Persons under specified ages forbidden to enter, remain in or loiter at certain licensed premises. 
No person under the age of 21 years shall enter, remain in or loiter on any licensed premises, as herein defined, licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink at retail, or sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises; nor shall any licensee or either such licensed premises, or any person in charge thereof, or on duty while employed by the licensee therein, permit or allow any person under the age specified with respect thereto to remain in or loiter in or about such place. 
Provided, however, it is lawful for persons who are 18 years of age or older that provide entertainment to enter and to remain in any licensed premises, but only during and in the course of their employment as entertainers. Provided further, that it is lawful for persons who are 18 years of age or older to sell, serve, possess or dispense alcoholic beverages in the course of their employment in any licensed premises in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24(a), or in any other place where alcoholic beverages are lawfully present, so long as such place is the place of employment for such person under 21 years of age. 
This section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries, or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24(b). However, the foregoing shall not permit the sale or distribution of any alcoholic beverages to any person under the ages specified for sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2001-6, § 1, 1-23-01; Ord. No. 2004-68, § 3, 10-8-04; Ord. No. 2007-62(07-O-2135), § 1, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 2010-16(10-O-0466), § 2, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 10-13. - Exceptions from restriction on entering or remaining. 
It shall not be unlawful for, nor shall section 10-12 be construed to restrict, any person under the age of 21 years from entering or being: 
(1)  Upon the premises of any restaurant, as herein defined, or in any railroad observation or club car or any airplane of a commercial airline, notwithstanding that such premises may also be licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or that alcohol beverages, are prepared, mixed or dispensed and served and consumed therein. 
(2)  In any public stadiums, sports coliseums, government centers, auditoriums, convention centers, outdoor markets, courtyard markets and fairgrounds and parks for which a valid license is obtained, notwithstanding that such premises or any portion thereof may be licensed for the sale of distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages by the drink for consumption on the licensed premises or that such products are dispensed and served and consumed therein; provided, that the person under the age of 21 years is attending a lawful activity, show, exhibition, performance or event on the premises or is required to be present as a condition of his employment. 
(3)  Upon the licensed premises of a tasting room when in the immediate company of at least one of his parents, or of his legal guardian. 
(4)  Upon the licensed premises of a lounge when in the immediate company of at least one of his parents, or of his legal guardian. 
(5)  Upon the licensed premises of a supermarket, convenience store, brewery, drugstore, package store, brew pub, private club or open air cafe as defined herein. 
(6)  Upon the licensed premises of a hotel, except for any area within the premises of a hotel being operated as a nightclub as defined herein. 
(7)  In any theater, concert hall, or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances. As used in this section only, the phrase "theater, concert hall, or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances" shall mean a building, playhouse, room, hall, or other place, licensed for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises, having at least 350 permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage upon which theatrical, vaudeville, live concert or similar performances are given, and in which the serving of alcoholic beverages is clearly incidental to such performances, and where the revenue derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages is insubstantial when compared to all other sources of gross revenue; provided, that the person under the age of 21 years is attending a lawful activity, show, exhibition, performance or event on the premises or is required to be present as a condition of his employment. 
(Ord. No. 2001-6, § 2, 1-23-01; Ord. No. 2001-33, § 1, 5-15-01; Ord. No. 2001-78, § 1, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 2004-68, § 3, 10-8-04; Ord. No. 2015-18(15-O-1158), § 4, 5-13-15 ; Ord. No. 2017-25(17-O-1194), § 5, 5-15-17 ) 
Sec. 10-14. - Posting signs as to restrictions. 
Every licensee herein referred to shall keep a sign conspicuously posted over or near each entrance to any place from which persons under 21 years are herein restricted giving public notice of such fact. The wording and size of such signs shall be in accordance with such regulations as the chief of police may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 2001-6, § 3, 1-23-01; Ord. No. 2004-68, § 3, 10-8-04) 
Secs. 10-15—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEALERS AND MANUFACTURERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-31. - Copies of agreements of persons holding license furnished to police. 
All agreements between and among any persons or stockholders of corporations or partners of partnerships holding a license to sell or dispense any alcoholic beverages by the bottle or by the drink and which agreements reflect or control ownership, division of profits, sharing of revenues of any kind, including payment of rents, or which agreements reflect any other arrangements in connection with ownership, rents, profit sharing or income application of use shall be in writing, and copies of all these agreements shall upon request be furnished to the department of police. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2006) 
Sec. 10-32. - Inspection of establishments. 
(a)  Authorized. Sworn officers of the department of police shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Fees. The bureau of buildings and the department of fire shall each charge a fee of $50.00 for the inspections made to report on the compliance status of structures were alcoholic beverage licenses are requested. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-2007, 19-14.001; Ord. No. 2002-35, § 6, 5-28-02) 
Sec. 10-33. - Sale of alcoholic beverages by certain nonprofit organizations. 
An applicant may be issued a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises owned or chosen by any nonprofit corporation within the city conducting events upon meeting all the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant is a nonprofit corporation within the city sponsoring a fundraising event for the purpose of expanding research in the cure for cancer and providing information for the general public. 
(2)  The applicant's fundraising event is held within the area described as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of North Avenue and Marietta Street; thence east on North Avenue to Piedmont Avenue; thence south on Piedmont Avenue to Pine Street; thence east on Pine Street to Bedford Place; thence south on Bedford Place to Baker Street; thence west on Baker Street to Piedmont Avenue; thence south on Piedmont Avenue to Capitol Avenue to Memorial Drive; thence west on Memorial Drive to Peachtree Street to Spring Street; thence north on Spring Street to Marietta Street; thence north on Marietta Street to North Avenue. 
(3)  The applicant sponsors a maximum of one fundraising event per year involving the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises, provided that no such fundraising event shall exceed four hours. 
(4)  The applicant shall show that the profits realized under any license granted under this section shall be used for the benefit of the nonprofit entity's organizational purposes. 
(5)  The applicant shall show by plat the physical location of defined areas within which alcoholic beverages are to be sold, which shall comply with all sections of this chapter other than sections 10-62, 10-86(d) and 10-88. 
(6)  The applicant shall pay an annual license fee of $100.00. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-2008, 19-14.002) 
Secs. 10-34—10-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— General authority relative to alcoholic beverage licensing, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 

Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 10-46. - Required. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be manufactured, imported, brokered, sold to wholesalers or other importers or brokers, sold at wholesale or retail in the original package or by the drink nor shall any tasting room be operated except under a license granted by the mayor as provided in this division. No licensee shall be authorized to operate a business until the license required in this section has been paid for by money order, certified check or cashier's check, and delivered to the licensee by the proper city official. Where there is a pending application for a new licensee or a change of ownership on a prior existing licensed premises, the authority of the prior licensee to operate the business shall be extended for a maximum period of 30 days beyond the termination date of the prior license. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2031; Ord. No. 1999-48, § 2, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 2004-61, § 1, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 2014-17(14-O-1232), § 3, 5-28-14 ) 
Sec. 10-47. - Keeping or storing without appropriate license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a place licensed for the sale of malt beverages or wine or both to store or have therein any distilled spirits without an appropriate license therefor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2127) 
Sec. 10-48. - Application. 
(a)  All persons desiring to obtain a license required under this division shall make written application to the Licenses and Permits Unit of the Atlanta Police Department for that privilege upon forms approved by the License Review Board. The application shall consist of two sections. Section 1 of the application will be used by the licenses and permits unit, the license review board and the relevant neighborhood planning unit (NPU). Section 2 of the license application will be used only by the licenses and permits unit and the license review board for confidential investigation. The applicant shall complete the application and file it with the business tax division along with all required supporting documentation and a non-refundable $300.00 filing fee payable by money order, certified check or cashier's check and the license fee payable by money order, certified check or cashier's check. The business tax division shall deposit the funds into the appropriate accounts and forward the application to the licenses and permits unit. 
(b)  The application shall be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof and shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  If a corporation, the names of the officers; 
(3)  If a partnership, the names of the partners; 
(4)  The address where the proposed business is to be located; 
(5)  Information regarding the distance of the location from the uses identified in section 10-88 or 10-88.1 provided however that such information need not be provided if the proposed business or location is exempt from or not required to comply with the measurements identified in section 10-88 and 10-88.1; 
(6)  The nature and character of the business to be carried on; 
(7)  The hours or operation of the proposed licensed business; 
(8)  The name of the agent/licensee; 
(9)  The name of the manager of the business; 
(10)  The identity of the owner of the property where the business is located; 
(11)  The plan for traffic flow, control and access in case of fire or other catastrophe; 
(12)  Ingress and egress to the property and proposed structure or uses thereon with particular preference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience; 
(13)  Parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention to the items in subsections (10) and (11) immediately preceding this subsection; 
(14)  Refuse and service areas and plans for maintenance thereof; 
(15)  The plan for appropriate buffering or screening to alleviate such potentially adverse effects as may be created by noise, glare, odor, lighting, signs or traffic congestion; 
(16)  Security plans and plans for training of employees; 
(17)  The nature of any entertainment to be provided on premises; 
(18)  Provisions for parking; and 
(19)  Such other information as may be required by the Atlanta Police Department Licenses and Permits Unit or the license review board to investigate compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them in writing by the license review board or the department of police, and failure to furnish this data, information and records within 30 days from the date of the request shall automatically dismiss, with prejudice, the application provided however the license review board may extend the time to respond for good cause shown. Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the license review board, the department of police or the city attorney and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to the license. The failure to produce the person within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of the application provided however the license review board may extend the time to respond for good cause shown. 
(d)  Upon receipt of an application, the licenses and permits unit shall make a copy of section 1 of the application and provide the copy and a blank NPU Report Form to the applicant. Within five business days, the applicant shall take the copy of section 1 of the application and the blank NPU report form to the commissioner of the department of city planning (DCP) or his designee for assignment to the appropriate NPU. 
(e)  The DCP shall provide the applicant with a "notice to appear" before the NPU in which the proposed licensed establishment is located. The DCP shall determine the date of the next regularly scheduled meeting at which it is possible for the applicant to appear, shall schedule the appearance on that date and shall include that information and the contact telephone numbers for the representatives designated by the NPU to handle liquor license applications on the notice to appear. 
The application shall be afforded the opportunity to appear before the NPU within 60 days from the date the applicant receives the notice to appear from the DCP. The date of the notice to appear shall not be included in the 60-day calculation. A copy of the notice to appear shall be forwarded by DCP to the NPU designee along with a copy of section 1 of the application and a blank NPU report form. The applicant and the NPU may mutually agree to hold the hearing outside the above-described 60-day time period. Should the NPU fail to hold the hearing for the applicant within the above described 60-day time period or on the date mutually agreed to by the applicant and the NPU, the form upon which the NPU provides its recommendation and comments shall indicate "no recommendation" by the NPU and shall immediately be executed and forwarded by the NPU to the DCP as set forth in section 10-48(f)(5) upon the expiration of the above described 60-day time period or the date for the applicant's hearing mutually agreed to by the applicant and NPU. 
(f)  All applicants for licenses to sell alcohol shall abide by the following regulations pertaining to appearances before the appropriate NPU: 
(1)  The applicant shall appear before the appropriate NPU on the scheduled date set forth in the notice to appear. At such meeting, the applicant shall be prepared to respond, to the best of his ability, to any questions regarding section 1 of the application. The applicant shall provide, to the best of his ability, any additional relevant information about the proposed licensed establishment, which the NPU members want to know. 
(2)  If the applicant fails to appear at the NPU meeting on the scheduled set forth in the notice to appear, the applicant shall be required to request from the DCP a new date on which the applicant shall appear before the NPU and a new notice to appear. The NPU shall submit its original NPU Report Form to DCP indicating that the applicant failed to appear by checking that box on the form. Once the DCP schedules a new date for the applicant to appear, the DCP shall send to the NPU designee a new notice to appear and a new NPU report form. 
(3)  After the applicant appears before the NPU, the NPU shall provide its recommendation to the DCP in writing on the form to be provided by the DCP. The form shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the proposed licensed business; 
b.  The name and address of the owner of the proposed licensed business; 
c.  The name of the agent/licensee of the proposed licensed business; 
d.  The date the applicant appeared before the NPU; 
e.  The comments of the NPU as set forth in section 10-48(f)(4); and 
f.  Whether the NPU: 
1.  Recommends that the license be approved; 
2.  Recommends that the license be denied; or 
3.  Provides no recommendation. 
(4)  In making its recommendation, the NPU shall consider and provide comments regarding any information contained in section 1 of the application and any additional information the applicant provides at the NPU meeting. The NPU shall specifically note any information not found within the application but provided at the meeting and relied upon by the NPU in making its recommendation. 
(5)  The form upon which the NPU provides its recommendation and comments shall be signed by the chairperson of the NPU, or his designee. The NPU shall have five days from the date on which the applicant appears before the NPU to submit the written, signed recommendation form to DCP and to provide a copy to the applicant. The date of the NPU meeting shall not be included in the five-day calculation. The form upon which the NPU provides its recommendation and comments shall be signed by the commissioner of the DCP, or his designee within three days after its receipt from the NPU. Such signatures shall confirm the accuracy of the NPU recommendation. The original signed form shall be sent by the commissioner of the DCP or his designee to the Atlanta Police Department's Licenses and Permits Unit and a copy thereof shall be maintained in the DCP. 
(6)  The license review board shall not hear any application for a license to sell alcohol if the signed form verifying the applicant's attendance before the NPU, or indicating that the NPU has no recommendation as to the applicant, has not been submitted to the licenses and permits unit. 
(7)  Any application for a license to sell alcohol that receives a recommendation from the NPU that the license be denied shall be listed on the license review board agenda for the date of the hearing on that application as, "PRESENTED WITH NPU RECOMMENDATION FOR DENIAL." 
(8)  The commander of the licenses and permits unit, or his designee, shall notify the commissioner of the DCP, or his designee, of the date, time and place of the license review board hearing scheduled for each application. Within three days after the commissioner of the DCP, or his designee, receives such information, he shall notify the appropriate city councilmembers (district and at-large) and the designated representative of the NPU of the date, time, and place of the hearing before the license review board. Such notification shall also include the name of the applicant and the address of the proposed business. 
(g)  Within 48 hours of the receipt of each new application for a liquor license, the licenses and permits unit of the police department shall forward a copy of section 1 of the application to the councilmember who represents the district within which the applicant proposes to sell alcohol and to all at-large councilmembers. 
(h)  In addition to the above requirements, an applicant for a new or renewal license to sell alcoholic beverages as a private club, as defined in section 10-1, shall submit the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of each of its officers and directors of the private club, and of any other person(s) who will manage, operate, direct, supervise or otherwise have any control over the day to day operations of the private club, including the sale of alcoholic beverages. Such information shall be submitted to the licenses and permits unit on a quarterly basis by the first day of each of the following months: January, April, July, and October. Furthermore, the applicant must submit the minutes of any meeting held during the prior 12 months at which time the salary of any member, director, officer, agent, or employee of the corporation has been set. The private club must also provide proof of its tax exempt status under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code. The failure of the applicant to submit the information set forth herein shall be grounds for denial, suspension, revocation of the license and/or the implementation of a fine of up to $1,000.00. 
(i)  A person desiring to obtain a license to sell alcoholic beverages in a leased location within a licensed premises, shall, in addition to the application required hereinabove, provide additional sworn application forms and the required application fees for each proposed leased location. The prospective lessees shall in all other respects comply with this code section. In the event a licensee shall seek to change, substitute or add a leased location within the licensed premises, then before alcohol sales can continue or commence, the individuals in control of the proposed leased locations must comply with the provisions of this code section. No applicant or licensee may allow sales of alcoholic beverages at a leased location within a licensed premise without compliance with this section and all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2032; Ord. No. 1997-45, §§ 1, 2, 8-25-97; Ord. No. 1999-64, § 1, 9-16-99; Ord. No. 1999-82, § 2, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 2001-26, § 2, 3-27-01; Ord. No. 2001-44, §§ 1—5, 6-8-01; Ord. No. 2002-89, § 1, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 2004-69, § 1, 10-8-04; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157), § 8, 4-26-17) 
Sec. 10-49. - False information in applications. 
Any material omission, untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original, renewal or transfer application for a license under this division shall be cause for the denial thereof, and if any license has previously been granted, these circumstances shall constitute cause for revocation. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2086) 
Sec. 10-50. - Minimum age of applicant. 
No application for any license under this division shall be granted unless the agent/licensee has attained the age of 21 years. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2046; Ord. No. 2004-62, § 1, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 10-51. - Citizenship, residence requirements. 
(a)  Sale of malt beverages or wine. No license for the sale of malt beverages or wine shall be issued to any person unless the licensee is a resident of Metropolitan Atlanta, which is defined as including Fulton, DeKalb, Cobb, Clayton, Gwinnett, Paulding, Henry, Cherokee, Douglas, Rockdale, Fayette, Coweta and Forsyth Counties. The person must also be a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. 
(b)  Sale of packaged distilled spirits. No license for the sale of distilled spirits by the package shall be granted to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence and who has not resided continuously within the state and Metropolitan Atlanta, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, for a one-year period next preceding the year for which application is made. The applicant shall have been a resident of the state for one year prior to the year for which the application is made. If the applicant is a corporation whose primary business is the operation of a liquor store, the majority stockholder must meet the requirements of this subsection, and the license shall be issued to the corporation and the majority stockholder. If the applicant is a corporation whose primary business is other than the operation of a liquor store, the license shall be issued to the corporation and an officer or agent of the corporation who meets the requirements of this subsection. If the applicant is a partnership, the same requirements pertaining to corporations shall apply to all partnerships. 
(c)  Sale of distilled spirits for on-premises consumption. No license for the sale of distilled spirits for on-premises consumption shall be granted to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence and who is not, at the time the application is made, a resident of Metropolitan Atlanta, as defined in subsection (a) of this section. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or association, the license shall be issued to the corporation, partnership or association and an officer or agent of the corporation, partnership or association who meets the requirements of this subsection. 
(d)  Grounds for denial or revocation. The inability of the police chief to verify any statement of information required to be disclosed on forms furnished by the police chief or to be able to adequately conduct a full investigation of an applicant or a place of business due to foreign background, ties or interest or for any reason beyond the police chief's control shall be, in addition to all other grounds, cause for denial of any license and if any license has been granted shall be cause for revocation of the license. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2036; Ord. No. 2004-63, § 1, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 2014-17(14-O-1232), § 4, 5-28-14 ) 
Sec. 10-52. - Advertisement of intent to engage in business. 
Each applicant for a license under this division shall give notice of the purpose of making the application by posting the subject property at least 15 days prior to the license review board meeting. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of meeting; and the name of the applicant(s). The posting shall be in accordance with specifications promulgated by the chief of police, and shall not be subject to the sign ordinance of the City of Atlanta. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2033; Ord. No. 2018-49(18-O-1583), § 1, 10-10-18 ) 
Sec. 10-53. - Tasting rooms of farm wineries. 
No tasting room shall be operated except under a license granted by the mayor as provided in this section. The applicant for a tasting room license must be a farm winery and must meet all legal requirements contained in this chapter for the sale of wine by the package and for the sale of wine by the drink. Individual patrons of tasting rooms may be given or sold samples of up to seven different wines for consumption, but may not be given or sold in excess of five ounces of wine in any one two-hour period. A tasting room license shall allow the license holder to sell wine by the package and to give or sell wine samples at one location. No other license shall be required for the tasting room location pursuant to this chapter. Tasting room licensees are subject to all laws, rules and regulations of the state and are subject to revocation for violation thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2060) 
Sec. 10-54. - Investigation of application; report. 
All applications for licenses required by this division shall be investigated and not acted upon by the license review board until 20 days after the filing thereof. After the expiration of 20 days the license review board shall report its recommendations to the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2034) 
Sec. 10-55. - Grounds for nonacceptance of application. 
No application for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be accepted by the department of police or considered by the license review board if the person applying has had a license to conduct a similar type business denied or revoked by the mayor within the immediately preceding 24 months for any reason other than location disqualification. 
For purposes of this section the 24 month period as stated in this section shall be tolled during any period of time that an appeal is pending of said denial or revocation, or any period of time that by operation of law the city cannot enforce said denial or revocation, or any period of time during which there is in place a valid, voluntary agreement between the city and the entity denied a license or whose license has been revoked to not enforce the mayor's decision pending the outcome of litigation in any way involving said denial or revocation. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2053; Ord. No. 1997-25, § 3, 5-8-97; Ord. No. 2003-106, § 2, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 10-56. - Issuance to persons with prior convictions. 
No original license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued to any person, partnership or corporation for pecuniary gain if any individual having an interest, either as owner, partner or principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, or the individual's spouse shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere, within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application, for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal ordinance, except traffic violations. The term "conviction" includes an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime; if the violation is for a misdemeanor, forfeiture of bond, municipal ordinance or if there is a plea of nolo contendere, the license review board may, after investigation, waive that disqualification. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2037; Ord. No. 2014-17(14-O-1232), § 5, 5-28-14 ) 
Sec. 10-57. - Grounds for denial. 
In addition to all other grounds for denial, no application for any license under this division shall be granted if the application or the evidence on a hearing before the license review board shows: 
(1)  The applicant is of bad moral character or has a bad reputation in the community or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made. 
(2)  The applicant has had any license issued under the police powers of the city previously suspended or revoked; provided, however, the license review board may waive this subsection if two years have passed since any prior revocation of any license held by the applicant. 
(3)  The applicant for a license to sell alcoholic beverages at a nightclub, other than those nightclubs located within a special entertainment district, does not furnish evidence of adequate parking for a nightclub, as defined by section 10-1, available to the applicant's patrons for the term of the license applied for and within 400 feet of the proposed licensed premises. 
(4)  The applicant, as a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to that business within a five-year period immediately preceding the date the application is heard by the license review board. 
(5)  Any applicant for a retail license is related to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or related to any stockholder of a distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or related to any employee engaged in a management position by any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the civil law. 
(6)  The applicant has been found to have violated the human relations ordinance as set forth in chapter 94 of this Code. 
(7)  That an applicant for renewal that is exempt from the certain distance requirements as provided in section 10-88.1, has failed to provide the police department with a statement from a certified public accountant evidencing that the package store derived less than the percentage established by ordinance of gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(8)  The application does not furnish evidence of adequate parking as defined in this chapter. This parking requirement is in addition to the requirement of subsection (3) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2045; Ord. No. 2001-94, § 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2004-83, § 4, 11-19-04; Ord. No. 2005-40, § 2, 7-12-05) 
Sec. 10-58. - Issuance to nonprofit performing arts theaters, museums, zoological parks, botanical gardens, and city park organizations for sale for consumption on premises. 
(a)  An applicant may be issued a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of any nonprofit performing arts theater having a seating capacity of not less than 175, any nonprofit museum. any nonprofit zoological park, any nonprofit botanical garden, or any park facility, within the city upon meeting all of the following requirements and all other requirements of this chapter dealing with the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  The applicant shall be a nonprofit corporation presenting legitimate indoor live performances or the applicant shall be a nonprofit museum, a nonprofit zoological park, a nonprofit botanical garden, or a city park organization. 
(2)  The performances of any such theater shall be held on a regular basis a minimum of three times per week for a period of 32 weeks per year. 
(3)  The applicant shall be the same group or corporation operating the nonprofit theater or nonprofit museum, nonprofit zoological park, nonprofit botanical garden, or park facility, and shall show that the profits from the sales under any license granted under this section shall be used for no purpose other than the sustaining and promotion of the theater, museum, zoological park, botanical garden, park facility, or the park in which the park facility is located. 
(4)  The applicant shall show by plat the physical delineation of the area in which alcoholic beverages are to be sold. 
(5)  The location of the applicant shall not be within or upon any public property, either federal, state, county or municipal, unless the applicant is a zoological park, botanical garden, or city park organization. 
(6)  The applicant shall be exempt from federal income taxes pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended. 
(b)  The applicant shall pay an annual license fee of $1,000.00, and the fee shall be subject to all other rules and regulations relating to license fees for alcoholic beverages set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  Fees. The bureau of buildings and the department of fire shall each charge a fee of $50.00 for the inspections made to report on the compliance status of structures were [where] alcoholic beverage licenses are requested. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, and notwithstanding the definition of premises contained in section 10-1, the premises of a park facility shall mean any number of the definite closed or portioned-in building(s), including any area or patio immediately adjacent to said building(s), which are located within one city-owned park, and which are managed, operated, and/ or leased by one city park organization pursuant to one or more agreements or leases with the City of Atlanta, and wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed, 
(1)  The area or patio need not be covered, but must be completely enclosed, except for entrances and exits, by a wall, fence, shrubbery or other decorative material no less than 30 inches in height. 
(2)  Where any city park organization has agreements with the City of Atlanta to manage, operate or lease buildings located in more than one city-owned park, the city park organization must hold a separate license for each park. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-2089, 14-2090(4), 19-14.007; Ord. No. 2002-35, § 6, 5-28-02; Ord. No. 2010-58(10-O-1419), § 2, 10-27-10) 
Sec. 10-59. - Right of licensee for sale by the drink; separate licenses required for package sales and sales for on-premises consumption. 
(a)  A licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensee's premises shall have the right to serve malt beverages or wine or allow the consumption of malt beverages or wine on the licensee's premises during the same hours as are permitted under this article for the serving of distilled spirits by the drink. 
A licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensee's premises shall have the right to serve malt beverages or wine to patrons seated in an outdoor dining area as part of the operation of a sidewalk café. A licensee operating a sidewalk café shall not have the right to serve malt beverages or wine to any person who is not seated, at a table, in a chair provided by the licensee. 
A licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensee's premises shall have the ability to allow patrons or members to bring in and consume alcoholic beverages on the premises in the manner authorized by this section. 
(b)  Licensees for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, to allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises and for the sale of malt beverages by the drink, shall not permit the sale of distilled spirits by the bottle or package. These licensees shall have the right to sell wines, champagnes or malt beverages to the public by the bottle or package for consumption on the premises without the issuance of a separate retail license therefor. 
A licensee for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink shall have the right to allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages by patrons seated in an outdoor dining area as part of the operation of a sidewalk café. Bottles of beer and wine shall only be transported into outdoor dining areas and/or opened in outdoor dining areas by a licensee's working employees as part of their work duties. A licensee operating a sidewalk café shall not have the right to allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any person who is not seated, at a table, in a chair provided by the licensee. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter to the contrary, a licensee of a Brewpub holding a valid license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be required to have an additional and separate license in order to engage in the retail sale of beer for off premises consumption. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2133; Ord. No. 2001-88, §§ 3, 4, 11-28-01; Ord. No. 2014-17(14-O-1232), § 6, 5-28-14 ; Ord. No. 2016-18(16-O-1277) , § 3, 6-15-16) 
Sec. 10-60. - Annual license fee; refunds. 
(a)  The annual license fee for each classification of license under this division shall be as follows: 
Fees Effective Beginning in the Year 2010 
(1)  Wine. 
a.  Manufacturer of wine ..... $2,250.00 
b.  Wholesaler, importer and/or broker of wine ..... 2,000.00 
c.  Retail dealer in wine to be consumed on or off the premises of the dealer, which shall be authorized to conduct wine tasting events at any time during the year ..... 2,500.00 
d.  Retail dealer in wine to be consumed off the premises of the dealer only ..... 2,500.00 
e.  Tasting room for retail dealer in wine and wine to be consumed on the premises ..... 2,500.00 
f.  Tasting room for retail dealer in wine and wine to be consumed on the premises which sells wine by the package on Sunday ..... 3,750.00 
(2)  Malt beverages. 
a.  Brewer or manufacturer of beer ..... $5,000.00 
b.  Wholesaler, importer, and/or broker of beer ..... 2,000.00 
c.  Retail dealer of beer to be consumed on or off the premises of the dealer ..... 2,500.00 
d.  Retail dealer in beer to be consumed off the premises of the dealer only ..... 2,500.00 
(3)  Distilled spirits. 
a.  Manufacturer ..... $5,000.00 
b.  Manufacturer that manufactures, distills or blends liquors made whole from products raised in the state ..... 5,000.00 
c.  Wholesaler ..... 5,000.00 
d.  Retail sale in package form ..... 4,500.00 
Plus an amount equal to one percent of the gross sales of the previous year in excess of $200,000.00, not to exceed a maximum license fee of $5,000.00 per annum. 
1.  In determining the license fee to be paid by any dealer in distilled spirits, each individual store or retail outlet shall be considered singly, and the license fee fixed shall be determined by sales made at each individual store. 
2.  Annual sales for the purpose of determining the license fee to be paid shall be the sales made by the store or outlet the previous 12 months, except that all new stores or licenses shall, for the first year, pay $3,000.00 per annum. 
(4)  Consumption on the premises of distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages. 
a.  Initial license ..... $5,000.00 
b.  Additional facility licenses, each ..... 5,000.00 
1.  Additional licenses shall be required for all additional facilities such as lounges, restaurants, nightclubs, patios or other areas located within the same building. 
2.  All restaurant patios and outdoor or open air eating areas which are immediately adjacent to restaurants shall be exempt from the additional facility license fee. 
3.  The licensee shall not provide any electronically amplified music or live entertainment on any patio, deck or in any other outdoor or open eating or drinking areas in which the licensed premises are within 500 feet of any area zoned for single-family residences. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no licensee shall provide any electronically amplified music or live entertainment on any patio, deck or in any other outdoor or open eating or drinking areas after 12:00 midnight. 
4.  All such licensees shall be required to comply with the requirements as to limitations on noise levels established by ordinance. 
(5)  Retail of beer or wine consumption off the premises. 
a.  Initial license ..... 2,500.00 
b.  Leased locations as additional facilities, each license ..... 2,250.00 
Additional licenses shall be required for each leased location located within a licensed premise, such as the Sweet Auburn Curb Market located at 209 Edgewood Avenue. In no event, however, shall there be no more than four additional facilities licenses at any location licensed for off premises consumption. Provided further, however, that the entire licensed location shall derive less than five percent of its gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Additional licenses shall be required for each leased location located within a licensed premise, such as the Sweet Auburn Curb Market located at 209 Edgewood Avenue. In no event, however, shall there be no more than four additional facilities licenses at any location licensed for off premises consumption. Provided further, however, that the entire licensed location shall derive less than five percent of its gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  If the licensee is denied a license by the state, upon the proof of that refusal, the licensee shall be entitled to a refund of the license fee paid to the city, less a charge of $25.00 to cover clerical cost of granting the license. If for any reason, the application for a city license is not approved, the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of the license fee pre-paid with the submission of the application, without interest. The refund may be made by the chief financial officer without the necessity of any action by the council. 
(c)  No license shall be issued for less than a calendar year, and if a license is revoked or surrendered before the expiration of a calendar year, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund. 
(d)  A licensee may be entitled to a refund of the license fee paid to the city if the licensed business cannot continue to be operated due to (i) destruction by fire or an act of God, (ii) death of the licensee, or (iii) any action taken by a governmental entity beyond the licensee's control. A refund shall not be granted if the license is revoked or suspended by resolution, approve or deny such refund. If a refund is approved by the council, the refund shall be calculated as follows: 
(1)  Three-fourths of the license fee if the licensee goes out of business during the first quarter of the calendar year. 
(2)  One-half of the license fee if the licensee goes out of business during the second quarter of the calendar year. 
(3)  One-fourth of the license fee if the licensee goes out of business during the third quarter of the calendar year. 
(4)  No refund if the licensee goes out of business during the fourth quarter of the calendar year. 
(e)  If for any reason, the issuance of a license is delayed so as to entitle the applicant to pay a prorated portion of the license fee for the year when the applicant has already pre-paid with submission of the application the full year's license fee; the city shall refund any overpayment of license fees to the licensee within 30 days after the license is issued. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-2051, 19-14.006; Ord. No. 1998-94, § 1, 11-20-98; Ord. No. 1999-48, § 3, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 1999-49, § 1, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 2000-3, § 1, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 2000-43, § 1, 7-6-00; Ord. No. 2002-12, § 1, 3-5-02; Ord. No. 2002-89, § 2, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 2004-61, § 4, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 2007-61(07-O-1900), § 2, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 2010-31(10-O-0900), § 1, 6-30-10, eff. 7-1-10; Ord. No. 2010-50(10-O-1407), § 1, 9-16-10; Ord. No. 2014-17(14-O-1232), § 7, 5-28-14 ) 
State Law reference— Restrictions on license fees, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-50, 3-5-43. 
Sec. 10-61. - Date for payment of license fees; prorated fees. 
All annual license fees under this division shall be paid in advance by money order, certified check or cashier's check with submission of the renewal application on or before January 1 of each year. Any person granted a new license under this division during a calendar year shall pay the full license fee without proration by money order, certified check or cashier's check with submission of the application for a new license, except that the fee for a new license granted after June 30 in any calendar year shall be 50 percent of the annual license fees for the remainder of that calendar year. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2055; Ord. No. 2004-61, § 2, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 10-62. - Supplemental requirements for sale of distilled spirits by the drink for on-premises consumption. 
No license for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink shall issue to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a restaurant, hotel, private club, lounge, nightclub, convention center, bar, brewpub, nonprofit performing arts theater, nonprofit museum, nonprofit zoological park, nonprofit botanical garden, auditorium, sports coliseum, suite hotel, open air café, government center, tasting room, sidewalk café, continuing education center, courtyard market or outdoor market. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2056; Ord. No. 2001-88, § 5, 11-28-01; Ord. No. 2005-56, § 2, 9-27-05; Ord. No. 2010-27(10-O-0780), § 3, 6-16-10; Ord. No. 2014-17(14-O-1232), § 8, 5-28-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-18(15-O-1158), § 6, 5-13-15 ; Ord. No. 2017-25(17-O-1194), § 7, 5-15-17 ) 
Sec. 10-63. - Wholesale licensees prohibited from interest in other licenses. 
No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold any other license under this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2131) 
Sec. 10-64. - Limitation on number of licenses within family. 
(a)  Sale of distilled spirits in package at retail. 
(1)  No application for a license to sell distilled spirits in the package at retail shall be granted when the person applying for the license and all members of that person's family already hold two interests in a license to sell distilled spirits by the package at retail. 
(2)  No person or member of the person's family shall own, hold or control any interest in more than two licenses to engage in the business of selling distilled spirits by the package at retail. 
(b)  Interest in license. 
(1)  As used in this section, an interest in a license shall be deemed to exist if the person involved is the outright owner of the license; a co-owner of the license; a partner in a partnership which owns all or any part of a license; a stockholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain which owns all or any part of a license; an owner or a lessor, sublessor or stockholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain owning or leasing any real estate which is occupied by a retail liquor store or shares in any of the income or corpus of any trust fund or estate having any interest in a retail liquor store. However, a stockholder shall not be deemed to have an interest in a retail liquor store where the stockholder owns stock in a motel or hotel having 200 or more rooms with a retail liquor store located on the premises of that motel or hotel and owned by that motel or hotel. Notwithstanding any of the other part of this section, no one person shall be deemed to have more than one interest in any one license. 
(2)  An interest in a license shall be deemed to exist in the settlor or grantor in any trust instrument where all or any part of the corpus of the trust is the land on which located or the business of any retail package liquor store and where any beneficiary, either direct or indirect, is related in any manner to the settlor. This subsection shall not apply to any trust in existence at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this subsection derives. 
(c)  Statements on license application. All applications for licenses, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to any and all interests as defined in subsection (b) of this section in retail liquor stores. This shall include the following: 
(1)  The names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the business of selling at retail packaged liquor, together with any interest each person or any member of such person's immediate family has in any other retail liquor store; 
(2)  The ownership of the land and building where that retail business is operated; 
(3)  The amount of rental paid for the land and building and the manner in which determined and to whom and at what intervals it is paid; 
(4)  The names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor or sublessor of that land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in and to the land and building on and in which the retail liquor store is located; and 
(5)  Any other information called for by the license review board. 
(d)  Change in relationship. Any change in any relationship must be filed when made with the department of police, and failure to so file within 30 days after that change is made shall be grounds for cancellation by the council. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2047) 
Sec. 10-65. - Interest in license by employee of department of police. 
It shall be unlawful for any full-time employee of the department of police or the employee's spouse or minor children to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest, as defined in section 10-64, in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2048; Ord. No. 2014-17(14-O-1232), § 9, 5-28-14 ) 
Sec. 10-66. - Public hearing on application; approval by mayor. 
(a)  All applications for licenses under this division shall be acted upon by the license review board, after a public hearing, after advertisement as required in this division. The recommendation of the license review board shall be reported to the mayor for action thereby. No license shall be issued until it has been approved by the mayor. 
(b)  With the exception of those applications made in accordance with sections 10-126 and 10-127 of this chapter, the mayor shall deny, grant, or remand to the license review board, any alcoholic beverage license application within 60 calendar days of receipt of a recommendation from the license review board as well as each of the following: 1) a letter issued by the Atlanta Department of Fire Rescue confirming that the proposed licensed premises meets the requirements of the City of Atlanta Fire Prevention Code, according to plans which were submitted to and approved by the City of Atlanta Fire Marshall; 2) a notice issued by the board of health or health department of the county in which the proposed licensed premises is located signifying the compliance of the proposed licensed premises with the rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources; and 3) a letter issued by the City of Atlanta Department of Community Development, Bureau of Buildings setting forth that the proposed licensed premises has been approved to operate its proposed business. With the exception of those applications made in accordance with sections 10-126 and 10-127 of this chapter, if the mayor does not receive the documentation described in sections (1), (2), and (3) of this subsection within six months of the mayor's receipt of the recommendation from the license review board, the alcoholic beverage license application shall expire without the necessity of any further action of the license review board, and no refund of any application fees shall be made to the applicant. Upon review of the license review board's recommendation and/or the record created during the license review board hearing, if the mayor determines there exists the need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application back to the license review board for further hearing. Additionally, where the mayor determines by reason of previously granted license that the application is for a location which may not comply with 10-88.1(a), the mayor shall remand the license application back to the license review board for further hearing on whether the proposed licensed location complies with 10-88.1(a). In remanding the application back to the license review board, the mayor shall provide written instructions to the license review board and the license and permit unit of the city's police department identifying specific issues and/or matters the mayor requires the license review board to conduct further hearing upon. An alcoholic beverage license applicant shall be provided with a five-day written notice stating the specific issues and/or matters to be addressed on remand, along with the place, date and time of the remand hearing. All applications remanded to the license review board shall be scheduled for further hearing before the license review board no later than 30 days after the date of remand. If the mayor does not make a decision to grant or deny an application within the 60 calendar days provided, and does not choose to remand the application to the license review board, the application shall be approved or denied wherein the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. A decision by the mayor to deny an application may be appealed via Certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(c)  For those applications made in accordance with sections 10-126 and 10-127 of this chapter, the mayor shall deny, grant, or remand to the license review board, any alcoholic beverage license application within 14 calendar days of receipt of a recommendation from the license review board as well as the documentation described in 10-66(b)(1)—(3). Upon review of the license review board's recommendation and/or the record created during the license review board hearing, if the mayor determines there exists the need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application back to the license review board for further hearing. In remanding the application back to the license review board, the mayor shall provide written instructions to the license review board and the license and permit unit of the city's police department identifying specific issues and/or matters the mayor requires the license review board to conduct further hearing upon. An alcoholic beverage license applicant shall be provided with a five-day written notice stating the specific issues and/or matters to be addressed on remand, along with the place, date and time of the remand hearing. All applications remanded to the license review board shall be scheduled for further hearing before the license review board no later than 30 days after the date of remand. If the mayor does not make a decision to grant or deny an application within the 14 calendar days provided, and does not choose to remand the application to the license review board, the application shall be approved or denied wherein the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. A decision by the mayor to deny an application made in accordance with sections to 10-126 or 10-127 may be appealed via Certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(d)  The license and permits unit of the Atlanta Police Department shall make the final agendas for all license review board hearings regarding annual licenses to sell alcohol available for public notice by the close of business on the day that is one week prior to the date of each hearing. Such agendas shall be made available to the public at the reception area of the offices of the license and permits unit of the Atlanta Police Department and shall be on file with the municipal clerk's office. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2049; Ord. No. 1999-82, § 1, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 2002-1, §§ 1, 2, 1-29-02; Ord. No. 2008-80(08-O-1676), §§ 1—3, 11-6-08; Ord. No. 2012-43(12-O-1072), § 1, 9-26-12; Ord. No. 2017-34(17-O-1326), § 1, 6-28-17 ) 
Sec. 10-67. - Time limit for obtaining license after approval of application. 
Once a license application has been approved by the mayor, the license shall be issued within 30 days. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2050; Ord. No. 2004-61, § 3, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 10-68. - Completion of proposed licensed premises. 
If a building in which a retailer of alcoholic beverages intends to operate under this article is, at the time of the application for a license, not in existence or not yet completed, a license may be issued for the location, provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other sections of this article. No sales or consumption shall be allowed in the establishment until it has been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all the other sections of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2052; Ord. No. 2014-17(14-O-1232), § 10, 5-28-14 ) 
Sec. 10-69. - Time limit for commencement of business in licensed establishment; forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this division must, within nine months after the issuance of the license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within the nine-month period shall serve as automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. 
(b)  Any holder of a license under this division who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the license but who shall for a period of nine consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the license shall, upon completion of the nine months, automatically forfeit the license, which license shall, by virtue of the failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity of any further action of the license review board or the council. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2054) 
Sec. 10-70. - License prohibited for package sales in connection with designated establishments. 
No retail license for the sale of distilled spirits by the package shall be allowed in or in connection with any restaurant, cafe or eating place or in the same room where a bar is maintained for the dispensing and sale of malt beverages and wine by the drink. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2058) 
Sec. 10-71. - Display of name of licensee and license number. 
Each licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package at retail under this division shall have printed on the front window of the licensed premises the name of the licensee, together with the inscription, "City Retail License No. _____," in uniform letters not less than four inches in height. However, if a licensee so desires, the licensee may have the licensee's name displayed on the inside of the window in neon or other electric lights. The sign shall be parallel with the window and shall not extend more than six inches from the window. A neon sign may also be constructed along the borderline or edge of the front window inside the glass. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2138) 
Sec. 10-72. - Clear view of entrance and interior of licensed premises; lighting; sale to public by private clubs. 
(a)  No licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package shall operate unless the front entrance to the licensed premises is clearly visible from the public street; provided however, this shall not apply where the licensee is a hotel, motel, private club or is located in a shopping center or multiple-story business building. 
(b)  No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing preventing a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or upon the doors of any retail store for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of the store. Each store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(c)  Private clubs which have been granted licenses under this division to sell distilled spirits at retail by the package shall not have an outside or street entrance for the retail outlet to sell to the general public and shall not make any sales to any member of the general public who is not a member of the private club. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2129) 
Sec. 10-73. - Revocation of other licenses. 
Whenever the city shall revoke a licensee's license to sell alcoholic beverages all other city licenses issued to such licensee to sell alcoholic beverages shall thereupon be subject to revocation. Said licensee shall thereupon be entitled to the same hearing procedures as set forth in section 10-109(c). The license review board shall conduct the hearings and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the report, may revoke the licenses. 
(Ord. No. 2001-60, § 2, 8-13-01; Ord. No. 2014-17(14-O-1232), § 11, 5-28-14 ) 
Sec. 10-74. - Size limitations on the sales of malt beverages by the package. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to sell on the licensed premises less than 14 ounces of malt beverage within a single transaction, unless they have a malt beverage license for consumption on the premises, or unless such sale is in conjunction with the package sale of additional malt beverage alcohol totaling not less than 14 ounces. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall be considered due cause to deny, suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew any license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-79, § 1, 11-13-01) 
Editor's note— Section 10-74 shall apply to all new licenses issued pursuant to chapter 10 by the city after the enactment of this section, as well as to all licenses that are renewed for the calendar year 2002 and subsequent years pursuant to chapter 10. 
Sec. 10-75. - Applications after change in ownership or recent annexation; temporary license authorized; conditions of issuance. 
(1)  Persons or entities making alcoholic beverage license applications pursuant to Chapter 10 because of a change in ownership of the retail licensed establishment; or persons or entities operating establishments which have been annexed into the City of Atlanta, which were properly licensed by their county and State of Georgia for the sale of alcoholic beverages at the time of their annexation, and are making alcoholic beverage license applications pursuant to chapter 10 within 60 days of the effective date of annexation, after properly filing all required documents, may be authorized by the chief of police to operate pursuant to a temporary license. Before any such temporary license may be issued, the applicant must have filed with the licenses and permits unit of the police department the following documents and materials under the conditions indicated: 
(a)  All documents required by the police department and pursuant to the Code for obtaining a license appropriate to the type business for which application is made, including payment by certified check, money order or cashier's check of the license fee at the time of submission of the license application. 
(b)  A written request, on forms to be provided by the licenses and permits unit of the police department, by the applicant for a temporary license to the chief of police. Said forms shall be submitted by the applicant to the licenses and permits unit of the police department who will in turn forward it to the chief of police. 
(c)  The applicant, licensee and agent for the temporary license must be identical to the applicant, licensee and agent indicated on the related annual alcoholic beverage license application. 
(d)  A written, notarized statement, on forms to be provided by the licenses and permits unit of the police department, indicating that the applicant, temporary licensee and agent waive any and all rights available to them to appeal the decision by the chief of police to deny their application for a temporary license or to revoke a temporary license that has been issued to them, and that the applicant, temporary licensee and agent agree to all conditions set forth in this section. As used in this section, "rights to appeal" shall include, but not be limited to, injunctive relief, writ of certiorari, writ of mandamus, writ of prohibition, or any court action which relates in any way to said decision(s). 
(e)  When preliminary records checks have been completed, determined and judgments made, and the chief of police is satisfied that the location for the proposed license substantially complies with the provisions of the Code authorizing such license in the city, a temporary license may be issued if deemed appropriate by the chief of police. 
(f)  The duration of any temporary license issued shall not exceed 120 days. 
(g)  A temporary license shall not be issued to any entity, real or artificial, who owes the city any monies at the time a temporary license is sought. 
(h)  There shall be assessed and paid by cashiers check, money order or certified check a non-refundable temporary license fee of $750.00. This fee shall be in addition to all other fees required by the Code. 
(i)  The issuance and duration of any temporary license pursuant to the conditions stated in this section is within the sole discretion of the chief of police and such temporary license may be revoked by the chief of police at any time without notice, cause, hearing or refund of any portion of the temporary license fee. 
(j)  The issuance of the temporary license pursuant to the above conditions does not eliminate or alter in any way the requirement that the applicant must otherwise follow the application process provided in section 10-48 of this Code. 
(2)  There shall be no vested right to, or protectable property interest in, the issuance of a temporary license as provided for in this section, or to the issuance of any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(3)  The grant, denial or revocation of a temporary license under the provisions of this section shall not affect or have any bearing upon the grant or denial of an annual license. 
(4)  During any one calendar year, there shall be not more than one temporary license granted for any single retail licensed establishment, as such temporary licenses are provided for in this section. 
(5)  With the exception of any retail licensed establishment seeking a temporary license due to being annexed in to the City of Atlanta pursuant to this section, no temporary license shall be granted to any retail licensed establishment that is exempt from the distance requirements contained in sections 10-88, 10-88.1 of the Code. 
(6)  The commander of the licenses and permits unit, or his designee, shall notify the commissioner of the DPDNC, or his designee, of the receipt of an application of a temporary license within three days. Within three days after the commissioner of the DPDNC, or his designee, receives such information, he shall notify the appropriate city councilmembers (district and at-large) and the chairperson and vice chairperson of the NPU. Such notification shall also include the name of the applicant and the address of the proposed retailed license establishment to receive the temporary license provided for in the section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-77, § 1, 10-22-04; Ord. No. 2015-53(15-O-1483), § 1, 11-11-15 ) 
Secs. 10-76—10-85. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Location Restrictions[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Location restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 

Sec. 10-86. - Issuance of license limited to designated areas. 
(a)  Manufacturer's license. No manufacturer's license shall be issued to a manufacturer engaged in distilling or blending alcoholic beverages except where that business is to be located in the area of the city zoned for industrial uses; provided, however, that a location which operates as a "microbrewery" or as a "microdistillery" as defined in City Code section 10-1 may be located in an area of the city zoned for commercial or mixed uses. This provision shall not apply to those locations, which operate as "brewpubs" as defined in City Code section 10-1, "Farm Wineries" as defined by state law, "Distillers" as defined by state law, and "Brewers" as defined by state law where such Distillers and Brewers are located on the same tract or parcel as a Courtyard Market as defined in City Code section 10-1, as long as such locations are in compliance with all requirements set forth in the City of Atlanta Zoning Code regarding eating and drinking establishments and any other applicable provisions of the City Code. 
(b)  Wholesaler's license. No license shall be issued to a wholesaler of alcoholic beverages except where the wholesale business is to be located in the area of the city which is zoned for business purposes. 
(c)  Packaged malt or vinous liquors. No license to engage in the retail sale of malt or vinous liquors in package form shall be issued to any person for the operation of that business except on premises upon which the retail sale of such beverages is permitted under the provisions of sections 10-88 and 10-88.1 of the 1982 City of Atlanta Zoning Ordinance as amended. 
(d)  On premises consumption. No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be issued unless the location has been zoned commercial, industrial, or residential apartment as long as such location is in compliance with the City of Atlanta Zoning Code, or the location is in use as a business under a special use permit, provided that: 
(1)  This subsection shall not apply to private clubs. 
(2)  Licenses for the sale of malt beverages or wine by the drink may be issued to restaurants within 100 yards of a public park which is within a National Register historic district, if such restaurants are located in areas which have been rezoned from commercial uses within the 24 months immediately preceding application. 
(3)  Subject to approval of the license review board, nonprofit charitable organizations may sell alcoholic beverages at locations zoned residential during fundraising events that do not exceed three consecutive days in length. 
(e)  Packaged spirituous liquors. No license to engage in the retail sale of spirituous liquors in package form shall be issued to any person for the operation of that business except on premises upon which the retail sale of such beverages is permitted under the provisions of sections 10-88 and 10-88.1 of the 1982 City of Atlanta Zoning Ordinance as amended. 
(f)  Exemption. Those licensed locations, for sale of packaged malt or vinous liquors or sale of alcohol for on-premises consumption existing on the date of passage of the ordinance from which this subsection derives that are respectively identified in subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall, on the date of the passage of such ordinance, be exempted from compliance therewith; provided, however, that such exemptions shall not be construed to apply to adult entertainment establishments as defined by part 16. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2035; Ord. No. 1995-43, §§ 2, 3, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 1998-75, § 1, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 1999-6, §§ 2, 3, 1-27-99; Ord. No. 2014-17(14-O-1232), § 12, 5-28-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-18(15-O-1158), § 2, 5-13-15 ; Ord. No. 2017-25(17-O-1194), § 4, 5-15-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-87(17-O-1787), § 2, 12-13-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-28(18-O-1394), § 2, 7-11-18 ) 
Sec. 10-87. - Issuance of license prohibited at locations permitted as shooting galleries. 
No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages within the City of Atlanta shall be issued for any location for which a permit to operate a shooting gallery has been issued by the city. 
( Ord. No. 2016-09(16-O-1135), 1, 4-27-16 ) 
Sec. 10-88. - Distances of establishments from residences, schools, churches, libraries, hospitals and other public places. 
(a)  No license hereunder shall be issued for any location where alcoholic beverages are sold whose proposed boundary line is within 300 feet of any private residence. The distance for the purpose of this section, notwithstanding the definition of distance contained in section 10-1, shall be measured by straight line from the closest point of the property line of the proposed site where alcoholic beverages are sold to the nearest point of any residential building, provided, however, that when the applicant is located within a shopping center containing a minimum of 80,000 square feet the distance from any private residence shall be reduced to 150 feet. 
(b)  No license shall be issued hereunder where the applicant's place of business where alcoholic beverages are to be sold is located within 300 feet of a branch of the Atlanta Public Library or within 500 feet of any church, or public park or within 300 feet of any private hospital, or mental health care facility, or public hospital which is owned and operated by any government agency or authority and used for hospitalization, or within 600 feet of a school ground or college campus, or any youth serving organization or any recreational facility that primarily serves school children under 18 years of age, or within 300 feet of any tattoo establishment as defined in section 30-1271, except that the restrictions of this section shall not apply to hotels of 50 rooms or more which have been in continuous operation for a period of at least five years immediately prior to April 5, 1938, or to the operator of a restaurant applying for a license for the sale and consumption by the drink of spirituous liquors where the operator held a license authorizing the sale and consumption by the drink of either malt beverages or vinous liquors at that restaurant on October 3, 1966, and has maintained the license in good standing from that time until the time of the application hereunder; provided further, that alcoholic beverage establishments which are located within a shopping center having 30,000 square feet or more and in which a branch of the Atlanta Public Library is also located shall not be required to comply with the above-described distance requirement for a branch of the Atlanta Public Library; provided further with regard to applications for licenses to sell alcoholic beverage for consumption on the premises, no distance requirements as to churches shall apply to churches which are located in commercial buildings or that move into existing commercial buildings in areas zoned for commercial purpose, and when such churches are within 300 feet of an existing establishment with a license to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(c)  The wholesaler's license for the sale of alcoholic beverages may be issued for a location within the above-prescribed distances of a private residence or residences, if the residence or residences are situated on property which is zoned for commercial or industrial use under the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(d)  The distance requirements and exemptions set forth in this section shall no longer apply to package stores which must meet the distance requirements set forth in section 10-88.1; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to locations licensed prior to the effective date of this section or to renewals thereof. The distance requirements and exemptions set forth in this section shall not apply to wine specialty shops which must meet the distance requirements set forth in subsection 10-88.1(e); city food markets which must meet the distance requirements set forth in subsection 10-88.1(f); or specialty food shops which must meet the distance requirements set forth in subsection 10-88.1(g). 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to licenses issued hereunder to continuing education centers, restaurants or sidewalk cafés, as defined in section 10-1, for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption; provided, however, that in order for a restaurant or sidewalk café to come within this exemption it shall provide no entertainment, as defined in section 10-1, unless it is located either: 
(i)  Within a mixed-use development (as that term is defined in section 1629.001(24)) that has zoning approval for at least 50,000 square feet of retail space, 100,000 square feet of office space and 300 residential units; or 
(ii)  Within a multi-building complex, which, for purposes of this code section, shall mean a group of buildings planned, developed and managed as a unit which is comprised of at least 50,000 square feet of retail shopping and/or restaurant space, at least 50,000 square feet of institutional office space; at least 100,000 square feet of space used for research and education, and at least 100,000 square feet of conference center space, as long as such multi-building complex is located on a college campus. Under no circumstances may music and/or live entertainment be provided in an outdoor dining area; or 
(iii)  Within a mixed-use development (as that term is defined in section 1629.001(24)), comprised of not less than 99,000 total square feet, that has zoning approval for at least 2,000 square feet of retail space, 3,000 square feet of office space and at least 70 residential units, which is located within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Atlanta Downtown Development Authority and is also located within an Urban Enterprise Zone created by the city. 
(f)  Upon written request by a licensee operating a restaurant or sidewalk café that satisfies the requirements of section 10-88(e)(i) or 10-88(e)(iii), the City of Atlanta Mayor shall authorize such Licensee to provide entertainment, as defined in section 10-1, upon receipt of confirmation from the City of Atlanta Zoning Division that the mixed-use development has zoning approval as required by this section. As used in this section, "zoning approval" shall mean the zoning classification assigned to the mixed-use development would allow development of the minimum square footage set forth in section 10-88(e)(i) or section 10-88(e)(iii); however, zoning approval does not require actual development of the minimum square footage of retail space, office space, or residential units. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2038; Ord. No. 1995-43, § 4, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 2001-88, § 6, 11-28-01; Ord. No. 2004-42, § 1, 7-14-04; Ord. No. 2004-46, § 5, 7-22-04; Ord. No. 2005-08, § 1, 2-14-05; Ord. No. 2005-56, § 3, 9-27-05; Ord. No. 2005-82, § 1, 11-22-05; Ord. No. 2006-87, § 5, 12-13-06; Ord. No. 2009-12 (08-O-0843), § 2, 3-25-09; Ord. No. 2012-19(12-O-0484), § 1, 5-16-12; Ord. No. 2013-60(13-O-1379), § 2, 11-27-13 ) 
Sec. 10-88.1. - Package stores. 
(a)  No package store, as defined in section 10-1, shall be located within 1,500 feet of any other package store. This distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. An application for a renewal license to sell distilled spirits by the package shall not be subject to this restriction if the location associated with such application is one for which a license to sell distilled spirits by the package has been issued prior to July 1, 1997. An application for a renewal license to sell beer and/or wine by the package shall not be subject to this restriction if the location associated with such application is one for which a license to sell beer and/or wine by the package has been issued prior to July 1, 1997. Nor shall the restriction of this subsection apply to any location for which a new application to sell distilled spirits by the package has been filed with the police department if the sale of distilled spirits by the package was lawful at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. Nor shall the restriction of this subsection apply to any location for which a new application to sell beer and/or wine by the package has been filed with the police department if the sale of beer and/or wine by the package was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(1)  This restriction shall not apply to: 
a.  Any hotel licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
b.  A retail grocery supermarket or pharmacy: 
i.  Which contains an interior floor area of 14,000 square feet or more; and 
ii.  In which not more than five percent of the interior floor area of such store is devoted to the display of beer and/or wine products for retail sale; and 
iii.  Which derives less than eight percent of its gross receipts from the sale of beer and/or wine. 
(2)  Any store which is construed to be a package store pursuant to this chapter and which sells beer and/or wine, but not distilled spirits, shall not be required to meet the 1,500 feet distance requirement between package stores, as set forth above, in regard to its distance between a retail grocery supermarket or pharmacy selling beer and/or wine, but not distilled spirits, which contains an interior floor area of 14,000 square feet or more and which is already in existence and is located in either a shopping center, which, for purposes of this section and notwithstanding the definition of a "shopping and retail entertainment center" as that phrase is defined in section 10-1, is comprised of 45,000 square feet or more, which contains at least three or more commercial establishments planned, developed and managed as a unit, which provides common on-site parking facilities; or which is located in a mixed-use development (as that term is defined in section 16-29.001(24)) comprised of 45,000 square feet or more, if such package store will be located within such shopping center or mixed-use development as defined herein. 
Any other package store seeking to obtain a license in a shopping center or mixed-use development, as defined above, in which a package store other than a retail grocery supermarket or pharmacy is located shall adhere to the 1,500 feet distance requirement between package stores as set forth above. Distance requirements contained in this chapter between all other package stores shall remain in effect. 
Pursuant to this provision, any package store seeking to obtain a license to sell either beer, wine, and/or distilled spirits in either a shopping center or mixed use development, as such terms are defined above, in which is already located a retail grocery supermarket or pharmacy which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the package, and also in which Is already located any other store which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the package shall be required to meet the 1,500 feet distance requirement set forth above as to each of these existing stores. However, this provision shall not affect any locations within either an existing shopping center or mixed-use development for which a valid license to sell alcoholic beverages was in effect on the date this section became effective. 
(b)  No package store, as defined in section 10-1, shall be located within the following distances of the specified other uses: 
(1)  From any structures in residential use, 600 feet. 
(2)  From any public or private school, 600 feet. 
(3)  From any public or private park or recreation facility, 600 feet. 
(4)  From any public library branch, 600 feet. 
(5)  From any church or similar place of religious worship, 250 feet. 
(6)  From any public or private hospital or mental health care facility, 600 feet. 
(7)  From any child care or day care facility, 600 feet. 
The distance in subsection (b)(1)—(7), notwithstanding the definition of distance contained in section 10-1, shall be measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of the site proposed to be occupied by the package store to the closest property line of any use identified above. 
Package stores that derive less than five percent of their gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be exempt from the distance requirements set forth in subsection (b)(1)—(7) above. 
In order to be exempt from the distance requirements set forth in subsection (b)(1)—(7) above, an applicant for a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the package which is not a wine specialty shop or a City Food Market, is required to file with the police department a sworn statement stating that it is the applicant's belief that the subject package store will derive less than five percent of the package store's gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. This statement shall accompany the original application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the package. 
In order to obtain exempt status when renewing a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the package, the applicant for renewal must provide the police department with a statement from a certified public accountant that proves that during the preceding year, the package store did in fact derive less than five percent of its gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purposes of this section, revenue derived from the sale of lottery tickets or related games of chance shall not be calculated when determining gross receipts. 
The failure of an applicant for renewal to provide the police department with a statement from a certified public accountant evidencing that the package store derived less than the percentage established by ordinance of gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages, shall result in the denial of a renewed license. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in section 10-113, a location licensed for the retail sale of packaged alcoholic beverages on or before May 6, 1997 shall not be required to comply with the distance requirements set forth in subsection (b)(1)—(7) above provided that such location is not expanded or enlarged. 
(d)  Applicants for a package store license shall include with their application, a plat of survey prepared and sealed by a surveyor registered in the state certifying that all of the locational requirements listed above in subsection (a) have been met. Such applications shall be reviewed by the bureau of buildings for compliance with all distance requirements. 
(e)  No wine specialty shop, as defined in section 10-1, shall be located within the following distances of the specified other uses: 
(1)  From any other wine specialty shop, 600 feet as measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 
(2)  From any public or private school, 600 feet. 
(3)  From any public or private park or recreation facility, 600 feet. 
(4)  From any public library branch, 600 feet. 
(5)  From any church or similar place of religious worship, 250 feet. 
(6)  From any public or private hospital or mental health care facility, 600 feet. 
(7)  From any child care or day care facility, 600 feet. 
The distance in subsection (e)(2)—(7), notwithstanding the definition of distance contained in section 10-1, shall be measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of the site proposed to be occupied by the wine specialty shop package store to the closest property line of any use identified above. 
(f)  No city food market, as defined in section 10-1, shall be located within the following distance, as defined in section 10-1, of the following specified other uses: 
(1)  From any other city food market, 600 feet. 
(2)  From any public or private school, 300 feet. 
(3)  From any public or private park or recreation facility, 300 feet. 
(4)  From any public library branch, 300 feet. 
(5)  From any church or similar place of religious worship, 300 feet. 
(6)  From any public or private hospital or mental health care facility, 300 feet. 
(7)  From any child care or day care facility, 300 feet. 
(g)  No specialty food shop, as defined in section 10-1, shall be located within the following distances, as defined in section 10-1, of the following specified other uses: 
(1)  From any other specialty food shop, 600 feet. 
(2)  From any public or private school, 300 feet. 
(3)  From any public library branch, 300 feet. 
(4)  From any public or private park or recreation facility, 300 feet. 
(5)  From any church or similar place of religious worship, 250 feet. 
(6)  From any public or private hospital or mental health care facility, 300 feet. 
(7)  From any child care or day care facility, 300 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1995-43, § 5, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 1997-25, §§ 1, 2, 5-8-97; Ord. No. 1998-77, §§ 1—3, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 1999-64, § 3, 9-16-99; Ord. No. 2001-43, § 1, 6-13-01; Ord. No. 2001-90, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2001-94, § 1, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2004-46, §§ 3, 4, 7-22-04; Ord. No. 2005-82, §§ 2, 3, 11-22-05; Ord. No. 2006-87, §§ 3, 4, 12-13-06; Ord. No. 2007-37(07-O-1240), § 1, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 2009-12 (08-O-0843), § 3, 3-25-09) 
Editor's note— Sections 4 and 5 of Ord. No. 1998-77, approved on October 27, 1998, read as follows: "All renewal licenses to sell alcoholic beverages by the package for the year 1998 shall be subject to the usual annual license fees set forth in the Code of Ordinances. All licenses to sell alcoholic beverages by the package issued by the City for the year 1998 shall expire on December 31, 1998 and shall be subject to existing renewal requirements." 
Sec. 10-89. - Additional distance requirements for adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult entertainment establishment means establishment as defined in section 16-29.001(3)(e) and also includes any establishment which has nude or seminude dancing or striptease performances, whether these occur regularly or occasionally. 
Distance, notwithstanding the definition contained in section 10-1, shall be measured by straight line from the property line of the adult establishment premises to the nearest property line of the property which is used as a private residence or other uses listed in this section. 
Private residence, in addition to the language contained in section 10-1, also includes apartment or condominium buildings housing more than four families. 
(b)  Minimum distances from certain uses. No license under this division shall be issued for any adult entertainment establishment which is within 2,000 feet of any private residence, boys' club, girls' club, public park, MARTA station, church or synagogue or any other place of worship, YMCA, YWCA, youth-oriented organization; day care center, child center, library, school ground or college campus, day labor center or hospital. The license issued to such an establishment shall state on its face "adult entertainment permitted." The performance of any adult entertainment without this express permission shall constitute grounds for revocation of an alcoholic beverage license. 
(c)  Exemptions. The distance requirements in this section shall not apply to locations approved by the bureau of buildings in 1987 for adult entertainment for the purposes of zoning. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2039.1) 
Sec. 10-90. - Exemption of hotels, motels or motor inns from distance requirements in certain areas. 
(a)  Any hotel, motel or motor inn having 150 or more rooms applying for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises located within the following areas shall not be required to comply with the distance requirements set forth in section 10-88: 
1.  Beginning at the intersection of Piedmont Avenue and North Avenue; running thence westerly along North Avenue to its intersection with Spring Street; running thence in a southerly and southwesterly direction along Spring Street to its intersection with Trinity Avenue; running thence in an easterly and southeasterly direction along Trinity Avenue to its intersection with Pryor Street; running thence in a southwesterly and southerly direction along Pryor Street to its intersection with Georgia Avenue; running thence in an eastwardly direction along Georgia Avenue to its intersection with Fraser Street; running thence in a northerly direction along Fraser Street to its intersection with Memorial Drive; running thence in a westerly direction along Memorial Drive to its intersection with Washington Street; running thence in a northeasterly direction along Washington Street to its intersection with Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive; running thence in a southeasterly direction along Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive to its intersection with Piedmont Avenue; running thence in a northeasterly and northerly direction along Piedmont Avenue to its intersection with North Avenue, the point of beginning. 
2.  All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in part of Land Lot 80 of the 14 th District, City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at an iron pin found located at the intersection of the southern right-of-way line of 5 th Street (60 foot right-of-way) and the western right-of-way line of Spring Street (60 foot right-of-way); thence leaving in the southern right-of-way of 5 th Street, run along the western right-of-way of Spring Street South 00° 43' 29" West a distance of 293.42 feet to an iron pin set; thence leaving the western right-of-way line of Spring Street, run the following six (6) courses and distances: (1) North 88° 47' 33" West a distance of 243.71 feet to an iron pin set; (2) North 01° 12' 27" East a distance of 139.83 feet to an iron pin set; (3) North 77° 24' 54" East a distance of 57.57 feet to an iron pin set; (4) North 01° 12' 27" East a distance of 35.41 feet to an iron pin set; (5) North 88° 47' 33" West a distance of 69.32 feet to an iron pin set; and (6) North 01° 12' 27" East a distance of 95.67 feet to a point located on the southern right-of-way line of 5 th Street; thence along the southern right-of-way line of 5 th Street, run the following two (2) courses and distances: (1) South 88 degrees 21 minutes 54 seconds East a distance of 164.63 feet to an iron pin found; and (2) South 88° 47' 33" East a distance of 90.11 feet to an iron pin found located on the western right-of-way line of Spring Street, said iron pin found being the point of beginning. 
(b)  However, this section shall not apply to adult entertainment establishments. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2040; Ord. No. 2003-73, § 1, 6-2-03) 
Sec. 10-91. - Exemption for certain malt beverage or wine licenses. 
(a)  On-premises consumption of malt beverages. Any applicant for a malt beverage license for consumption on the premises located within the following area shall not be required to comply with any distance requirement as to public libraries: 
Beginning at the intersection of Piedmont Avenue and Baker Street; running thence westerly along Baker Street to its intersection with Spring Street; running thence in a southerly and southwesterly direction along Spring Street to its intersection with Hunter Street; running thence in a southeasterly direction along Hunter Street to Piedmont Avenue; running thence in a northeasterly and northerly direction along Piedmont Avenue to its intersection with Baker Street. 
(b)  Nonapplicability of section. This section shall not apply to adult entertainment establishments. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2041; Ord. No. 1995-43, § 6, 8-28-95) 
Sec. 10-92. - Exemption for consumption on the premises and package sale of malt beverages or wine in certain area. 
(a)  Any applicant for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises located within the following area shall not be required to comply with the distance requirements set forth in section 10-88: 
Beginning at a point on the west right-of-way line of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad at a point where the railroad right-of-way line intersects the northernmost line of land lot 144, 14th district, Fulton County, thence running easterly along the north line of land lots 144, 113, 112, 81, 80, 49 and the 17th district of Fulton County to the intersection of the north line of land lot 17 with the east right-of-way line of Southern Railway; running thence generally south along the east right-of-way line of the Southern Railway to its intersection with the south line of the Georgia Railroad right-of-way; running thence generally west along the south line of the Georgia Railroad right-of-way to its intersection with the east line of Boulevard, S.E.; running thence generally south along the east line of Boulevard, S.E., to the intersection of Boulevard, S.E. and the centerline of Interstate 20 (east expressway); running thence west along the centerline of I-20, to its intersection with the east line of Fraser Street projected over I-20; running thence south along the east line of Fraser Street to its intersection with the south line of Georgia Avenue; running thence west along the south line of Georgia Avenue to its intersection with the west line of Pryor Street; thence running north along the west line of Pryor Street to its intersection with the centerline of I-20; running thence generally west along the centerline of I-20 to its intersection with the west right-of-way line of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad; running thence northerly along the west right-of-way line of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad back to the point of beginning. 
(b)  Any applicant for a license for the package sale of malt beverages and/or wine within the following areas shall not be required to comply with the distance requirements set forth in section 10-88.1: 
(1)  That parcel of land known as 2371 Glenwood Avenue, SE, Atlanta, Georgia under the numbering system of the City of Atlanta, more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the southern end of the miter of the intersection of the eastern right-of-way line of Second Avenue and the southern right-of-way line of Glenwood Avenue, said point being the point of beginning; run thence along the mitered right-of-way line in a northeastern direction a distance of approximately 30 feet to a point located on the southern right-of-way line of Glenwood Avenue; run thence along the southern right-of-way line of Glenwood Avenue in an eastern direction approximately 109 feet to a point; run thence in a southern direction approximately 189 feet to a point; run thence in a western direction approximately 129 feet to a point along the eastern right-of-way line of Second Avenue; run thence in a northern direction along the eastern right-of-way line of Second Avenue approximately 165 feet to the point of beginning. 
(2)  That parcel of land lying and being in the City of Atlanta, in Land Lot 53 of the 14th District of Fulton County, Georgia known as 244 Hill Street, Atlanta, Georgia 30312 under the numbering system of the City of Atlanta, more particularly described as follows: Beginning at the northwest corner of Clarke Street and Hill Street, and running thence north 89 degrees 31 minutes west, along the north side of Clarke Street, 97 feet to a point; running thence north 00 degrees 17 minutes east, 71.37 feet to a point; running thence north 88 degrees 15 minutes west, 50 feet to a point; running thence north 00 degrees 01 minutes west, 125.81 feet to a point; running thence north 89 degrees 49 minutes east, 146.84 feet to a point on the west side of Hill Street; running thence south along the west side of Hill Street 200 feet to the north side of Clarke Street and the point of beginning. 
(3)  That parcel of land known as 209 Edgewood Avenue, S.E., Atlanta, Georgia under the numbering system of the City of Atlanta. 
(4)  That parcel of land known as 1061 Ponce de Leon Avenue, Atlanta, Georgia, under the numbering system of the City of Atlanta. This exemption shall be valid so long as an establishment located on said parcel of land derives less than 15 percent of gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(5)  That parcel of land known as 1192 B Pryor Street, Atlanta, Georgia, under the numbering system of the City of Atlanta. This exemption shall be conditioned on the requirement that no vending be permitted on said parcel of land. 
(6)  For one retail grocery supermarket located on that parcel of land known as 650 Ponce de Leon Avenue, Atlanta, Georgia, under the numbering system of the City of Atlanta provided that such retail grocery supermarket contains an interior floor area of 14,000 square feet or more and that the retail grocery supermarket derives less than 15% of gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages, such parcel of land being more particularly described as: All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 17 of the 14th District, City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING AT a hole in concrete found on the eastern right-of-way of Lakeview Avenue (50 foot r/w), said hole being located North 00 degrees 05 minutes 19 seconds East, 82.91 feet from the intersection of the northern right-of-way of Ponce de Leon Avenue (90 foot r/w) and the eastern right-of-way of Lakeview Avenue if said right-of-ways were extended to meet at an angle instead of a curve; thence along the eastern right-of-way of Lakeview Avenue, run North 00 degrees 05 minutes 19 seconds East, 633.16 feet to a point at the northerly terminus of Lakeview Avenue; thence North 89 degrees 51 minutes 18 seconds West, 50.18 feet to an open top pipe found on the northerly right-of-way of St. Charles Avenue (50 foot r-o-w); thence continuing along said right-of-way, run North 89 degrees 51 minutes 18 seconds West, 101.83 feet to a point on the eastern line of Proposed Right-of-Way Dedication Tract; thence leaving said right-of-way, and with the eastern line of said Proposed Tract, run North 00 degrees 40 minutes 31 seconds East, 455.36 feet to a point at the intersection of said Proposed Tract with the southern right-of-way of Greenwood Avenue (60 foot r/w); thence crossing Greenwood Avenue, North 00 degrees 33 minutes 28 seconds East, 60.02 feet to a point on the northern right-of-way of Greenwood Avenue; thence along the northern right-of-way of Greenwood Avenue, South 89 degrees 45 minutes 00 seconds West, 49.99 feet to a 1" open top pipe set; thence leaving said right-of-way, North 00 degrees 39 minutes 09 seconds East, 389.72 feet to a ½" rebar found; thence South 88 degrees 54 minutes 38 seconds East, 498.09 feet to a ½" rebar found on the western right of Southern Railway System (100 foot r/w); thence along said right-of-way, run the following three (3) courses and distances: along a curve to the right, an arc distance of 312.30 feet, said curve having a radius of 2570.74 feet and being subtended by a chord of 312.11 feet, at South 14 degrees 47 minutes 28 seconds East, to a hole in concrete found; South 10 degrees 21 minutes 16 seconds East, 309.44 feet to a point; South 11 degrees 20 minutes 11 seconds East, 719.86 feet to a 1" open top pipe set at the northeast corner of property now or formerly owned by Ronald J. Lazarus and Scott G. Ardolino, Deed Book 13490, Page 268; thence leaving said right-of-way, and with the line of Lazarus and Ardolino, North 86 degrees 52 minutes 35 seconds West, 57.32 feet to a PK nail set; thence South 75 degrees 53 minutes 08 seconds West, 76.59 feet to a PK nail set; thence South 01 degrees 28 minutes 07 seconds West, 233.66 feet to a ½" rebar found; thence along a curve to the left, an arc distance of 59.05 feet, said curve having a radius of 101.33 feet and being subtended by a chord of 58.21 feet, at South 17 degrees 11 minutes 14 seconds East, to a ½" rebar found; Thence North 89 degrees 28 minutes 16 seconds West, 10.77 feet to a point; Thence South 89 degrees 09 minutes 39 seconds West, 35.41 feet to a point; Thence North 78 degrees 49 minutes 43 seconds West, 4.58 feet to a point; Thence North 00 degrees 31 minutes 44 seconds East, 14.15 feet to a point; Thence North 89 degrees 28 minutes 16 seconds West, 42.19 feet to a point; Thence South 05 degrees 04 minutes 16 seconds West, 26.18 feet to a point; Thence North 84 degrees 55 minutes 44 seconds West, 21.90 feet to a point; thence South 05 degrees 04 minutes 16 seconds West, 9.99 feet to a point on the northern right-of-way of Ponce De Leon Avenue (90 foot r/w); thence along said right-of-way run the following three (3) courses and distances: North 84 degrees 55 minutes 23 seconds West, 194.34 feet to a point; North 87 degrees 26 minutes 09 seconds West, 90.80 feet to a hole in concrete found; thence run along a curve to the right, an arc distance of 40.29 feet, said curve having a radius of 38.99 feet and being subtended by a chord of 38.52 feet, at North 57 degrees 39 minutes 10 seconds West, to a ½" rebar found on a curve joining the intersection of said northern right-of-way and the eastern right-of-way of Lakeview Avenue; thence run North 28 05 minutes 27 seconds West, 52.07 feet to a ½" rebar found on the eastern right-of-way of Lakeview Avenue; thence with said right-of-way, along a curve to the right, an arc distance of 19.93 feet, said curve having a radius of 40.40 feet and being subtended by a chord of 19.73 feet; at North 14 degrees 01 minutes 26 seconds West, to a hole in concrete found and the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
(7)  For one retail establishment selling wine by the package located at 2625 Piedmont Road, Suite 51, Atlanta, Georgia, and situated on that parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 47 and Land Lot 48 of the 17th District of Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a point marked by an iron pin set located on the northerly right-of-way line of Sidney Marcus Boulevard (formerly known as Marion Road, having a variable right-of-way width), said point being located at the southeastern most and of miter which forms the intersection of the northerly right-of-way line of Sidney Marcus Boulevard with the easterly right-of-way line of Piedmont Road (having a variable right-of-way width), said miter being delineated by a line running from the easterly right-of-way line of Piedmont Road South 27°26'41" East a distance of 39.30 feet to a point on the northerly right-of-way line of Sidney Marcus Boulevard: 
RUNNING THENCE North 89°42'18" East along the northerly right-of-way line of Sidney Marcus Boulevard a distance of 135.24 feet to a point marked by an iron pin set: 
RUNNING THENCE South 06°16'58" West a distance of 8.90 feet to a point marked by a right-of-way monument on the aforesaid right-of-way line of Sidney Marcus Boulevard: 
RUNNING THENCE North 89°42'03" East a distance of 143.37 feet to a point marked by an iron pin set on the aforesaid right-of-way: 
RUNNING THENCE North 03°30'37" East for a distance of 10.48 feet to a point marked by a nail on the aforesaid right-of-way line of Sidney Marcus Boulevard: 
RUNNING THENCE South 86°29'23" East for a distance of 59.51 feet to a point marked by a nail set on the aforesaid right-of-way: 
RUNNING THENCE North 89°42'03" East of distance of 403.10 feet to a point marked by an iron pin found on the aforesaid right-of-way: 
RUNNING THENCE North 00°00'00" East (or due North) a distance of 809.49 feet to a point marked by an iron pin found: 
RUNNING THENCE North 30°39' 15" West for a distance of 140.75 feet to a point marked by an iron pin found: 
RUNNING THENCE 89°29'42" West for a distance of 123.06 feet to a point marked by an iron pin found: 
RUNNING THENCE North 39°36'30" West for a distance of 38.70 feet to a point marked by an iron pin set located on the southerly right-of-way line of Miami Circle (50-foot right-of-way): 
RUNNING THENCE along a curve to the right formed by the southerly right-of-way line of Miami Circle a distance of 73.36 feet to a point marked by an iron set (said curve having a chord line running south 79°23' 17" West a distance of 73.13 feet and having a radius of 197.07 feet): 
RUNNING THENCE North 80°55'08" West for a distance of 282.69 feet to a point marked by an iron pin set on the aforesaid right-of-way: 
RUNNING THENCE along a curve to the left formed by said right-of-way line a distance of 69.91 feet to a point marked by an iron pin found on the (said curve having a chord line running south 68°32'44" West a distance of 68.28 and having a radius of 93.00 feet): 
RUNNING THENCE South of 47°00'35" West for a distance of 122.66 feet to a point marked by a nail set on aforesaid right-of-way, said point also being on the easterly right-of-way line of Piedmont Road: 
RUNNING THENCE South 02°14'41" West for a distance of 367.88 feet to a point marked by an iron pin found on aforesaid right-of-way line of Piedmont Road: 
RUNNING THENCE South 5°57'42" East for a distance of 95.98 feet to a point marked by a nail set on aforesaid right-of-way: 
RUNNING THENCE South 02°14'41" West for a distance of 175.00 feet to a point marked by an iron pin on aforesaid right-of-way: 
RUNNING THENCE South 15°19'05" West for a distance of 60.57 feet to a point marked by a nail set on aforesaid right-of-way: 
RUNNING THENCE South 02°14'41" West for a distance of 108.00 feet to a point marked by a concrete monument found on aforesaid right-of-way: 
RUNNING THENCE South 27°26'41" East for a distance of 39.30 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING 
(8)  For one (1) retail establishment selling beer/wine located at 4485 Campbellton Road, SW; and situated on that parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 47 and Land Lot 43 of the 14th F.F. District of Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
ALL THAT TRACT OR PARCEL OF LAND, SITUATED, LYING AND BEING IN THE CITY OF ATLANTA, LAND LOT 43 of the 14th District of Fulton County, Georgia, being more particularly described as follows: 
TO FIND THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING, Commence at a reference nail set at the intersection of a line located 30 feet easterly of the centerline of County Line Road (said right-of-way being 60 feet in width) and a line located 40 feet northerly of the centerline of Campbellton Road (said right-of-way being 80 feet in width), run thence north 00 degrees 03 minutes, 54 seconds west a distance of 30.42 feet to a point located on the easterly right-of-way of County Line Road, and the true point of beginning. 
FROM THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING, as thus established, run thence along the easterly right-of-way of County Line Road north 00 degrees 03 minutes, 54 seconds west a distance of 126.70 feet to an iron pin placed; thence departing said right-of-way run north 81 degrees 27 minutes, 27 seconds east a distance of 170.07 feet to an iron pin placed, run thence south 00 degrees 13 minutes 19 seconds west a distance of 150.07 feet to a nail set on the northerly right-of-way of Campbellton road; run thence in a westerly direction along said right-of-way and following an arc to the left a distance of 41.03 feet to a point (said arc having a radius of 919.23 feet and being subtended by a chord bearing south 80 degrees 02 minutes 49 seconds west a distance of 41.02 feet); continue thence along said right-of-way south 78 degrees, 46 minutes, 06 seconds west a distance of 99.08 feet to a point; continue thence along said right-of-way and following an arc to the right a distance of 44.14 feet to a point (said arc having a radius of 25.00 feet and being subtended by a chord bearing north 50 degrees 38 minutes 54 seconds west a distance of 38.63 feet) and the true point of BEGINNING. 
SAID PROPERTY containing 0.5852 acres and being designated as Tract "B" and shown on that certain plat of survey entitled, "Boundary Survey for Lansky Partnership and First Georgia Community Bank," dated April 30, 2001 (Revised March 28, 2003, and last revised April 11, 2003), prepared by P.J.K. Engineers and Surveyors, Inc., and recorded in Plat Book 240, Page 107, Fulton County, Georgia records, said Plat and its descriptive data are incorporated herein by reference to same. 
(9)  For one retail establishment located at 556 Northside Drive S.W. and situated on all that tract or parcel of land lying in and being in land lot 85 of the 14th district, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at a mag nail set at the intersection of the easterly right-of-way of metropolitan boulevard (having a variable width right-of-way) and the northwesterly right-of-way of wells street (having a variable width right-of-way), said mag nail being the true point of beginning. 
Thence leaving said right-of-way of wells street and continuing along said right-of-way of metropolitan boulevard north 01 degrees 04 minutes 45 seconds east a distance of 300.96 feet to a mag nail set; thence leaving said right-of-way north 73 degrees 38 minutes 07 seconds east a distance of 80.51 feet to a mag nail set; thence south 15 degrees 44 minutes 14 seconds east a distance of 260.96 feet to a 5/8 -inch capped rebar set on the northwesterly right-of-way of wells street; thence continuing along said right-of-way of wells street south 64 degrees 46 minutes 23 seconds west a distance of 169.90 feet to a mag nail set at the intersection of said right-of-way of wells street with the easterly right-of-way of metropolitan boulevard, said mag nail being the true point of beginning. 
(10)  For one (1) retail establishment located at 415 Memorial Drive S.E. and situated on all that tract or parcel of land lying in and being in land lot 44 of the 14th Land District, Fulton County Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the Southerly edge of the right-of-way of Memorial Drive (varying right-of-way width), said point being located 95.00 feet West, as measured along the Southerly edge of the right-of-way of Memorial Drive, from the point formed by the intersection of the Southerly edge the right-of-way of Memorial Drive with the Westerly edge of the right-of-way of Cherokee Avenue (varying right-of-way widths); running thence from the true point or place of beginning so established South 00 degrees 55 minutes 04 seconds West a distance of 88.29 feet to a point; running thence North 88 degrees 55 minutes 36 seconds West a distance of 104.85 feet to a point; running thence South 01 degree 14 minutes 52 seconds West a distance of 14.00 feet to a point; running thence North 87 degrees 37 minutes 49 seconds West a distance of 199.50 feet to a point located on the Easterly edge of the right-of way of Oakland Avenue (50-foot right-of-way width); running thence North 00 degrees 17 minutes 37 seconds East along the Easterly edge of the right-of-way of Oakland Avenue, a distance of 40.23 feet to an iron pin found; running thence South 87 degrees 32 minutes 40 seconds East a distance of 135.00 feet to a point; running thence North 00 degrees 22 minutes 01 second East a distance of 61.20 feet to a point located on the Southerly edge of the right-of-way of Memorial Drive; running thence South 88 degrees 46 minutes 32 seconds East along the Southerly edge of the right-of-way of Memorial Drive a distance of 170.44 feet to a point which is the true point or place of beginning. 
(11)  160 Ponce de Leon Avenue, NE, Atlanta, Georgia: 
Tract A: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the City of Atlanta, in Land Lot 49 of the 14th District of Fulton County, Georgia, and more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at an iron pipe on the northerly side of Ponce de Leon Avenue, at a point seventy and sixty-five hundredths (70.65) feet westerly from the Northwest corner of Ponce de Leon and Piedmont Avenues (said beginning point being at the Southwest corner of the property now owned by Frances Walter Arnold) and running thence North along the West line of the property now owned by the said Frances Walter Arnold two hundred nine and ninety-eight hundredths (209.98) feet to an iron pipe; thence West along a line parallel with third Street ninety (90) feet to an iron pipe; thence South two hundred twenty-two and eighty-one hundredths (222.81) feet to the northerly side of Ponce de Leon Avenue; thence in an easterly direction along the northerly side of Ponce de Leon Avenue ninety and eighty hundredths (90.80) feet to the point of beginning. 
Tract B: 
All that tract or parcel of land, lying and being in the City of Atlanta, in Land Lot 49 of the 14th District of Fulton County, Georgia, and more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the Northwest corner of Ponce de Leon Avenue and Piedmont Avenue, and running thence North along the West side of Piedmont Avenue two hundred (200) feet to an iron pipe (which point is ninety-six and seven-tenths (96.7) feet South from the Southwest corner of Piedmont Avenue and Third Street); thence West seventy (70) feet to an iron pipe at the Northeast corner of the property owned by Milton Dargan, Jr. and Helen Dargan Lampkin; thence South along the East line of the property now owned by the said Milton Dargan, Jr. and Helen Dargan Lampkin; two hundred nine and ninety-eight hundredths (209.98) feet to an iron pipe on the northerly side of Ponce de Leon Avenue; thence in a northeasterly direction along the northerly side of Ponce de Leon Avenue seventy and sixty-five hundredths (70.65) feet to the point of beginning. 
Less and Except those portions of subject property which lie within the bounds of Ponce de Leon Avenue and Piedmont Road. 
As Surveyed Legal Description: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 49 of the 14th District, City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a point located at the intersection of the northerly Right-of-way line of Ponce de Leon Avenue (U.S. Highway 29-78-278) having a Variable Right-of-way and the westerly Right-of-way line of Piedmont Avenue having a Variable Right-of-way; thence along the northerly Right-of-way line of Ponce de Leon Avenue South 87 Degrees 37 Minutes 45 Seconds West, 161.45 feet to a point; thence leaving the northerly Right-of-way line of Ponce de Leon Avenue North 05 Degrees 37 Minutes 00 Seconds East, 222.81 feet to a point; thence South 84 Degrees 15 Minutes 00 Seconds East, 160.00 feet to a point on the westerly Right-of-way line of Piedmont Avenue; thence along the westerly Right-of-way line of Piedmont Avenue South 05 Degrees 39 Minutes 00 Seconds West, 200.00 feet to The Point of Beginning, containing 0.78 Acres, as per survey prepared by Harkleroad and Associates, Donald W. Harkleroad, surveyor, RLS 1578, dated July 14, 2008, last revised March 12, 2009. 
(12)  For one retail establishment selling beer/wine located at 2018 Bolton Road, NW; and situated on that parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 256 and of the 17th District of Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as: All That tract or parcel of land lying and being in the City of Atlanta, in Land lot 77 of the 14th District of Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a one half inch (½") rebar set at the intersection of the westerly right-of-way of James Jackson Parkway (State Route 280) and the northerly right-of-way of Bolton Road (State Route 70), said rebar being 42.50 feet northerly from the centerline of Bolton Road and 99.95 feet westerly from the centerline of James Jackson Parkway; running thence along the northerly right-of-way of Bolton Road in a southwesterly direction following the curvature thereof of arc distance of 148.38 feet to a one-half inch (½") rebar set, said curvature having a chord bearing and distance of South 78 degrees 52 minutes 17 seconds West, a distance of 147.92 feet and having a radius of 540.72 feet; running thence North 07 degrees 58 minutes 47 seconds West, a distance of 187.77 feet to a one-half inch (½") rebar set; running thence North 82 degrees 40 minutes 49 seconds East, a distance of 149.66 feet to a one-half inch (½") rebar set on the westerly right-of-way of James Jackson Parkway; running thence along the westerly right-of-way of James Jackson Parkway in a southeasterly distance South 07 degrees 21 minutes 00 seconds East, a distance of 177.93 feet to THE POINT OF BEGINNING, and containing 0.61 acres, and being known as 2018 Bolton Road, N.W., according to the present system of numbering in the City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia. 
(13)  For one (1) retail establishment located at 568 Boulevard, S.E. and situated on all that tract or parcel of land lying in and being in land lot 21 of the 14 th Land District, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in The City of Atlanta in Land Lot 21 of the 14th District, Fulton County, Georgia, being delineated as parcel 1 as per plat recorded in Plat Book 157, Page 14, Fulton County, Georgia records, which recorded plat is incorporated herein by this reference and made a part of this description. Said property being known as 560-568 Boulevard Avenue according to the present system of numbering property in Fulton County, Georgia. 
(14)  For one (1) retail establishment selling malt beverages and wine by the package located at 99 Krog Street, NE, and situated on all that tract or parcel of land lying in and being in land lot 19 of the 14th District, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the building corner at the intersection of the southerly right-of-way of Lake Avenue (50 foot right-of-way) and the easterly right-of-way of Krog Street (40 foot right-of-way); running thence, along said Lake Avenue right-of-way the following. Calls: S 89°06'12" E a distance of 110.09 feet to an iron pin found; S 88°47'41" E a distance of 40.88 to a rebar set; S 89°03'35" E a distance of 142.80 feet to a rebar set at the intersection of said southerly right-of-way of Lake Avenue and the westerly right-of-way of Waddell Street (44 foot right-of-way); thence, along said right-of-way of Waddell Street S 06°42'39" W a distance of 127.79 feet to a point; thence, continuing along said right-of-way of Waddell Street with a curve turning to the left with an arc length of 105.95 feet, with a radius of 2,392.20 feet, with a chord bearing of S 05°26'31" W, with a chord length of 105.94 feet to a rebar set; thence, leaving said right-of-way OP Waddell Street N 89°43'40" W a distance of 145.01 feet to a rebar set; thence S 02°50'16" W a distance of 157.78 feet to a rebar set; thence S 85°49'28" E a distance of 13.00 feet to a rebar set; thence S 05°52'51" E a distance of 185.00 feet to a rebar set; thence S 83°30'00" W a distance of 23.00 feet to a rebar set; thence S 12°36'45" E a distance of 102.14 feet to a rebar set; thence S 83°58'03" W a distance of 139.02 feet to an iron pin found on aforesaid easterly right-of-way of Krog Street; thence, along said right-of-way of Krog Street N 06°44'06" W a distance of 168.13 feet to a point; thence, continuing along said right-of-way of Krog Street with a curve turning to the right with an arc length of 125.41 feet, with a radius of 1,809 feet, with a chord bearing of N 04°44'59" W, with a chord length of 125.38 feet to a point; thence, continuing along said right-of-way of Krog Street with a compound curve turning to the right with an arc length of 285.31 feet, with a radius of 1,825.13 feet, with a chord bearing of N 01°09'02" E, with a chord length of 285.02 feet to a point; thence, continuing along said right-of-way of Krog Street N 07°19'35" E a distance of 120.16 feet to the point of beginning: 
Said tract or parcel of land, being designated as Tract No. III and Tract No. IV, containing 134,638 square feet or 3.090 acres as shown on ALTA/ACSM land title survey prepared for Krog Owner, LLC, Nxt Capital, LLC, lender and agent, its successors and assigns, Specialized Title Services, Inc., and Commonwealth Land Title Insurance Company as prepared on 02/13/2012 by Survey Systems & Assoc., Inc., last revised 10/22/12. 
(15)  For one retail establishment located on that parcel of land known as 23 Peachtree Street, Atlanta, Georgia, under the numbering system of the City of Atlanta, such parcel of land being more particularly described as: All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the City of Atlanta, in Land lot 77 of the 14th District of Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a pk nail set at the intersection of the southerly right-of-way line of Edgewood Avenue and the eastern right-of-way line of Peachtree Street and thence run along said southerly right-of-way of Edgewood Avenue North 89 degrees 48 minutes 53 seconds East a distance of 166.30 feet to a pk nail found; Thence leaving said right-of-way and run South 32 degrees 51 minutes 18 seconds West a distance of 127.01 feet to a brass disk found on the northern right-of-way line of Decatur Street; Thence run along said northern right-of-way line North 56 degrees 59 minutes 10 seconds West a distance of 139.35 feet to a pk nail set at the intersection of said right-of-way with the eastern right-of-way line of Peachtree Street; Thence run along Peachtree Street North 32 degrees 45 minutes 47 seconds East a distance of 35.95 feet to a pk nail set and the Point of Beginning. 
(16)  For not more than two, separate and distinct retail establishments operated as separate businesses on separate licensed premises, not more than one of which is a wine specialty shop and not more than one of which is a package store selling malt beverages and not wine or distilled spirits, both located at 280 Elizabeth Street and both situated on all that tract or parcel of land lying in and being in land lots 14 and 19 of the 14th District, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying or being in land Lots 14, and 19 of the 14th Land District, City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at an iron pin found (one-half inch rebar) at the intersection of the southerly right-of-way line of North Highland Avenue (having a 50-foot wide right-of-way) and the land lot line common to said land Lots 14 and 19, said point being the point of beginning; thence from the point of beginning as thus established, departing said land lot line common to land Lots 14 and 19 and along the said southerly right-of-way line of North Highland Avenue north 56 degrees 34 minutes 25 seconds east a distance of 298.50 feet to an iron pin found (one-half inch rebar) on the westerly right-of-way line of Elizabeth Street (having a 50-foot wide right-of-way); thence departing the said southerly right-of-way line of North Highland Avenue and along the said westerly right-of-way line of Elizabeth Street south 03 degrees 38 minutes 41 seconds east a distance of 431.10 feet to a nail found in asphalt on the northerly right-of-way line of Lake Avenue (having a 60-foot wide right-of-way); thence departing the said westerly right-of-way line of Elizabeth Street and along the said northerly right-of-way line of Lake Avenue the following two courses and distances: along a curve to the left having a radius of 1,014.19 feet, an arc length of 185.27 feet, being subtended by a chord bearing of south 47 degrees 04 minutes 40 seconds west and a chord distance of 185.01 feet to a point; thence south 39 degrees 05 minutes 04 seconds west a distance of 98.69 feet to an iron pin found (one-half inch rebar); thence departing the said northerly right-of-way line of Lake Avenue north 45 degrees 38 minutes 13 seconds west a distance of 110.88 feet to an iron pin found (one-half inch rebar) on the said land lot line common to land lots 14 and 19; thence along the said land lot line common to land Lots 14 and 19 north 00 degrees 03 minutes 51 seconds east a distance of 75.95 feet to an iron pin found (one-half inch rebar); thence departing the said land lot line common to land Lots 14 and 19 north 89 degrees 55 minutes 51 seconds west a distance of 62.19 feet to an iron pin found (bent one-half inch rebar); thence north 00 degrees 03 minutes 51 seconds east a distance of 120.00 feet to an iron pin found (one-half inch rebar); thence south 89 degrees 56 minutes 12 seconds east a distance of 8.80 feet to a point; thence along a curve to the left having a radius of 4.50 feet, an arc length of 9.70 feet, being subtended by a chord bearing of north 28 degrees 17 minutes 33 seconds east and a chord distance of 7.93 feet to a point; thence north 56 degrees 31 minutes 53 seconds east a distance of 12.06 feet to an iron pin found (one-half inch rebar); thence north 33 degrees 28 minutes 42 seconds west a distance of 73.32 feet to a nail found in concrete; thence north 33 degrees 28 minutes 07 seconds west a distance of 55.90 feet to a nail found in concrete on the said southerly right-of-way line of North Highland Avenue; thence along the said southerly right-of-way line of North Highland Avenue north 56 degrees 31 minutes 53 seconds east a distance of 133.14 feet to a the point of beginning. 
Said tract or parcel of land contains 3.309 acres (being 144,143 square feet), also being all of Tract 1 and Tract 2 combined. 
(17)  The BP Gas Station located at 356 Boulevard NE, Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia, being more particularly described as follows: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the City of Atlanta, Land Lot #7 of the 14th District, Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the corner formed by the intersection of the westerly right-of-way line of Boulevard (having an 80-foot right-of-way) the northerly right-of-way line of Forrest Avenue (having a 60-foot right-of-way; running thence north 85°02'10" west a distance of 135.00 feet to an iron pin set; running thence north 04°49' 07" east a distance of 69.00 feet to a nail and cap found; running thence south 87°20'53" east a distance of 2.28 feet to a ½-inch rebar found; running thence north 05°10'14" east a distance of 49.99 feet to a 1/2-inch rebar found running thence 85°34'22" west a distance of 67.22 feet to a one-inch crimp top pipe found along the easterly right-of-way line of a 20-foot alley; running thence north 50°29'00" east along the easterly right-of-way line along said 20-foot alley a distance of 258.80 feet to a one-inch crimp top pipe found on the southerly right-of-way line of Wabash Avenue (having a 40-foot right-of-way); running thence south 86°18'54" east along the southerly right-of-way line of Wabash Avenue a distance of 48.19 feet to a ½-inch rebar found; running thence south 03°59'11" west a distance of 60.13 feet to a ½-inch rebar found; running thence south 85°48'15" east a distance of 149.56 feet to a ½-inch rebar found on the westerly right-of-way line of Boulevard; running thence south 05°01'48" west along the westerly right-of-way line Boulevard a distance of 220.20 feet to an iron pip set at the POINT OF BEGINNING; and being a tract of land containing 0.89 acres with a one-story brick, block and frame convenience store and gasoline filling station located thereon; according to a plat survey prepared for Boulevard C-Store, Inc. and The Citizens Banks by Solar Land Surveying Company, certified by Walter K. Maupin, Je., Georgia Registered Land Surveyor No. 2399, dated March 1, 1993; and being known as 354 and 356 Boulevard, according to the present system of numbering of streets and roads in the City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia. 
(18)  For all package stores, wine specialty shops, city food markets and specialty food shops located at 675 Ponce de Leon Avenue and 650 North Avenue situated on all that tract or parcel of land lying in and being in land lot 17 of the 14th District, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 17 of the 14th Land District, City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia, said tract or parcel of land being more fully shown and designated on a plat of survey prepared by Valentino & Associates, Inc. (Job #11-016; Drawing/File #11-016), dated 7/6/2011, bearing the seal of Glenn A. Valentino, Ga. Registered Land Surveyor #2528, and being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a ½″ iron pin set at the intersection of the southerly right-of-way line of Ponce De Leon Avenue (AKA U.S. Highway #29, 78, 278 and State Route #8; public r/w varies) and the easterly right-of-way line of Glen Iris Drive (50′ public r/w); 
THENCE proceeding along said southerly right-of-way line of Ponce De Leon Avenue the following courses and distances: 
South 82 degrees 20 minutes 02 seconds East (Grid bearing, Ga. West Zone, typical) for a distance of 54.82 feet to a ½″ iron pin set; 
THENCE South 86 degrees 38 minutes 16 seconds East for a distance of 125.17 feet to a PK (masonry) nail set; 
THENCE South 86 degrees 01 minute 05 seconds East for a distance of 210.21 feet to a ½″ iron pin set; 
THENCE South 85 degrees 17 minutes 40 seconds East for a distance of 155.79 feet to a ½″ iron pin set; 
THENCE South 86 degrees 06 minutes 16 seconds East for a distance of 104.43 feet to a PK nail set; 
THENCE South 58 degrees 07 minutes 33 seconds East for a distance of 26.32 feet to a PK nail set; 
THENCE South 86 degrees 05 minutes 26 seconds East for a distance of 120.29 feet to a PK nail set; 
THENCE along a curve to the left having a radius of 448.47 feet for an arc distance of 65.67 feet (said arc being subtended by a chord of North 89 degrees 42 minutes 45 seconds East for a distance of 65.62 feet) to a ½″ iron pin set; 
THENCE departing said southerly right-of-way line of Ponce De Leon Avenue South 11 degrees 22 minutes 16 seconds East for a distance of 442.75 feet to a ½″ iron pin set; 
THENCE along a curve to the left having a radius of 2,863.72 feet for an arc distance of 288.64 feet (said arc being subtended by a chord of South 17 degrees 01 minute 28 seconds East for a distance of 288.52 feet) to a computed point on the northerly right-of-way line of North Avenue (public r/w varies; said computed point being witnessed by a ½″ rebar with cap found 0.09 feet northwest thereof); 
THENCE proceeding along said northerly right-of-way line of North Avenue North 89 degrees 38 minutes 48 seconds West for a distance of 1,038.92 feet to a ½″ iron pin set at the intersection of said northerly right-of-way line of North Avenue and the easterly right-of-way line of Glen Iris Drive; 
THENCE proceeding along said easterly right-of-way line of Glen Iris Drive North 00 degrees 47 minutes 36 seconds East for a distance of 774.50 feet to a ½″ iron pin set at the intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of Glen Iris Drive and the southerly right-of-way line of Ponce De Leon Avenue, said ½″ iron pin set being the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
Said tract or parcel of land contains 15.912 acres or 693,107 square feet. 
(19)  For the establishment/property located at 655 Cleveland Avenue, SW, and situated on all that tract or parcel of land lying in and being in the City of Atlanta, Land Lot #101 of the 14th District, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
Exhibit "A" 
Legal Description of  655 Cleveland Avenue  Atlanta, GA 30315 
Legal Description: 
Parcel 10223/655 Cleveland Avenue 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 101 of the 14th District, Fulton County, Georgia; and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a point marked by an aluminum disk in concrete found at the southeastern most point of the mitered intersection of the northern margin of the right-of-way of Cleveland Avenue (right-of-way width varies) and the eastern margin of the right-of-way of Interstate 85 (right-of-way varies); thence along said mitered intersection North 56 degrees 16 minutes 09 seconds West a distance of 48.72 feet to an aluminum disk in concrete found on the eastern margin of the right-of-way of Interstate 85; thence along said eastern margin of right-of-way of Interstate 85; thence North 05 degrees 28 minutes 57 seconds East a distance of 93.38 feet to an aluminum disk in concrete found; thence North 89 degrees 59 minutes 50 seconds East a distance of 198.50 feet to a ½-inch rebar set; thence South 00 degrees 24 minutes 24 seconds East a distance of 112.02 feet to a P-K nail set; thence South 90 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds East a distance of 34.00 feet to a P-K nail set; thence South 00 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds East a distance of 8.00 feet to a ½-inch rebar found on the northern margin of the right-of-way of Cleveland Avenue; thence along said northern margin of the right-of-way of Cleveland Avenue North 90 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds west a distance of 201.70 feet to an aluminum disk in concrete found and the point of beginning; said tract contains 0.5568 acres of land, more or less, and is described according to that certain boundary and above ground "as-built" survey for Amerada Hess Corporation and Lawyers Title Insurance Corporation, prepared by Pearson & Associates, Inc., Mark A. Buckner, Georgia Registered Land Surveyor, Number 2422, dated June 18, 1996, last revised June 26, 1996, which plat of survey is incorporated herein by this reference and made a part of this description. 
(20)  Reserved. 
(21)  For one (1) retail grocery supermarket located on that parcel of land known as 519 Memorial Drive, SE, Atlanta, Georgia, under the numbering system of the City of Atlanta and being more particularly described as: All that tract or parcel of land tying and being in Land Lot 44 of the 14th District, City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 44 of the 14th District, City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING at an iron pin set being the intersection of the southerly Right-of-way of Memorial Drive (55' R/W) and the easterly Right-of-way of Loomis Avenue (50' R/W), from point thus established and running along said Right-of-way of Memorial Drive South 88° 32' 13" East a distance of 348.05 feet to an iron pin set on the westerly side of an alley; thence South 88° 53' 06" East a distance of 9.17 feet to a 1" rod found on the easterly side of said alley; thence South 88° 53' 06" East a distance of 95.14 feet to an iron pin set; thence South 00° 48' 56" West a distance of 8.80 feet to an iron pin set; thence South 89° 11' 04" East a distance of 4.66 feet to an iron pin set on the westerly Right-of-way of Park Avenue (70' R/W); thence along said Right-of-way of Park Avenue the following courses: South 01° 03' 21" West a distance of 121.48 feet to a ¼" rod found; thence South 01° 03' 21" West a distance of 48.50 feet to a 1" open top pipe found; thence South 01° 03' 21" West a distance of 47.14 feet to a ½" rebar found; thence South 01° 03' 21" West a distance of 6.48 feet to a point; thence leaving said Right-of-way and running North 88° 58' 58" West a distance of 39.63 feet to a point; thence South 01° 01' 12" West a distance of 6.47 feet to a point on the southerly side of the aforementioned alley; thence leaving said alley and running South 01° 01' 12" West a distance of 149.85 feet to an iron pin set on Woodward Avenue (50' R/W); thence along said Right-of-way North 88° 58' 28" West a distance of 417.90 feet to a point; thence North 01° 06' 39" East a distance of 391.52 feet to the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. 
(22)  For the establishment/property located at 855 Peachtree Street, NE, and situated on all that tract or parcel of land lying in and being in the City of Atlanta, Land Lot 49 of the 14th District, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
All that certain PIEE, parcel or lot of land lying and being in land Lot 49 of the 14th District Fulton County, the City of Atlanta, Georgia and being more fully shown and designated on boundary and topographic survey for wood partners, dated 09/15/03 last revised 01/21/04 prepared by Highland Engineering, Inc. and having the following metes and bounds to wit. 
BEGINNING at a point at the intersection of the southern right-of-way of peachtree street (having a right-of-way of 30') with the Western right-of-way of peachtree street (having a right-of-way of 60') at a # P.K. Nail found, the point of beginning (P.O.B.); 
THENCE turning and continuing along the Western right-of-way of Peachtree Street (60' RIW) South 04 degrees 37 minutes 52 seconds West (S04°37'52"W) a distance of 198.20' TO A '/,'' open top pipe found; thence turning and leaving said right-of-way and continuing North 84 DEGREES 46 minutes 38 seconds West (N84°46'38"W) a distance of 399.08' to a #4 rebar found on the Eastern right-of-way of Cypress Street (30' RIW); thence turning and continuing along said right-of-way North 04 degrees 47 minutes 54 seconds East (N04°47'54"F) a distance of 197.34' TO A P.K. Nail set on the Southern right-of-way of Seventh Street; thence turning and continuing along said right-of-way South 84 degrees 54 minutes 03 seconds East (S84°54'03"E) a distance of 398.50' to the point-of beginning and containing 1.81 acres (78,866 SQ. FT.). 
(23)  For one (1) package store located on that parcel of land known as 3495 Buckhead Loop, NE, Atlanta, Georgia, under the numbering system of the City of Atlanta and being more particularly described as: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in land lot 62 of the 17th district of atlanta, fulton county, georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
To find the true point of beginning, commence at the point of intersection of the southeasterly right-of-way line of Buckhead Loop, a/k/a Lenox Road (variable right-of-way) with the northeasterly right-or-way line of Piedmont Road (variable right-of-way); continuing thence along said right-of-way line of Buckhead Loop, a/k/a Lenox Road, the following courses and distances; North 02° 00' 52" East 32.00 feet to a point; North 27° 32' 30" East 56.50 feet to a point; North 31° 59' 10" East 166.30 feet to a point; North 30° 59' 51" East 33.18 feet to a point; North 40° 48' 06" East 18.90 feet to a point; north 54° 14' 50" East 51.59 feet to a point; and North 40° 49' 37" East 233.83 feet to a 5/8" rebar and the true point of beginning. from said true point of beginning thus established, thence leaving said right-of-way line and running South 61° 45' 53" East 737.66 feet to an iron pin found; thence running North 45° 48' 47" East 100.44 feet to a point; thence running North 45° 51' 09" East 198.03 feet to a one-inch open top pipe; thence running north 45° 51' 21" East 199.79 feet to a point located on the southwesterly right-of-way line of Georgia 400 (variable right-of-way); thence running along said right-of-way line of Georgia 400 the following courses and distances; North 09° 17' 21" West 50.68 feet to a point; in a northwesterly direction along the arc of a circular curve to the right, said arc being subtended by a 249.06 foot chord bearing north 25° 24' 07'' West, an arc distance of 249.11 feet to a point; North 23° 22' 01" West 186.63 feet to a point; North 23° 22' 01" West 90.00 feet to a point; and North 60° 39' 39" West 133.74 feet to the point of intersection of said right-of-way line with the southeasterly right-of-way line of Buckhead Loop, a/k/a Lenox Road; thence running along said right-of-way line of Buckhead Loop, a/k/a Lenox Road the following courses and distances; in a southwesterly direction along the arc of a circular curve to the left, said arc being subtended by a 55.35 foot chord bearing South 77° 25' 16" West, an arc distance of 55.78 feet to a point; in a southwesterly direction along the arc of a circular curve to the left, said arc being subtended by a 25.29 foot chord bearing South 64° 18' 19" West, an arc distance of 25.29 feet to a point; in a southwesterly direction along the arc of a circular curve to the left, said arc being subtended by a 345.65 foot chord bearing South 52° 08' 32" West, an arc distance of 347.92 feet to a point; South 41° 36' 17" west 428.17 feet to a point; and South 40° 41' 12" West 49.13 feet to the true point of beginning. 
Together with easement rights granted pursuant to cross easement agreement among Charles S. Ackerman, Ackerman & Co. and the First National Bank of Boston, dated October 13, 1989, recorded in deed book 12864, page 190, office of the clerk of the superior court, fulton county, Georgia, as modified by first amendment to cross easement agreement by and between Charles S. Ackerman, Brasstown Development Corp. and the First National Bank of Boston, dated January 7, 1993, recorded in deed book 16232, page 1, aforesaid records. 
Together with easement rights granted pursuant to easement and shared facilities agreement by and between Capital City Plaza Associates and Buckhead Station, L.L.C., dated September 13, 1995, and recorded in deed book 19997, page 8, aforesaid records. 
Together with easement rights granted pursuant to easement agreement for access and utilities by and among Regent Peachtree Holdings, Inc., Regent Tower Holdings, Inc., and Buckhead Station, L.L.C., dated september 13, 1995, and recorded in deed book 19997, page 43, aforesaid records. 
Together with easement rights granted pursuant to easement and operating agreement by and between Buckhead Station, L.L.C. and Dominion Blt, L.P., dated september 13, 1995, and recorded in deed book 19997. page 124, aforesaid records. 
Less and except: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in land lot 62 of the 17th district of Fulton County, Georgia. land being more particularly described as follows: 
To find the true point of beginning, commence at the point of intersection of the southeasterly right-of-way line OF Buckhead Loop, a/k/a Lenox Road (variable right-of-way) with the northeasterly right-of-way line of Piedmont Road (variable right-of-way); continuing thence along said right-of-way line of Buckhead Loop, a/k/a Lenox Road, the following courses and distances; north 02° 00' 52" East 32.00 feet to a point; north 27° 32' 30" East, 56.50 feet to a point; North 31° 59' 10" East 166.30 feet to a point; North 30° 59' 51" East 33.18 feet to a point; North 40° 48' 06" East 18.90 feet to a point; North 54° 14' 50" East 51.59 feet to a point; and North 40° 49' 37" East 233.83 feet to a 5/8" rebar; thence leaving said right-of-way line and continuing South 61° 45' 53"' east 737.66 feet to an iron pin found; continuing thence South 44° 04' 02" West 74.54 feet to a point; continuing thence North 24° 49' 07'' East 118.10 feet to the true point of beginning. From said true point of beginning thus established, thence running North 69° 08' 51" West 71.50 feet to a point; thence running North 61° 37' 45" West 76.39 feet to a point; thence running North 07° 31' 27" West 56.00 feet to a point; thence running North 52° 28' 33" East 186.00 feet to a point; thence running South 44° 08' 51" East 161.16 feet to a point; thence running South 45° 51' 09" West 165.00 feet to the true point of beginning. 
(24)  For that parcel of land located at 1039-1059 Grant Street and 0 Hill Street, S.E., Atlanta, Georgia, under the numbering system of the city and being more particularly described as: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 42 of the 14th District of Fulton County, Georgia, as shown on that survey for Grant-Hill LLC and Old Republic National Title Insurance Company prepared by Conroy & Associates, P.C., bearing the seal and certification of Daniel F. Conroy, Georgia- Registered Land Surveyor No. 2350, said survey drawn May 31, 2007 and last revised June 10, 2007, to which survey reference is hereby made for a complete and accurate legal description and being more particularly described as follows: 
TO FIND THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING, commence at the intersection of the southerly right-of-way line of Grady Avenue (abandoned) and the westerly right-of-way line of Grant Street (50 foot right-of-way); thence run southwesterly a distance of 457.00 feet along the westerly right-of-way of Grant Street to an iron pin found in concrete and THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING; continue thence along said westerly right-of-way line South 00 degrees 16 minutes 03 seconds West a distance of 560.58 feet to an iron pin found (1/2 inch rebar); leaving said westerly right-of-way of Grant Street, run thence South 89 degrees 51 minutes 38 seconds West a distance of 307.14 feet to an iron pin found (mark on wall) on the easterly line of a 15 foot alley (not open); thence run along the easterly line of the 15 foot alley North 00 degrees 00 minutes 22 seconds East a distance of 561.75 feet to an iron pin found (1/2 inch rebar); leaving said easterly line of the 15 foot alley, thence run South 89 degrees 55 minutes 17 seconds East a distance of 309.69 feet to an iron pin found in concrete and THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. Said parcel of land being known as 1035 and 1039 Grant Street, Atlanta, Georgia 30315 according to the current system of numbering property in the City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia. 
AND ALSO: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 42 of the 14th District of Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at an iron pin found on the North right-of-way line of the Atlanta and West Point Railroad with its intersection with the West right-of-way of Grant Street; thence South 89 degrees 59 minutes 17 seconds West a distance of 81.01 feet to an iron pin found; thence North 00 degrees 37 minutes 33 seconds East a distance of 50.15 feet to an iron pin found; thence South 89 degrees 48 minutes 24 seconds West a distance of 424.31 feet to an iron pin found; thence North 00 degrees 16 minutes 08 seconds East a distance of 121.83 feet to an iron pin found; thence North 89 degrees 48 minutes 24 seconds East a distance of 200.20 feet to an iron pin set; thence North 00 degrees 05 minutes 43 seconds East a distance of 29.8 feet to an iron pin set; thence South 89 degrees 53 minutes 25 seconds East a distance of 307.2 feet to an iron pin found; thence south 00 degrees 55 minutes 43 seconds West a distance of 200.44 feet to an iron pin found and point of beginning, all as more particularly shown on a survey for Jay D. Kessler by Solar Land Surveying Company, dated March 8, 2000. 
(25)  For one retail establishment located at 2595 Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, SW, Atlanta, Georgia 30311. 
All the tract and parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 205 of the 14th District of Fulton County, Georgia, being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING at the intersection formed by the northeasterly right-of-way of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive and the easterly right-of-way of Westland Boulevard and running thence in a northerly direction along the easterly right-of way of Westland Boulevard and the following courses and distances: North 37 degrees 31 minutes 26 seconds West a distance of 23.5 feet; thence North 01 degrees 00 minutes 47 seconds East a distance of 52.0 feet; thence North 88 degrees 59 minutes 14 seconds West a distance of 5.78 feet; thence North 00 degrees 39 minutes 43 seconds West a distance of 106.02 feet to a point; running thence South 82 degrees 19 minutes 34 seconds East, and departing from Westland Boulevard, a distance of 214.95 feet to a point; running thence South 00 degrees 34 minutes 00 seconds West a distance of 234.17 feet to the northeasterly right-of-way of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive; running thence North 75 degrees 44 minutes 13 seconds West along the Northeasterly right-of-way of Martin Luther King Jr. Drive a distance of 196.5 feet to the easterly right-of-way of Westland Boulevard and the Point of Beginning; as per plat of survey by Watts & Browning, Engineers, for Gulf Oil Corporation, dated October 4, 1980, last received February 25, 1981. 
(26)  For one retail establishment located at the following tracts or parcels of Land Lot 51 of the 14 th District, City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia and more particularly described as follows: 
Tract 1 — 120 Piedmont Ave. 
To Reach the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING, commence at a chiseled hole found in concrete at the intersection of the northerly Right-of-way of John Wesley Dobbs Avenue (60' R/W) and the westerly Right-of-way of Piedmont Avenue (60' Right-of-way), thence along said Right-of-way of Piedmont Avenue North 00° 27' 48" East a distance of 119.86 feet to a ¾" crimp top pipe found and the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING; thence leaving said Right-of-way and running North 89° 18' 01" West a distance of 151.44 feet to a mag nail with washer found; thence North 00° 43' 35" East a distance of 79.91 feet to a point; thence North 89° 15' 36" West a distance of 21.82 feet to a building corner; thence along said building line North 00° 16' 16" West a distance of 34.85 feet to a building corner; thence along said building line South 89° 24' 43" East a distance of 172.82 feet to a 3/8" rebar found; thence South 00° 12' 16" West a distance of 115.11 feet to the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. Said tract contains 0.416 Acres (18,121 Square Feet). 
Tract 2 — 138 JW Dobbs Ave. 
To Reach the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING, commence at a chiseled hole found in concrete at the intersection of the northerly Right-of-way of John Wesley Dobbs Avenue (60' R/W) and the westerly Right-of-way of Piedmont Avenue (60' Right-of-way), thence along said Right-of-way of John Wesley Dobbs Avenue North 89° 23' 42" West a distance of 151.95 feet to a 5/8" rod found and the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING; thence continuing along said Right-of-way and running thence North 89° 29' 48" West a distance of 82.03 feet to a building corner; thence running along a line between two build ings North 00° 05' 39" East a distance of 200.09 feet to a building corner; thence South 89° 31' 25" East a distance of 62.38 feet to a building corner; thence South 89° 15' 36" East a distance of 21.82 feet to a point; thence South 00° 43' 35" West a distance of 79.91 feet to a mag nail with washer found; thence South 00° 42' 20" West a distance of 120.11 feet to the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. Said tract contains 0.382 Acres (16,629 Square Feet). 
"Cut-Out" Parcel from 160 JW Dobbs Ave. 
To Reach the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING commence at a chiseled hole found in concrete at the intersection of the northerly Right-of-way of John Wesley Dobbs Avenue (60' R/W) and the westerly Right-of-way of Piedmont Avenue (60' R/W); thence running along the said Right-of-way of John Wesley Dobbs (60' R/W) North 89° 23' 42" West a distance of 100.93 feet to a point and the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING; from point thus established and continuing along said Right-of-way North 89° 23' 42" West a distance of 51.01 feet to a 5/8" rod found; thence leaving said Right-of-way and running North 00° 42' 20" East a distance of 120.11 feet to a mag nail with washer found; thence South 89° 18' 01" East a distance of 151.44 feet to a 3/4" crimp top pipe found on the westerly Right-of-way of Piedmont Avenue (60' R/W); thence running along said Right-of-way South 00° 27' 48" West a distance of 30.84 feet to a point; thence leaving said Right-of-way North 89° 37' 09" West a distance of 101.06 feet to a point; thence South 00° 22' 51" West a distance of 88.63 feet to the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. Said tract contains 0.212 Acres (9,230 Square Feet). 
(27)  For one retail establishment selling beer/wine located at a consolidated location that includes 2356 Marietta Boulevard, NW, 2429 Bolton Road, NW, and an abandoned portion of Adams Drive; and situated on that parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 230 and of the 17 th District of Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a concrete right-of-way monument found at the intersection of the southerly right-of-way line of Bolton Road (variable right-of-way) and the southwesterly right-of-way line of Marietta Boulevard (variable right-of-way), thence along said right-of-way line of Marietta Boulevard S 56°46'22" E a distance of 10.59 feet to a 1/2" rebar with cap set inscribed LECRAW LSF 1160, thence continuing along said right-of-way line of Marietta Boulevard and crossing the abandoned right-of-way line of Adams Drive South 49°50'34" East a distance of 66.68 feet to a 1/2" rebar found; thence following said right-of-way line of Marietta Boulevard the following 2 courses and distances: S 52°44'24" E a distance of 129.66 feet to a P.K. Nail found and S 56°07'33" E a distance of 60.38 feet to a ½" rebar with cap found; thence departing said right-of-way and following the dividing line between realty income properties 25, LLC (per deed book 54059, page 17, Fulton County, Georgia, Records) to the East and Mountainprize, INC. (per deed book 55556, page 335, aforesaid records) to the West, S 04°29'50" W a distance of 215.17 feet to a ½" rebar with cap found; thence following the dividing line between KC Inspired Investments, Inc. (per deed book 44196, page 594, AFORESAID RECORDS) to the South, West and South, respectively and said Mountain Prize, Inc. To the North, East and North, respectively, the following 3 courses and distances: N 82°53'53" W a distance of 34.50 feet to a ½" rebar with cap found, N 03°09'53" W a distance of 58.10 feet to a ½" rebar with cap found and N 79°53'53" W a distance of 99.40 feet to a scribed "X" found; thence crossing the abandoned 40 foot right-of-way of Adams Drive S 60°04'57" W a distance of 45.11 feet to a point; thence following the dividing line between City of Atlanta (per deed book 24424, page 329, aforesaid records) to the South and West respectively and Bolton Adams, LLC (per deed book 53612, page 94, aforesaid records) to the North and East respectively, the following 6 courses and distances: N 89°51'52" W (passing a ½" rebar with cap set at a distance of 10.00 feet and passing a ½" rebar with cap set at a distance of 187.97), a total distance of 197.97 feet to a point, N 03°06'49" W a distance of 88.47 feet to a ½" rebar with cap set, N 07°55'34" E a distance of 52.52 feet to a point, N 01°43'33" E a distance of 85.07 feet to a ½" rebar with cap set, N 71°55'27" W a distance of 177.00 feet to a ½" rebar with cap set and N 01°40'27" E a distance of 63.96 feet to a ½" rebar with cap set on the southerly right-of-way line of Bolton Road (variable right-of-way); thence along said right-of-way line the following 5 courses and distances: S 88°32'30" E a distance of 40.35 feet to a scribed "X" set, S 02°16'11" W a distance of 4.19 feet to a concrete right-of-way monument found, S 87°32'04" E A distance of 30.28 feet to a concrete right-of-way monument found, S 77°42'34" E a distance of 65.05 feet and s 88°17'02" e, passing a ½" rebar set at a distance of 7.36 feet, a total distance of 203.60 feet, back to the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
(28)  For one (1) retail grocery supermarket located on that parcel of land located at the southeast corner of the intersection of 14th Street, NW and Spring Street, NW and such parcel of land being more particularly described as: All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 107 of the 17th District, City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning for the same at the northeasterly end of a mitered corner of the intersection of the East Right-of-Way Line of Spring Street, (variable width right-of-way) as per Georgia DOT Right-of-Way Plans - Project No. NHS-0001 -00(298) & NHS-0005-00(945), and the South Right-of-Way Line of 14 th Street, also known as Georgia Highway 9 (variable width right-of-way) per the aforementioned GDOT Plans; thence, leaving said Point of Beginning and running with the said line of 14 th Street 
1.  South 89° 33' 51" East, 343.59 feet; thence, 
2.  South 44° 46' 58" East, 20.38 feet to a point on the West Right-of-Way Line of West Peachtree Street (variable width right-of-way) as per the aforementioned GDOT Plans; thence, running with the said line of West Peachtree Street. 
3.  South 00° 34' 27" West, 57.95 feet; thence, 
4.  South 89° 47' 38" East, 10.00 feet; thence, 
5.  South 00° 41' 17" West, 65.00 feet; thence, 
6.  South 00° 34' 21" West, 122.00 feet to the point of intersection with the North Right-of-Way Line of 13 th Street (an apparent 30 feet wide right-of-way); thence, running with the said line of 13 th Street 
7.  North 89° 30' 56" West, 213.00 feet; thence, 
8.  North 89° 38' 43" West, 164.07 feet to a ½ inch open top pipe with a nail found at the intersection with the aforesaid line of Spring Street; thence, running with the said line of Spring Street 
9.  North 00° 54' 04" West, 244.42 feet; thence, 
10.  North 46° 19' 36" East, 21.49 feet to the Point of Beginning, containing 97,664 square feet or 2.2421 acres of land, more or less. 
(29)  For all package stores licensed for the sale of beer and wine, wine specialty shops, "Distillers" as defined by state law, "Brewers" as defined by state law, and "Farm Wineries" as defined by state law located at 929 Lee Street, Atlanta, Georgia 30310 situated on all that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 106, 118 and 119 of the 14th District, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in land lots 106, 118 and 119 of the 14th district, City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at an iron pin set at the intersection of the southwesterly right-of-way of White Street (r/w varies) and the northwesterly right-of-way of Lee Street (r/w varies), thence departing said southwesterly right-of-way of White Street and proceeding along said northwesterly right-of-way of Lee Street South 33 degrees 11 minutes 05 seconds West a distance of 504.00 feet to a point; thence South 33 degrees 26 minutes 14 seconds West a distance of 22.35 feet to an iron pin set at the intersection of said northwesterly right-of-way of Lee Street and the northeasterly right-of-way of Louisville and Nashville Railway Company (r/w varies); Thence departing said northwesterly right-of-way of Lee Street and proceeding along said northeasterly right-of-way of Louisville and Nashville Railway Company North 53 degrees 42 minutes 31 seconds WEST a distance of 280.28 feet to a point; Thence along a curve to the right with a radius of 477.47 feet and an arc length of 77.51 feet, said curve having a chord bearing of North 49 degrees 04 minutes 31 seconds West and a chord distance of 77.42 feet to a point; Thence North 44 degrees 25 minutes 31 seconds West a distance of 676.05 feet to a point; Thence South 36 degrees 15 minutes 31 seconds West a distance of 6.42 feet to a point; Thence North 53 degrees 42 minutes 31 seconds West a distance of 562.70 feet to an iron pin set; Thence departing said northeasterly right-of-way of Louisville and Nashville Railway Company North 36 degrees 17 minutes 29 seconds East a distance of 318.52 feet to an iron pin set on said southwesterly right-of-way of White Street; Thence proceeding along said southwesterly right-of-way of White Street South 54 degrees 06 minutes 42 seconds East a distance of 281.27 feet to a point; Thence South 55 degrees 08 minutes 13 seconds East a distance of 90.55 feet to a point; Thence South 58 degrees 21 minutes 04 seconds east a distance of 84.24 feet to a point; Thence South 60 degrees 55 minutes 03 seconds East a distance of 183.78 feet to a point; thence South 60 degrees 06 minutes 37 seconds East a distance of 251.81 feet to a point; Thence South 57 degrees 42 minutes 13 seconds East a distance of 127.48 feet to a point; Thence South 57 degrees 00 minutes 51 seconds East a distance of 73.24 feet to a point; Thence along a curve to the left with a radius of 409.28 feet and an arc length of 46.56 feet, said curve having a chord bearing of South 53 degrees 33 minutes 25 seconds East and a chord distance of 46.53 feet to a point; Thence South 56 degrees 48 minutes 55 seconds East a distance of 424.40 feet to a point, said point being the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. Said tract contains 643,210 square feet or 14.77 acres and is shown as "parcel 4" on that certain ALTA/ACSM Land Title Survey for SRPF A/Lee & White, L.L.C., A10 Capital, LLC, and First American Title Insurance Company, prepared by Travis Pruitt & Associates, Inc., bearing the seal and certification of Jaime F. Higgins, G.R.L.S. No. 2802, dated June 17, 2015, and as last revised October 15, 2015. 
(30)  For one (1) retail package store establishment that shall derive a minimum of ninety (90) percent of its gross receipts from the sale of liquor, beer, and wine located at 1151 Chattahoochee Avenue, NW, 30318; and situated on that parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 187 and of the 17 th District of Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a point on the Northwest side of New Chattahoochee Avenue 297 feet Northeast of the Northeast corner of New Chattahoochee Avenue and Booker Street; Thence Northeast along the Northwest side of New Chattahoochee Avenue 210 feet to a point; Thence in a Northwesterly direction along a line which forms an interior angle of 88 degrees 45 minutes with a Northwest side of New Chattahoochee Avenue a distance of 400 feet; Thence in a Southwesterly direction along a line which forms an interior angle of 91 degrees 15 minutes with the preceding course a distance of 210 feet; Thence in a Southeasterly direction along a line which forms an interior angle of 88 degrees 45 minutes with the preceding course a distance of 400 feet to the point of beginning. 
(31)  For not more than one package store located at 360 Pharr Road, such property being more particularly described as: All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 61 of the 17th District, City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a P-K Nail found at the intersection of the North right-of-way line of Pharr Road (70 foot right-of-way) with the East right-of-way line of Grandview Avenue (50 foot right-of-way); running thence along the East right-of-way line of Grandview Avenue (50 foot right-of-way) North 04 degrees 39 minutes 53 seconds East 369.08 feet to a ½-inch rebar found (disturbed) at the intersection of the East right-of-way line of Grandview Avenue with the Southwest right-of-way line of Buckhead Avenue (50 foot right-of-way); thence along the Southwest right-of-way of Buckhead Avenue, South 75 degrees 27 minutes 20 seconds East 144.18 feet to a P-K Nail set on the centerline of Sims Circle (40 foot right-of-way); thence, leaving the Southwest right-of-way line of Buckhead Avenue, along the centerline of Sims Circle, the following courses and distances: (1) South 54 degrees 01 minute 10 seconds East 78.68 feet to a point; (2) South 52 degrees 31 minutes 29 seconds East 21.99 feet to a point; (3) along the arc of a curve to the right (which arc is subtended by a chord having a bearing and distance of South 25 degrees 10 minutes 51 seconds East 103.64 feet and a radius of 112.76 feet) 107.69 feet to a point, and (4) South 01 degrees 37 minutes 22 seconds West 72.00 feet to a point; thence leaving the centerline of Sims Circle, South 84 degrees 24 minutes 12 seconds East 19.96 feet to a 5/8-inch rebar set; thence south 84 degrees 24 minutes 22 seconds East 79.01 feet to a 5/8 -inch rebar found; thence South 02 degrees 29 minutes 07 seconds West 135.50 feet to a ½-inch rebar found on the North right-of-way line of Pharr Road; thence along the North right-of-way line of Pharr Road North 84 degrees 15 minutes 32 seconds west 387.32 feet to the point of beginning, said tract containing approximately 2.448 acres as shown on plat of boundray and topographic survey for East Village Place limited partnership, Amsouth Bank and Chicago Title Insurance Company prepared by Geosurvey, Ltd., bearing the seal and certification of Trenton D. Turk, Georgia registered professional Land Surveyor No. 2411, dated July 3, 2000, last revised November 8, 2000. Together with those certain perpetual non-exclusive easement rights contained in that certain grant of easements by and between Gables Realty limited partnership and East Village Place limited partnership, dated November 9, 2000, filed November 13, 2000 in deed book 29660, page 292, records of the Superior Court of Fulton County, Georgia. 
(32)  For one specialty food shop located at an address currently known as 2031-2033 Hosea L. Williams Drive, S.E.; and situated on that parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 206 and of the 15 th District of DeKalb County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a point found on the Southern side of Boulevard Drive (formerly Boulevard — Dekalb) 259.50 feet easterly as measured along the Southern side of Boulevard Drive from the corner formed by the intersection of the Southern side of Boulevard Drive with the Northeastern side of Oakview Road; said point of beginning being at the Northeast corner of lot 2 said subdivision; running thence Southerly along the East line of said lot 2, 100.00 feet to a point; running thence Easterly, parallel to the Southern side of Boulevard Drive, 44.00 feet to a point; running thence Northerly, parallel to the East line of said lot 2, 56.00 feet to a point; thence running Easterly, parallel to the Southern side of Boulevard Drive, 5.00 feet to a point; running thence Northerly, parallel to the East line of said lot 2, 44.00 feet to a point on the Southern side of Boulevard Drive, running thence westerly long the Southern side of Boulevard Drive 49.00 feet to the point of beginning, being the same property conveyed in deed recorded at deed book 9335, page 226, Dekalb County Georgia Records, being the same property conveyed in deed recorded at deed book 12530, page 694; being known as 2031-2033 Boulevard Drive, according to the present system of numbering houses in Dekalb County, Georgia. 
(33)  For that parcel of land located at 350 Moreland Avenue, NE, Atlanta, Georgia, 30307, under that numbering system of the City of Atlanta and being more particularly described as: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 150 of the 14th District of Fulton County. Georgia, and being more particularly described as: 
BEGINNING at an iron pin set on the westerly right-of-way line of Moreland Avenue (84 foot Right-of-way) 328.42 feet southerly as measured along said right-of-way line, from the intersection of said right-of-way line with the centerline of Euclid Avenue (formerly McLendon) and 298.76 feet southerly, as measured along said right-of-way line, from the intersection of the western right-of-way line of Moreland Avenue and the southern right-of-way line of Euclid Avenue, said iron pin also being the southeast corner of property now or formerly owned by ADM Associates. Inc. (Deed Book 10013, Page 493, Fulton County, Georgia Records); thence South 01 degrees 22 minutes 00 seconds West a distance of 141.24 feet along the westerly right-of-way line of Moreland Avenue to a point; thence South 00 degrees 07 minutes 25 seconds East a distance of 38.54 feet along said right-of-way line to a point, said point being the northeastern corner of property now or formerly owned by the City of Atlanta (Deed Book 2368, Page 461, aforesaid Records); thence leaving said right-of-way line and running North 89 degrees 16 minutes 05 seconds West along the northern boundary line of said property now or formerly owned by the City of Atlanta, a distance of 164.95 feet to a 2 inch pipe found at the southeastern corner of property now formerly owned by Community Theatres Company (Deed Book 2571, page 578, aforesaid Records); thence North 00 degrees 54 minutes 55 seconds East a distance of 49.65 feet to a 1 1/2 inch pipe found at the southwest corner of the terminus of a 10 foot alley; thence South 89 degree 18 minutes 05 seconds East a distance of 10.00 feet along the southern side of said alley to a nail in cap set; thence North 02 degrees 25 minutes 11 seconds East a distance of 83.10 feet along the eastern side of said alley to a 1/2 inch rebar found; thence North 00 degrees 44 minutes 12 seconds East along the eastern side of said alley a distance of 50.69 feet to a point at the southwestern corner of the property now formerly owned by ADM Associates, Inc.; thence South 87 degrees 54 minutes 34 seconds East along the southern boundary line of said property now or formerly owned by ADM Associates, Inc., a distance of 153.37 feet to the iron pin sat at the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to applicants for licenses for adult entertainment establishments. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2042; Ord. No. 1995-43, § 7, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 2001-3, §§ 1, 2, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 2002-49, § 1, 6-12-02; Ord. No. 2002-90, § 1, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 2003-10, § 1, 2-11-03; Ord. No. 2004-14, § 1, 4-28-04; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 1, 5-12-04; Ord. No. 2004-71, § 1, 10-8-04; Ord. No. 2004-85, § 1, 11-19-04; Ord. No. 2012-45(12-O-1251), § 1, 10-12-12; Ord. No. 2013-17(13-O-0638), § 1, 5-15-13; Ord. No. 2013-46(13-O-1260), § 1, 11-27-13 ; Ord. No. 2013-63(13-O-1340), § 1, 11-27-13 ; Ord. No. 2013-65(13-O-1378), § 1, 12-11-13 ; Ord. No. 2014-10(14-O-1114), § 1, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-12(14-O-1135), § 1, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-27(14-O-1307), § 1, 6-25-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-31(14-O-1305), § 1, 7-16-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-34(14-O-1072), § 2, 7-30-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-54(14-O-1558), § 1, 12-10-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-18(15-O-1158), § 1, 5-13-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-41(15-O-1301), § 2, 7-29-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-48(15-O-1042), § 2, 10-14-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-15(16-O-1214), § 1, 5-25-16 ; Ord. No. 2016-19(16-O-1216) , § 2, 5-25-16; Ord. No. 2016-23(16-O-1359) , § 1, 7-14-16; Ord. No. 2016-29(16-O-1424) , § 1, 9-15-16; Ord. No. 2016-34(16-O-1442) , § 1, 9-28-16; Ord. No. 2017-06(17-O-1003), § 1, 2-15-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-24(17-O-1201), § 1, 5-1-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-25(17-O-1194), § 2, 5-15-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-29(17-O-1245), § 1, 5-15-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-37(17-O-1334), § 1, 6-28-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-54(17-O-1562), § 1, 9-18-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-61(17-O-1611), § 1, 10-16-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-08(18-O-1151), § 1, 3-28-18 ; Ord. No. 2018-13(18-O-1227), § 1, 5-16-18 ) 
Sec. 10-93. - Exemptions for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. 
(a)  Any applicant for a license to sell wine and/or malt beverages by the package, and not distilled spirits by the package, shall be exempt from the distance requirement provided for in section 10-88.1(b)(5) of the City Code of Ordinances from churches or similar places of religious worship if the location for which the license is being sought and the applicant for such license meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The location for which a license to sell wine and/or malt beverages is being sought must have an address on Peachtree Street or Road, and it must be within the area designated by the city as the Midtown Community Improvement District; and 
(2)  At the time of filing the application, the applicant for the license to sell wine and/or malt beverages by the package, or his agent, must hold a current license in the city to sell beer and/or wine for consumption on the premises in a restaurant which has a Peachtree Street or road address and which is located immediately adjacent to the location for which the applicant is seeking a license to sell wine and/or malt beverages by the package. For purposes of this Code section, the term "immediately adjacent to" shall mean directly next door or side by side to each other. 
(3)  In conjunction with the sale of wine and/or malt beverages by the package in the new location, the applicant must sell food to be consumed off premises which is prepared in the kitchen of the restaurant located immediately adjacent to the location which will sell packaged wine and/or beer. 
(b)  Any applicant for a license to sell alcoholic beverages, including beer, wine and distilled spirits, by the package within the following areas shall not be required to comply with the distance requirements set forth in section 10-88.1 of the City Code of Ordinances: 
(1)  If the applicant for such license and the location for which the license is being sought meets the following requirements: 
a.  At the time of filing the application for a license, the applicant for the license to sell alcoholic beverages by the package, or his agent, must have been issued a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the package within the past 12 months in an establishment located within SPI 16; 
b.  The applicant or his agent has filed an application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the package at a new location within SPI 16 because the business can no longer be operated at the former location due to either the planned demolition or reconstruction of the building within which the establishment was located; and 
c.  The new location for which a license to sell alcoholic beverages is being sought lies within the following area: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 106 & 107 of the 17th District of Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a PK nail set at the intersection of the northwesterly right-of-way of Peachtree Place (50' R/W) and the southwesterly right-of-way of West Peachtree Street (75' R/W); thence along said right-of-way of Peachtree Place South 83 degrees 06 minutes 36 seconds West a distance of 182.35 feet to a PK nail set; thence departing said right-of-way North 13 degrees 58 minutes 14 seconds West a distance of 123.60 feet to a PK nail set; thence North 57 degrees 11 minutes 26 seconds East a distance of 169.77 feet to a PK nail set on said right-of-way of West Peachtree Street; thence along said right-of-way along a curve to the left an arc distance of 71.31 feet (being subtended by a chord distance of 71.29 feet a bearing of South 21 degrees 35 minutes 28 seconds East and a 920.70 foot radius) to a point; thence along a curve to the right an arc distance of 42.84 feet (being subtended by a chord distance of 42.84 feet, a bearing of South 20 degrees 36 minutes 11 seconds East and a 7791.88 foot radius) to said PK nail set and the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
(2)  If the location for which the license is being sought within the following: 
a.  That parcel of land known as 275 Memorial Drive, S.E. and being more particularly described as all that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the City of Atlanta in Land Lot 53 of the 14th District, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a 5/8 -inch rebar set at the north side of the mitered intersection of the southerly right-of-way of Memorial Drive having a variable right-of-way and the east side of Hill Street having a variable right-of-way and thence run along said southerly right-of-way South 89 degrees 12 minutes 36 seconds East, a distance of 355.66 feet to a 5/8 -inch rebar set; Thence South 00 degrees 40 minutes 48 seconds West, a distance of 194.01 feet to a 5/8 -inch rebar set; Thence North 89 degrees 17 minutes 08 seconds West, a distance of 34.00 feet to a crimp top pipe found; Thence South 00 degrees 40 minutes 48 seconds West, a distance of 0.56 feet to a point; Thence North 89 degrees 32 minutes 53 seconds West, a distance of 66.00 feet to a 5/8 -inch rebar set; Thence South 00 degrees 42 minutes 55 seconds West, a distance of 1.48 feet to a 5/8 -inch rebar set; Thence North 89 degrees 12 minutes 36 seconds West, a distance of 50.00 feet to a 5/8 -inch rebar set; Thence North 00 degrees 41 minutes 52 seconds East, a distance of 1.27 feet to a 5/8 -inch rebar set; Thence North 89 degrees 17 minutes 08 seconds West, a distance of 57.56 feet to a 5/8 -inch rebar set; Thence North 00 degrees 43 minutes 42 seconds East, a distance of 55.28 feet to a 5/8 -inch rebar set; Thence North 88 degrees 49 minutes 27 seconds West, a distance of 42.58 feet to a ½-inch rebar found; Thence North 02 degrees 16 minutes 58 seconds East, a distance of 0.88 feet to a 5/8 -inch rebar set; Thence North 89 degrees 12 minutes 05 seconds West, a distance of 130.95 feet to a 5/8 - inch rebar set on said easterly right-of-way; Thence run along said westerly right-of-way North 00 degrees 46 minutes 35 seconds East, a distance of 124.40 feet to a 5/8 -inch rebar set on the south side of said miter; Thence run along said miter North 61 degrees 02 minutes 12 seconds East, a distance of 28.93 feet to a 5/8 - inch rebar set and the Point of Beginning. 
b.  That property located at 464 Windsor Street, SW, and situated on all that tract or parcel of land lying in and being in the City of Atlanta, Land Lot #76 of the 14th District, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
Exhibit "A" 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 76 of the 14th Land District of Fulton County, Georgia, being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the point of intersection of the northerly right-of-way line of Fulton Street (seventy-foot right-of-way) and the easterly right-of-way line of Windsor Street (right-of-way varies), said point being marked by an iron pin set, run thence along said right-of-way line of Windsor Street North 01 degrees 44 minutes 02 seconds East a distance of 309.16 feet to a point marked by an iron pin set, continue thence along said right-of-way line South 88 degrees 21 minutes 11 seconds East a distance of 41.63 feet to a point marked by an iron pin set, continue thence along said right-of-way line North 00 degrees 14 minutes 49 seconds East a distance of 111.68 feet to a point located on the southerly right-of-way line of Eugenia Street (thirty-foot right-of-way), said point being marked by an iron pin set, thence leaving said right-of-way line of Windsor Street run along said right-of-way line of Eugenia Street South 88 degrees 52 minutes 07 seconds East a distance of 109.38 feet to a point marked by an iron pin set, thence leaving said right-of-way line, run South 00 degrees 15 minutes 00 seconds East a distance of 111.82 feet to a point marked by an iron pin set; run thence South 00 degrees 53 minutes 12 seconds West a distance of 50.48 feet to a point marked by an iron pin set, run thence South 05 degrees 53 minutes 28 seconds West a distance of 13.91 feet to a point marked by an iron pin set, run thence South 01 degrees 21 minutes 16 seconds West a distance of 67.76 feet to a point marked by an iron pin set, run thence South 89 degrees 23 minutes 09 seconds East a distance of 6.70 feet to a point marked by an iron pin set, run thence South 00 degrees 54 minutes 40 seconds West a distance of 176.31 feet to a point located on the northerly right-of-way line of Fulton Street, said point being marked by an iron pin set, run thence along said right-of-way line North 88 degrees 58 minutes 28 seconds West a distance of 161.41 feet to the point of intersection of Windsor Street and Fulton Street, said point being marked by an iron pin set and said point being the true point of beginning. 
Said tract of land contains 1.392 acres, more or less, and is more particularly described on a Boundary and Topographic Survey prepared by Conroy & Associates, P.C., bearing the seal and certification of Daniel F. Conroy, Georgia Registered Land Surveyor No. 2350, surveyed September 11, 2014, drawn September 12, 2014 and last revised on September 14, 2014, said survey being numbered: AO137. 
(Ord. No. 2001-80, § 1, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 2003-100, § 1, 10-14-03; Ord. No. 2016-14(16-O-1213), § 1, 5-25-16 ; Ord. No. 2018-13(18-O-1227), § 2, 5-16-18 ) 
Sec. 10-93.1. - Exemptions for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package in certain retail commercial areas on Peachtree Road. 
Any applicant for a license to sell alcoholic beverages, including beer, wine and distilled spirits, by the package shall be exempt from the distance requirements provided for in subsections 10-88.1(a) and 10-88.1(b) of the City Code of Ordinances if the location for which the license is being sought meets each of the following requirements: 
(a)  The location for which such package license is being sought is located in a retail commercial area that contains at least 80,000 square feet of retail space. For purposes of this section, "retail commercial area" shall mean a retail area which contains at least five or more commercial establishments developed and managed as a unit and providing common on-site surface parking. 
(b)  Such retail commercial area shall be zoned C-3 and contain frontage on Peachtree Road between Junction Avenue, NE and Lindbergh Drive, NE. 
(Ord. No. 2011-05(11-O-0245), § 1, 3-2-11; Ord. No. 2011-21(11-O-0795), § 1, 6-13-11) 
Sec. 10-94. - Certain areas exempt from distance restrictions for sale for consumption on premises. 
(a)  Any applicant for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises located within the following area shall not be required to comply with the distance requirements set forth in section 10-88: 
(1)  Any property located on Peachtree Street or Road or any property located within a shopping center which has a frontage of at least 200 feet on Peachtree Street or Road. 
(2)  Any property located on Stewart Avenue between Lakewood Freeway and I-85 or any property located within a shopping center which has a frontage of at least 200 feet on Stewart Avenue. 
(3)  Any shopping center located on the east side of Monroe Drive between Eighth Street and Virginia Avenue. 
(4)  Any property within Piedmont Park which has been leased by the city to an applicant for an initial term. 
(5)  Any room or area within the Loudermilk Building, which is bounded by Auburn Avenue on the north, Edgewood on the south, Courtland Street on the east, and Peachtree Park Avenue on the west, which is controlled by a bona-fide nonprofit organization. 
(6)  The Herndon Stadium, which is bounded by Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive on the south, Vine Street on the east, Rhode Street on the north and Sunset Street to the west, providing that such exemption shall be limited to use of Herndon Stadium by a duly incorporated division of a professional sports league in connection with official professional sporting events conducted by such league. 
(7)  Any brewpub, restaurant, convention center, bar or combination thereof located on property registered in the National Register of Historic Places. 
(8)  Any room or area within the premises located at 99 Krog Street, NE, which is bounded by Lake Avenue on the north, Edgewood Avenue on the south, and Krog Street on the west. 
(9)  For that parcel of land located at 1039-1059 Grant Street and 0 Hill Street, S.E., Atlanta, Georgia, under the numbering system of the city and being more particularly described as: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 42 of the 14th District of Fulton County, Georgia, as shown on that survey for Grant-Hill LLC and Old Republic National Title Insurance Company prepared by Conroy & Associates, P.C., bearing the seal and certification of Daniel F. Conroy, Georgia-Registered Land Surveyor No. 2350, said survey drawn May 31, 2007 and last revised June 10, 2007, to which survey reference is hereby made for a complete and accurate legal description and being more particularly described as follows: 
TO FIND THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING, commence at the intersection of the southerly right-of-way line of Grady Avenue (abandoned) and the westerly right-of-way line of Grant Street (50 foot right-of-way); thence run southwesterly a distance of 457.00 feet along the westerly right-of-way of Grant Street to an iron pin found in concrete and THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING; continue thence along said westerly right-of-way line South 00 degrees 16 minutes 03 seconds West a distance of 560.58 feet to an iron pin found (½ inch rebar); leaving said westerly right-of-way of Grant Street, run thence South 89 degrees 51 minutes 38 seconds West a distance of 307.14 feet to an iron pin found (mark on wall) on the easterly line of a 15 foot alley (not open); thence run along the easterly line of the 15 foot alley North 00 degrees 00 minutes 22 seconds East a distance of 561.75 feet to an iron pin found (½ inch rebar); leaving said easterly line of the 15 foot alley, thence run South 89 degrees 55 minutes 17 seconds East a distance of 309.69 feet to an iron pin found in concrete and THE TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. Said parcel of land being known as 1035 and 1039 Grant Street, Atlanta, Georgia 30315 according to the current system of numbering property in the City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia. 
AND ALSO: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 42 of the 14th District of Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at an iron pin found on the North right-of-way line of the Atlanta and West Point Railroad with its intersection with the West right-of-way of Grant Street; thence South 89 degrees 59 minutes 17 seconds West a distance of 81.01 feet to an iron pin found; thence North 00 degrees 37 minutes 33 seconds East a distance of 50.15 feet to an iron pin found; thence South 89 degrees 48 minutes 24 seconds West a distance of 424.31 feet to an iron pin found; thence North 00 degrees 16 minutes 08 seconds East a distance of 121.83 feet to an iron pin found; thence North 89 degrees 48 minutes 24 seconds East a distance of 200.20 feet to an iron pin set; thence North 00 degrees 05 minutes 43 seconds East a distance of 29.8 feet to an iron pin set; thence South 89 degrees 53 minutes 25 seconds East a distance of 307.2 feet to an iron pin found; thence south 00 degrees 55 minutes 43 seconds West a distance of 200.44 feet to an iron pin found and point of beginning, all as more particularly shown on a survey for Jay D. Kessler by Solar Land Surveying Company, dated March 8, 2000. 
(10)  For brewpubs, restaurants, "Farm Wineries" as defined by state law, "Brewers" as defined by state law, and "Distillers" as defined by state law located at 929 Lee Street, Atlanta, Georgia 30310 situated on all that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 106, 118 and 119 of the 14th District, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in land lots 106, 118 and 119 of the 14th district, City of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at an iron pin set at the intersection of the southwesterly right-of-way of White Street (r/w varies) and the northwesterly right-of-way of Lee Street (r/w varies), thence departing said southwesterly right-of-way of White Street and proceeding along said northwesterly right-of-way of Lee Street South 33 degrees 11 minutes 05 seconds West a distance of 504.00 feet to a point; Thence South 33 degrees 26 minutes 14 seconds West a distance of 22.35 feet to an iron pin set at the intersection of said northwesterly right-of-way of Lee Street and the northeasterly right-of-way of Louisville and Nashville Railway Company (r/w varies); Thence departing said northwesterly right-of-way of Lee Street and proceeding along said northeasterly right-of-way of Louisville and Nashville Railway Company North 53 degrees 42 minutes 31 seconds West a distance of 280.28 feet to a point; Thence along a curve to the right with a radius of 477.47 feet and an arc length of 77.51 feet, said curve having a chord bearing of North 49 degrees 04 minutes 31 seconds West and a chord distance of 77.42 feet to a point; Thence North 44 degrees 25 minutes 31 seconds West a distance of 676.05 feet to a point; Thence South 36 degrees 15 minutes 31 seconds West a distance of 6.42 feet to a point; Thence North 53 degrees 42 minutes 31 seconds West a distance of 562.70 feet to an iron pin set; Thence departing said northeasterly right-of-way of Louisville and Nashville Railway Company North 36 degrees 17 minutes 29 seconds East a distance of 318.52 feet to an iron pin set on said southwesterly right-of-way of White Street; Thence proceeding along said southwesterly right-of-way of White Street South 54 degrees 06 minutes 42 seconds East a distance of 281.27 feet to a point; Thence South 55 degrees 08 minutes 13 seconds East a distance of 90.55 feet to a point; Thence South 58 degrees 21 minutes 04 seconds East a distance of 84.24 feet to a point; Thence South 60 degrees 55 minutes 03 seconds East a distance of 183.78 feet to a point; Thence South 60 degrees 06 minutes 37 seconds East a distance of 251.81 feet to a point; Thence South 57 degrees 42 minutes 13 seconds East a distance of 127.48 feet to a point; Thence South 57 degrees 00 minutes 51 seconds East a distance of 73.24 feet to a point; Thence along a curve to the left with a radius of 409.28 feet and an arc length of 46.56 feet, said curve having a chord bearing of South 53 degrees 33 minutes 25 seconds East and a chord distance of 46.53 feet to a point; Thence South 56 degrees 48 minutes 55 seconds East a distance of 424.40 feet to a point, said point being the TRUE POINT OF BEGINNING. Said tract contains 643,210 square feet or 14.77 acres and is shown as "parcel 4" on that certain ALTA/ACSM Land Title Survey for SRPF A/Lee & White, L.L.C., A10 capital, LLC, and First American Title Insurance Company, prepared by Travis Pruitt & Associates, Inc., bearing the seal and certification of Jaime F. Higgins, G.R.L.S. No. 2802, dated June 17, 2015, and as last revised October 15, 2015. 
(11)  For that parcel of land located at 2246-2260 Marietta Boulevard, Atlanta, Georgia, under the numbering system of the City of Atlanta and being more particularly described as: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 221 and 230 of the 17 th District of Fulton County, Georgia and consisting of Lots 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 along with a Portion of Lots 4, 5, and 19 Lysmore Subdivision, a Portion of the current 40 foot Right-of-Way of Queen Street (A.K.A. Folger Avenue) (A.K.A. Folger Street) (To be Abandoned) and an Abandoned 10 foot alley (Ordinance No. 2001-22, Section 1, 3-14-01) and being more fully described as follows; 
Start at a nail found located at the intersection of the Southwesterly right-of-way of Queen Street (A.K.A. Folger Avenue) (40' R/W) and the East right-of-way of Dunseath Avenue (Apparent 40' R/W) said nail also being the Point of Beginning. Thence from the Point of Beginning and running S58°48'00"E along the said Southwesterly right-of-way of Queen Street a distance of 123.28 feet to a point. Thence leaving the Southwesterly right-of-way and running N31°12'00"E a distance of 40.00 feet to point located along the Joint right-of-ways of the Northeasterly right-of-way of said Queen Street and the Southwesterly right-of-way of Marietta Boulevard (150' R/W). Thence running S59°13'07"E along said Northeasterly right-of-way of Queen Street a distance of 611.68 feet to a point. Thence leaving said Northeasterly Right-of-Way of Queen Street and running S59°13'07"E along the said Southwesterly Right-of-Way of Marietta Boulevard a distance of 227.46 feet to a point. Thence continuing along said Southwesterly Right-of-Way and following the arc of a curve to the left an arc distance of 247.80 feet (said arc having a radius of 3,774.58 feet, a chord bearing of S61°24'58"E and a chord distance of 247.75 feet) to a rebar set located at the intersection of the said Southwesterly right-of-way of Marietta Boulevard and the Northwesterly right-of-way of La Dawn Lane (Formerly Bolton Road) (Formerly Old Marietta Road) (40' R/W). Thence leaving said Southwesterly right-of-way and running S71°03'53"W along said Northwesterly right-of-way of La Dawn Lane a distance of 318.60 feet to a rebar set located at the intersection of the said Northwesterly right-of-way of La Dawn Lane and the Northeasterly right-of-way of Queen Street (A.K.A. Folger Street) (40' R/W). Thence leaving said intersection and running S79°52'13"W a distance of 40.42 feet to a rebar set located at the intersection of the Southwesterly right-of-way of said Queen Street and the North right-of-way of said LaDawn Lane. Thence running S87°55'05"W along said North right-of-way of LaDawn Lane a distance of 330.00 feet to a point. Thence running S87°50'43"W along said North right-of-way a distance of 95.41 feet to a rebar found. Thence running S88°41'54"W along said Right-of-Way a distance of 100.00 feet to a point. Thence running S88°16'54"W along said right-of-way a distance of 100.00 feet to a point. Thence leaving said North right-of-way of La Dawn Avenue and running N00°55'18"W a distance of 192.58 feet to a point. Thence running N00°36'36"W a distance of 100.92 feet to a point. Thence running N88°52'47"W a distance of 99.84 feet to a point located along the East right-of-way of Dunseath Avenue (Apparent 30' R/W at this Point). Thence running N05°27'47"E along said Apparent East right-of-way a distance of 59.09 feet to a point located along the Southwesterly line of said Abandoned Alley. Thence running N00°07'06"W along said Apparent East right-of-way a distance of 353.64 to said nail found and the Point of Beginning. 
(12)  For that parcel of land located at 2465 Memorial Drive, Atlanta, Georgia, under the numbering system of the City of Atlanta and being more particularly described as: 
ALL THAT TRACT OR PARCEL OF LAND LYING AND BEING IN LAND LOT 181 OF THE 15 th DISTRICT OF ATLANTA, DEKALB COUNTY, GEORGIA, AND BEING MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS: 
To reach the Point of Beginning, start at a point located at the intersection of the South Right-of-Way of Memorial Drive (R/W Varies) and the East Right-of-Way of Third Avenue (50'R/W) (as Presently Located). Thence running East along the said South Right-of-Way of Memorial Drive a distance of 589.40 feet to a nail set located in concrete and the Point of Beginning. Thence from the Point of Beginning and leaving said South Right-of-Way of Memorial Drive and running S21°45'56"E a distance of 162.80 feet to a nail set located in an asphalt drive. Thence running S89°45'45"E a distance of 25.50 feet to a point located in said asphalt drive. Thence leaving said drive and running S15°33'56"E a distance of 76.86 feet to a point. Thence runing N87°26' 19"W a distance of 86.94 feet to a point. Thence running N40°54'47"W a distance of 21.83 feet to a point. Thence running N28°59'58'W a distance of 20.48 feet to a point. Thence running 23°28'01 "W a distance of 20.04 feet to a point. Thence running N09°02'30"W a distance of 30.54 feet to a point. Thence running N00°46'00"W a distance of 28.89 feet to a point. Thence running N07°19'08"W a distance of 29.13 feet to a point. Thence running N11°19'30'W a distance of 28.79 feet to a point. Thence running N00°16'20"E a distance of 41.31 feet to a point. Thence running N24°22'04"E a distance of 12.77 feet to a point located along the said South Right-of-Way of Memorial Drive. Thence running S89°10'01E along said Right-of-Way a distance of 20.75 feet to nail set and the Point of Beginning. 
(b)  Any applicant for a license for the sale of malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises located within the following area shall not be required to comply with the distance requirements set forth in section 10-88: 
(1)  Any property located in the Little 5 Points business district fronting on the east side of Moreland Avenue between Mansfield Avenue on the north and McLendon Avenue on the south and all properties fronting on the west side of Moreland Avenue between Mansfield Avenue on the north and McLendon Avenue on the south; any properties fronting on the south side of Euclid Avenue from 1097 on the west to 1189 on the east and all properties fronting on the north side of Euclid Avenue from 1118 on the west to 1190 on the east; any properties fronting on the east side of Seminole Avenue from 441 on the north to 420 on the south. 
(2)  Any property located in the east Atlanta business district fronting on the east side of Flat Shoals Avenue between McPherson Avenue on the north and May Avenue on the south and all properties fronting on the west side of Flat Shoals Avenue between McPherson Avenue on the north and 559 Flat Shoals Avenue on the south; any property fronting on the south side of Glenwood Avenue between 1323 Glenwood Avenue on the west and Brownwood Avenue on the east and all properties fronting on the north side of Glenwood Avenue between Haas Avenue on the west and 1246 Glenwood Avenue on the west. 
(3)  Any room or area within the Loudermilk Building, which is bounded by Auburn Avenue on the north, Edgewood on the south, Courtland Street on the east, and Peachtree Park Avenue on the west, which is controlled by a bona-fide nonprofit organization. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses for adult entertainment establishments. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2044; Ord. No. 2001-7, §§ 1, 2, 1-23-01; Ord. No. 2003-56, § 1, 4-28-03; Ord. No. 2010-27(10-O-0780), § 1, 6-16-10; Ord. No. 2014-13(14-O-1136), § 1, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2016-28(16-O-1423) , § 1, 9-15-16; Ord. No. 2017-25(17-O-1194), § 3, 5-15-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-44(17-O-1405), § 1, 7-26-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-39(18-O-1459), § 1, 9-13-18 ) 
Sec. 10-95. - Exemption for expansion of preexisting location. 
Any applicant for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, which application includes an expansion of a preexisting licensed location, shall not be required to comply with the distance requirements set forth in sections 10-88. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2059) 
Secs. 10-96—10-105. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Renewal, Revocation and Transfer 

Sec. 10-106. - Annual renewal; forms. 
(a)  All licensees under this division shall be required to renew their licenses annually on forms prescribed by the license review board on or before January 1 of the calendar year in which the licensee proposes to operate. 
(b)  All licensees who are dependent upon some contractual agreement or special exception to meet the minimum parking requirements set forth by the Zoning Code must provide, on an annual basis, proof that they will continue to have a contractual or legal interest in those spaces throughout the upcoming year. 
(1)  The failure of an applicant for renewal to provide such proof shall result in the denial of the application. 
(2)  All lessees located within any licensed premises shall be subject to this requirement, by submitting a renewal application contemporaneously with the primary renewal submitted by the licensee. 
(c)  Each applicant for renewal of an alcohol license at an establishment, which pursuant to section 10-88(e) is exempted from certain distance requirements contained in section 10-88, shall report at the time of renewal, sales in even dollars and as a percent of the total, gross food sales in even dollars and as a percent of the total, and gross alcoholic beverage sales in even dollars and as a percent of a total. 
(1)  The applicant for renewal shall report sales as described herein for the 52-week period preceding renewal, or for the period time following the initial issuance of the license, whichever is greater. 
(2)  The failure of an applicant for renewal to report sales as required by this subsection shall result in the denial of a renewed license. 
(d)  The failure of an applicant for renewal to provide the police department with a statement from a certified public accountant evidencing that a location derived less than the percentage established by ordinance of gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages, shall result in the denial of a renewed license. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2081; Ord. No. 2000-65, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-89, § 3, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 2003-06, § 1, 1-28-03; Ord. No. 2004-64, § 1, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 2004-82, § 1, 11-19-04; Ord. No. 2012-54(12-O-1736), § 1, 12-12-12, eff. 6-1-13) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that § 2 of Ord. No. Ord. No. 2012-54(12-O-1736) provides, "That this ordinance shall become effective June 1, 2013." 
Sec. 10-107. - License constitutes grant or privilege. 
All licenses in this division shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license, subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by the Charter and related state laws, applicable sections of this Code and other ordinances of the city relating to these businesses. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-2082(a), 14-2121) 
Sec. 10-108. - Return of fee for revocation. 
If a license required under this division is revoked, the licensee shall not be entitled to a return of the unearned license fee. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2121) 
Sec. 10-109. - Procedures. 
(a)  As used in this chapter, the term "due cause" for the denial of applications for all new alcoholic beverage licenses, or for the transfer of location or the transfer of ownership, or for revocation, suspension or refusal to renew any license, or for the assessment of a fine in regard to any license includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  The solicitation on the licensed premises by a licensee or by any employee of the licensee, for the licensee or employee or for any person other than a patron and guest of a patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic, or money with which to purchase the drink; the paying by a licensee of a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting the establishment of the licensee or to the agent, employee or manager of the licensee to solicit the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic. For purposes of this subsection, neither the licensee nor any employee of such licensee shall be considered a guest of any patron. 
(2)  The selling to or serving of any alcoholic beverage to any person below the age of 21 years; or permitting the entrance of anyone under 21 years of age in violation of section 10-12; or failure to post a sign pursuant to section 10-14. 
(3)  The conviction of any felony reasonably related to the ability of the licensee to operate and maintain the premises in a proper manner. 
(4)  The violation of any state law or regulation governing the manufacture, sale, distribution or transportation of alcoholic beverages. 
(5)  The violation of any section of O.C.G.A. tit. 10, ch. 1, art. 15, pt. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 10-1-370 et seq.), the Uniform Deceptive Trade Practices Act, reasonably related to the operation of licensed establishments. 
(6)  Permitting the solicitation of patrons on the licensed premises for prostitution or any other unlawful act where the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct. 
(7)  The selling or serving of any alcoholic beverage to any person that the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication. 
(8)  The failure to comply with any and all federal, state or municipal tax laws and regulations applicable to the operation of establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(9)  The failure to furnish any and all data, information and records related to the operation of licensed establishments, when such has been requested by the department of police or the license review board. 
(10)  The failure to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license as set forth in section 10-57. 
(11)  The failure to obtain prior approval of the mayor after hearing by the license review board for changing the type of establishment operated pursuant to section 10-62. 
(12)  Failure by the licensee to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, patrons and others on the licensed premises or on any property owned or leased by the licensee, including but not limited to parking lots and parking areas, or on any parking lots or areas which may be lawfully used by patrons of a licensed establishment, in order to protect the safety and well-being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. 
(13)  The violation of chapter 94, which violation shall be evidenced by receipt of an order by the human relations commission which shall contain findings of discrimination pursuant to such chapter. 
(14)  The violation of any other law, ordinance or regulation governing the operation of establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or which are reasonably related to the operation of such establishments. 
(15)  The failure of a license whose licensed premises directly abuts a public street directly to maintain all property outside the lot and property line and inside the curb line upon the public street, including any sidewalk. Said duty to maintain the above-designated property must be accomplished within reasonable time after the close of business each day. "Maintain" as used in this subsection shall mean keeping the specified area free of bottles, cups, trash and other debris. "Within a reasonable time" as used in this subsection shall mean within four hours of the close of business. 
(16)  The violation by either the owner, the licensee, the management, an employee, an independent contractor, or anyone acting as an agent for or on behalf of any establishment licensed to sell alcohol of any of the city's ordinances which pertain to the posting of signage and/or banners found in chapters 138 and 16-28A of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances if such violation is reasonably related to the operation of the licensed establishment and the owner or licensee knew or should have known of the posting. The director of the bureau of buildings, or his designee, shall report all violations of such ordinances of which the bureau of buildings is aware to the City of Atlanta Police Department's Licenses and Permits Unit within ten days of the occurrence of such violation. 
(17)  The violation by either the owner, the licensee, the management, an employee, an independent contractor, or anyone acting as an agent for or on behalf of any establishment licensed to sell alcohol of the city's noise ordinance found in chapter 74 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances or of section 10-60(a)(4)(3) if such violation is reasonably related to the operation of the licensed establishment and the owner or licensee knew or should have known of the violation of the noise ordinance. 
(18)  The failure of an applicant for renewal that is exempt from the certain distance requirements as provided in section 10-88.1, to provide the police department with a statement from a certified public accountant evidencing that the package store derived less than the percentage established by ordinance of gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages shall result in the denial of a renewed license. 
(19)  Permitting the sale of illegal drugs on the licensed premises where the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct. 
(b)  Upon a finding of due cause, the mayor shall have the authority to deny applications for new licenses or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership and to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license issued by the city to any licensee under this division. The decision of the mayor may be appealed via Certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(c)  No application for a new license or for a transfer of location or transfer of ownership shall be denied and no license issued by the city or any license under this division shall be revoked, suspended or refused renewal except upon a finding of due cause and after a hearing and upon a five-day written notice to the licensee, stating the place, date, time and purpose of such hearing and setting forth the charge upon which the hearing shall be held. The commander of the licenses and permits unit, or his designee, shall notify the commissioner of the DPDNC, or his designee, regarding any adverse action being taken on any application for a renewal license to sell alcohol or on any proposed revocation of a current license to sell alcohol. The commander of the licenses and permits unit, or his designee, shall also notify the city councilmember who represents the district within which the licensed establishment, which is subject to adverse action is located and all at-large councilmembers regarding the adverse action. Such notice shall provide the date, time and place of any hearing regarding the adverse action. The commissioner of the DPDNC, or his designee, shall then notify both the chairperson and the vice chairperson of the NPU in which the licensed establishment is located regarding the hearing. Such notice shall provide the date, time and place of any hearing regarding the adverse action. 
(d)  The license review board shall conduct the hearings and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the report, may deny applications for new licenses or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership and may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license in accordance with section 10-109.1. Except as provided in section 10-109.1, in lieu of revocation or the failure to renew, the mayor may impose a fine upon any licensee holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, such fine not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. For each violation pertaining to other licenses issued pursuant to this chapter, except as provided in section 10-109.1, the mayor may impose a fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 in lieu of revocation or the failure to renew occurring on the licensed premises. The decision of the mayor may be appealed via Certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(e)  After denial, revocation or the failure to renew a license, the mayor, upon the recommendation of the license review board and after a hearing by the board, may refuse to accept or consider any application for a license to operate at the location for the sale of alcoholic beverages for a period of 12 months from the time of denial, revocation or failure to renew such license; however, any new application for licensure at such location shall ask of the new applicant whether the location has been denied, revoked or not renewed under this division. For purposes of this subsection the 12-month period as stated in this subsection shall be tolled during any period of time that an appeal is pending of said refusal to accept or consider any application, or any period of time that by operation of law the city cannot enforce said refusal to accept or consider any application, or any period of time during which there is in place a valid, voluntary agreement between the city and the entity whose application the mayor has refused to accept or consider to not enforce the mayor's decision pending the outcome of litigation in any way involving said refusal to accept or consider any application. 
(f)  For due cause, if a violation of this chapter occurs which results in an emergency situation in which continued operation of the premises by the licensee endangers the health, welfare or safety of the public, the mayor or the mayor's designee may suspend any license. Any such suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the next regular or called meeting of license review board. 
(g)  The mayor may, upon a finding of due cause, deny, revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license upon a determination that public convenience and advantage would not be promoted by the approval of an applicant's application. In making such a determination the mayor may consider the general welfare and safety of the community, noise, parking and traffic with reasonable consideration being given to the character of the area and its peculiar suitability to the proposed uses and the stability of the neighborhood as they may be impacted by the proposed licensed premises. The decision of the mayor may be appealed via Certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(h)  Property owners of licensed premises will be responsible to a reasonable extent for unlawful activity which occurs on their premises on a regular basis such that the property owner knows or should have known that such unlawful activity was taking place on the licensed premises. If' it appears that such activity was encouraged or if it appears that the property owner could have prevented such activity, in addition to being authorized to deny, revoke and refuse to renew the license, the mayor shall be authorized to deny the issuance of any license under this division at that location for a period up to two years from the occurrence of such unlawful activity, and such property shall also lose its permitted and nonconforming uses for the same period. Such a decision by the mayor may be appealed via Certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County. At the time an application is submitted, the applicant shall also submit a form, provided by the department of police and signed by the property owner of the proposed licensed premises, which states that the owner has been notified of this section. Property owners will not be responsible for unlawful activity on their property unless they have first been warned in writing by certified or registered mail, at least once, that such activity was occurring on the property. Property owners shall only be responsible for unlawful activity similar to that about which they were warned. However, this section does not require that such owners be notified about every instance of unlawful activity occurring on their property. 
(i)  The provisions of section 10-109 shall supersede any and all other provisions of the City Code of Ordinances with which there exists a conflict. 
(j)  The provisions of section 10-109 shall apply in all respects to anyone seeking to obtain a license or to the holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages in a leased location within a licensed premise. 
(k)  Final decisions of the mayor to deny an application for a new license or permit, to deny a transfer of location or transfer of ownership, or to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew a license or permit, or to impose a fine upon any license or permit under this chapter may be appealed via Certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2083; Ord. No. 1998-49, § 1, 7-13-98; Ord. No. 1999-64, § 2, 9-16-99; Ord. No. 1999-72, §§ 1, 2, 9-30-99; Ord. No. 2001-6, § 4, 1-23-01; Ord. No. 2001-26, §§ 3, 4, 3-27-01; Ord. No. 2001-78, § 2, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 2001-94, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-89, § 4, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 2003-106, § 3, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 1, 2-28-05; Ord. No. 2005-90, § 1, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 2006-45, § 2, 7-25-06; Ord. No. 2012-43(12-O-1072), § 2, 9-26-12; Ord. No. 2013-40(12-O-1734), § 2, 8-28-13 ) 
Sec. 10-109.1. - Mandatory progressive penalties for "due cause" findings by the license review board and penalties imposed by the mayor. 
(a)  With respect to existing licenses, mandatory penalties for "due cause" findings by the mayor shall be as follows: 
(1)  First violation—Minimum of five to 60 days to a maximum 180 days suspension of license and $1,000.00 fine; 
(2)  Second violation—Minimum of 30—180 days to one year suspension of license or revocation and $1,000.00 fine; 
(3)  Third violation—Revocation. 
(b)  With respect to existing licenses, mandatory penalties for "due cause" findings by the mayor with respect to licensees holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall be as follows: 
(1)  First violation—Minimum of five to 60 days to a maximum 180 days suspension of license and $2,500.00 fine; 
(2)  Second violation—Minimum of 30—180 days to one year suspension of license or revocation and $2,500.00 fine; 
(3)  Third violation—Revocation. 
( Ord. No. 2013-40(12-O-1734), § 1, 8-28-13 ) 
Sec. 10-110. - Automatic revocation of city license upon revocation of state license. 
Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the city license to manufacture or deal in these products shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the council or any municipal officer. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2084) 
Sec. 10-111. - Removal of signs after revocation. 
When any license for selling alcoholic beverages is revoked, all signs indicating that those beverages may be sold or purchased shall be removed from the place of business, both outside and inside. The department of police shall enforce this section. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2085) 
Sec. 10-112. - Restrictions upon transfers. 
(a)  Licenses under this division shall not be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  If the death of any person holding a license or any interest therein occurs, the license may, in the discretion of the mayor, be transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heirs of the deceased person. 
(c)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. The withdrawal shall not, however, bring any new ownership into the partnership. 
(d)  Should a transfer of a location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee, and the new location shall be considered and meet the requirements of a new license under this division; provided, however, if a transfer of an existing location is approved and there is no change in the ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. 
(e)  A licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders if it is determined that the additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or for building new facilities and if it appears that the licensee receives directly none of the additional capital invested. Under this section an additional partner or new principal stockholder must be approved by the license review board, except as provided in this division for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2087) 
Sec. 10-113. - Application for new license at existing licensed location. 
(a)  An applicant for a new liquor license who has acquired a previously licensed liquor location may, within one year after the expiration of the previous owner's license, obtain a liquor license for that location even though the location may not meet distance requirements from churches, schools, private residences and other distance requirements set forth in this division. 
(b)  An application filed under this section shall meet and qualify under all other requirements of this division for the granting of a new license; however, this section shall not apply to applications for alcoholic beverage licenses for adult entertainment establishments. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2088; Ord. No. 1995-43, § 9, 8-28-95) 
Sec. 10-114. - Active participation in licensed premises by licensee; transfer of right to operate. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "active participation" means direct control or supervision over the employees and location of the premises licensed under this division. 
(b)  Every individual person granted a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages under this division shall maintain an active participation in the operation of the licensed premises during the term of the license. For a corporation, partnership or association issued a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages, the individual agent named in the application for the license shall maintain an active participation in the operation of the licensed premises during the term of the license. 
(c)  No licensee or agent of any licensee shall transfer the right to operate under any license to any other person by lease, agreement, contract or any other agreement. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2091) 
Secs. 10-115—10-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL PERMITS 

Sec. 10-126. - Temporary permit for special events. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application and payment of a filing fee of $100.00 and a permit fee of $500.00 per day, up to a maximum of $2,000.00, and after investigation by the department of police and review by the license review board, the mayor may issue a permit to an individual or organization for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only during a special event under the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant must already hold an annual license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
(2)  The permit will allow sale of alcoholic beverages beyond the premises described in the annual license only in the area specifically described in the application and only during the special event named. 
(3)  Food must be served during any period of time that alcoholic beverages are served. 
(4)  The application for such permit must have been filed with the department of police at least 30 days prior to the date of the special event. 
(5)  The hours of any such special event must be between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Alcoholic beverages may be sold on Sundays pursuant to this section between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons and in eating establishments. As used in this subsection, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7. 
(6)  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all state statutes governing the sale of alcoholic beverages and all sections of this Code and other city ordinances governing such sales, including but not limited to sections of this Code and other ordinances relating to the hours of operation, distance requirements and the permit requirements for employees contained in section 10-206. 
(7)  Each special event shall last a maximum of seven consecutive days, and no more than two special event permits shall be issued to any applicant in any calendar year. 
(b)  A special event permit may be immediately revoked by the police chief for due cause for a violation of this chapter which results in an emergency situation in which continued operation of the premises by the licensee endangers the health, welfare or safety of the public. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-2032.3, 19-14.005) 
Sec. 10-126.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-64, § 2, approved Sept. 28, 2004, repealed § 10-126.1 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to temporary permit for sale of alcoholic beverages as enacted by Ord. No. 1996-35, § 1, 6-12-96; as amended. 
Sec. 10-126.2. - Traveling companies providing public entertainment. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "traveling companies providing public entertainment" means any national or international company which travels to various locations throughout the country to provide public entertainment for a limited time period of no more than 365 days. 
(b)  Upon filing an application and payment of a filing fee of $100.00 and a permit fee of $500.00 per day, up to a maximum of $5,000.00, and after investigation by the department of police and review by the license review board, the mayor may issue a permit to an individual or organization authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises only during the performance of a show by a traveling company providing public entertainment under the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant must already hold an annual license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
(2)  The permit will allow the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond the premises described in the annual license only in the areas specifically described in the application and only during the period specified in the application. 
(3)  The application for such permit must have been filed with the department of police at least 30 days prior to the date of the special event. 
(4)  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all state statutes governing the sale of alcoholic beverages and all sections of this Code and other city ordinances governing such sales, except those provisions of the Code of Ordinances in express conflict with this Code section. 
(5)  The hours of any such special event must be between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Alcoholic beverages may be sold on Sundays pursuant to this section between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and midnight in eating establishments. As used in this subsection, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7. 
(6)  Each such special event permitted pursuant to this section must comply with the following conditions: 
a.  Said permit shall last for a period not to exceed 365 days; 
b.  The area in which the special event is held must be fenced; 
c.  The applicant must submit a site plan for the special event; 
d.  The applicant must provide a traffic plan and a security plan, and said plan must be approved by the police department; and 
e.  The applicant must submit a plan for removal of trash and provision of toilet facilities, and said plan must be approved by the department of public works. 
(7)  Food must be served during any period of time that alcoholic beverages are served. 
a.  A special event permit issued pursuant to this Code section may be denied, suspended or revoked by the mayor for due cause for a violation of this chapter in accordance with the procedures provided in section 10-109. 
b.  A special event permit may be immediately suspended or revoked by the chief of police for due cause for a violation of this chapter when such violation results in an emergency situation in which continued operations of the premises by the licensee endangers the health, safety and/or welfare of the public. A hearing on the suspension or revocation shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the license review board. Prior publication on the license review board agenda shall not be required for such hearing. Thereafter, the procedures for suspension or revocation of the special event permit provided in section 10-109 shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 2000-60, § 1, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2013-55(13-O-1343), § 1, 11-13-13 ) 
Sec. 10-127. - Temporary permit for nonprofit civic organizations. 
(a)  Upon filing an application and payment of a fee of $25.00 and after review by the license review board, the mayor may issue a permit authorizing a bona fide nonprofit civic organization to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only, for a period not to exceed one day, subject to any law regulating the time for selling such beverages. 
(b)  The application for such permit must have been filed with the License and Permits Unit of the Atlanta Police Department at least 30 days prior to the date of the special event. 
(c)  Not more than six permits may be issued pursuant to this section to an organization in any one calendar year. 
(d)  Permits issued pursuant to this section shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-2032.1, 19-14.003; Ord. No. 2007-65(07-O-2123), § 1, 11-13-07; Ord. No. 2009-59(09-O-1558), § 1, 10-13-09; Ord. No. 2010-52(10-O-1535), § 1, 9-28-10) 
Sec. 10-128. - Approved outdoor festivals. 
(a)  Whenever an application is made for an outdoor festival permit pursuant to chapter 138, article VI, an application may be made pending approval of the festival permit for a special permit pursuant to this section to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption at a specified location and time in connection with such festival. The location and time specified must be at the place and time specified in the festival permit application. A special permit may be issued under this section only after the festival permit has been issued. Such permits may be issued to the following: 
(1)  Any natural person holding a license from the city for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages simply by payment of the fee provided for in subsection (b) of this section, without further review or approval. Festival organizers may contract with any such license holder for this purpose. 
(2)  Any natural person listed as one of the applicants or officers of an organization applying for an outdoor festival permit, provided such person shall comply with all other sections of this Code for the issuance of licenses for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages, including review by the license review board. 
(b)  Applicants approved to sell alcoholic beverages at outdoor festivals pursuant to this section shall pay a special license fee of $50.00 per day for malt beverages and wine and $50.00 per day for distilled spirits per sales location for each calendar day of the festival. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-2032.2, 19-14.004) 
Cross reference— Outdoor festivals, § 138-186 et seq. 
Sec. 10-129. - Wine tastings. 
Upon filing an application and payment of a filing fee of $100.00 and a permit fee of $250.00 per day and after investigation by the department of police and review by the license review board, the mayor may issue a permit to a licensed retail package wine dealer or licensed wine wholesaler to hold a wine tasting. The permit shall allow the applicant to provide samples of wine to the public for consumption at a location which meets legal requirements for on-premises consumption, under the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant for a wine tasting must hold a valid current wine license in the state. 
(2)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in the unbroken container at retail. 
(3)  No permit to conduct a wine tasting will be issued to conduct a wine tasting on the premises of a malt beverage and wine store operating in connection with a licensed retail liquor store. 
(4)  Wine tastings may only be conducted in connection with an instructional or educational promotion. 
(5)  All wines secured for tasting purposes must be obtained through a retail or wholesale wine outlet. 
(6)  Any advertising of such wine tasting must receive prior approval from the commissioner of the state department of revenue. 
(7)  Wine tastings must comply with all laws and regulations otherwise pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state. 
(8)  No wine tasting shall last more than two days, and no applicant may hold more than two wine tastings per year. 
(9)  The permit will allow tasting of wine beyond the premises described in the annual license only in the area specifically described in the application and only during the time set out in the permit. 
(10)  The application for such permit must have been filed with the department of police at least 30 days prior to the date of the wine tasting. 
(11)  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all state statutes and sections of this Code and other city ordinances concerning alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to those dealing with hours of operation, zoning and distance requirements. 
(12)  This section shall not apply to licensed wine specialty shops that hold an annual license pursuant to section 10-60(a)(1)(c) of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2061; Ord. No. 2007-61(07-O-1900), § 3, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 10-130. - Home-brew special events. 
(a)  Upon filing an application and payment of a fee of $50.00 and after review by the license review board, the mayor may issue a permit authorizing home-brew special events (including contests, tastings, and judgings) wherein malt beverages produced by a person in his or her private residence in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4, may be transported and delivered in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4(c). 
(b)  The application for such permit must have been filed with the License and Permits Unit of the Atlanta Police Department at least 30 days prior to the date of the special event. 
(c)  Not more than six permits may be issued pursuant to this section to an individual, organization or entity in any one calendar year. 
(d)  Subject to the City of Atlanta's zoning ordinances, permits issued pursuant to this section may be issued for locations not otherwise licensed under this title and shall be valid only for the location specified in the permit. 
(e)  (1)  Consumption of malt beverages at home-brew special events is limited solely to malt beverages produced pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4. 
(2)  Malt beverages produced pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4 shall only be consumed by the participants in and judges of the home-brew special event, and may not be sold, offered for sale, or made available for consumption by the general public. 
( Ord. No. 2014-05(14-O-1015), § 1, 2-26-14 ) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2014-05(14-O-1015) , provides, "That Chapter 2, Article II, Division 1, Section 2-45 (Establishment or change in fees; notice to public) is waived to the extent that it is applicable to this ordinance." 
Secs. 10-131—10-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - EXCISE TAXES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 146. 

Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 10-141. - [Reporting of food sales required.] 
(a)  Each wholesale dealer selling alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to malt beverages and distilled spirits, shall file a report on forms furnished by the city disclosing the following: report sales in even dollars and as a percent of the total, gross food sales in even dollars and as a percent of the total, gross alcoholic beverage sales in even dollars and as a percent of a total, the amount of tax at the percent required under this division, and any other information reasonably related to the operation of the business required by the City of Atlanta. The report shall be accompanied by remittance to the city for all taxes collected or due as shown on the report. 
(b)  Failure to provide any and all of the information required by this report may result in penalties specified in this chapter, including but not limited to, penalties and interest on the amount of tax due and payable, suspension or revocation of the license, or fines imposed by the mayor or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2001-4, § 1, 1-8-01) 
Secs. 10-142—10-150. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Malt Beverages[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq. 

Sec. 10-151. - Levy; report of sales; payment of tax. 
(a)  There is levied and imposed upon all wholesale dealers selling malt beverages within the city a specific excise tax in the amount of $0.05 per 12 ounces or proportionately thereof so as to graduate the tax on bottles, cans and containers of various sizes, and a specific excise tax on tap or draft beer shall be in the amount of $6.00 for each container of 15½ gallons or proportionately thereof so as to graduate the tax on containers of various sizes where the beverage is sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, such beverage being commonly known as tap or draft beer, of all malt beverages sold by each wholesale dealer within the corporate limits of the city, to be paid as provided in this section. 
(b)  On or before the tenth day of each month, each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the city shall file a report on forms furnished by the city disclosing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, constituting a beginning and ending inventory for the month, sold within the city. Each wholesale dealer shall remit to the city on the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which the sales were made the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this subdivision. 
(c)  There shall be no excise tax levied or imposed upon sales of malt beverages sold to persons outside of the state, for resale or consumption outside of the state, or upon sales of malt beverages sold to stores or canteens located on United States military posts or reservations; provided, however, that malt beverages sold to licensed airlines and railway passenger carriers for resale or consumption in or over the state shall not be exempt from such taxation. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2201) 
Sec. 10-152. - Tax in addition to other fees and taxes. 
The excise tax levied in this subdivision shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge imposed upon the business of selling malt beverages at retail or wholesale within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2202) 
Sec. 10-153. - Penalties for late reporting and payment. 
The failure to make a timely report and remittance of the tax levied in this subdivision shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to two percent of the total amount due during the first 30 days following the date the report and remittance were due and a further penalty of five percent of the amount of the remittance for each consecutive 30 days or any portion thereof during which the report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making the report liable for a penalty equal to 20 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2203) 
Secs. 10-154—10-165. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Wines and Distilled Spirits[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60; local excise taxes on distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80. 

Sec. 10-166. - Levy. 
(a)  In addition to all other taxes or license fees, all wholesale dealers engaged in the city in the business of selling wine or distilled spirits, as defined under the laws of the state, there is imposed and levied upon all such wholesale dealers within the city a tax for the privilege of doing such business in the city, to be computed and collected as set forth in this section. 
(b)  The amount of the tax imposed on such dealers shall be computed on the following basis: 
(1)  Wholesale dealers in distilled spirits (fortified wine excluded), per liter ..... $ 0.22 
(2)  Wholesale dealers in wine, per liter ..... 0.22 
(c)  The special or excise tax imposed in this section upon such wholesale sales shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the chief financial officer by the tenth of each month based upon the volume in liters of liquor and wine sold during the previous month. For prompt payment on or before the tenth of each month, the wholesale dealer shall be entitled to receive and may deduct from such remittance two percent of the total tax for the preceding month. Such wholesale dealers shall be subject to all the conditions set forth in section 10-166 and shall, in all respects, comply with this subdivision, particularly with reference to the keeping of true and correct records of all sales and shipments and the rendering of a sworn statement of the records. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2221) 
Sec. 10-167. - Payment of tax; records; report of sales. 
(a)  The tax imposed in this subdivision shall be computable and payable monthly. 
(b)  Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping or delivering wines or distilled spirits to any retail dealer in the city, whether delivered to the retail dealer's place of business in the city or elsewhere for resale in the city, shall as a condition to the privilege of carrying on the business in the city: 
(1)  Keep true and correct records of all sales, shipments or deliveries of wines or distilled spirits to each retail dealer in the city, such records to be preserved for a period of one year and to be made available on request for the inspection of any duly authorized representative of the city. 
(2)  On or before the tenth day of each calendar month make a verified and comprehensive return to the city, which shall correctly show all sales and deliveries of wines or distilled spirits made to or for retail dealers in the city for the month immediately preceding the report. The report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retail dealer, the amount collected under the terms of this subdivision, and such other information as may be called for by the city. The report shall be accompanied by remittance to the city for all taxes collected or due as shown on the report. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2222) 
Sec. 10-168. - Failure to make returns. 
If any wholesale dealer fails or refuses to make the returns provided for in this subdivision, the city shall notify the party in writing. If the returns are not made and the taxes levied in this subdivision remitted within five days from date of the notice, the city may withdraw from the wholesale dealer the privilege of doing business in the city by revoking the dealer's license. Upon the failure to make returns and pay the taxes accrued, the city shall proceed to assess the amount of taxes due under this subdivision from retail dealers, who have purchased from the wholesale dealer, from the best information available and proceed to collect the taxes as provided by this subdivision for the collection of delinquent taxes. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2223) 
Sec. 10-169. - Penalty for violation. 
It shall be a violation of this subdivision for any person to sell at retail within the city any wines or distilled spirits on which the taxes levied in this subdivision have not been paid by the wholesale dealer to the city, as provided under this subdivision, and the dealer shall be subject to the general penalty as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2224) 
Secs. 10-170—10-180. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Sale of Distilled Spirits by the Drink[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on sales of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-14-130 et seq. 

Sec. 10-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means that person designated by a licensee in the licensee's application for a permit to sell distilled spirits by the drink in the city. 
Drink means any distilled spirits not in its original package for consumption on the premises which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. 
Licensee means any person who holds a license from the city to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
Monthly period means the calendar month of the year. 
Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any distilled spirits by the drink from a licensee. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this subdivision. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2231) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-182. - Administration. 
(a)  Authority. The mayor or the mayor's designee shall administer and enforce this subdivision. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The mayor or the mayor's designee shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this subdivision or other laws of the city and the state or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of this subdivision and the collection of the taxes under this subdivision. 
(c)  Records required from licensees. Every licensee for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink to any person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the mayor or the mayor's designee may require. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The mayor or the mayor's designee may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports. In administration of this subdivision, the mayor or the mayor's designee may require the filing of reports by any person having in such person's possession or custody information relating to sales of beverages which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the license division, department of finance, when required and shall set forth the price charged for each sale, the dates of sales and such other information as may be required. 
(f)  Confidentiality. The mayor or the mayor's designee or any person having an administrative duty under this subdivision shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof set forth or disclosed in any return or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this subdivision, except for judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax levied and assessed. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2241) 
Sec. 10-183. - Violations. 
Any person violating this subdivision shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this subdivision is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2242) 
Sec. 10-184. - Levy. 
There is imposed and levied in addition to all other taxes imposed by law upon every purchase of distilled spirits by the drink in the city a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2232) 
State Law reference— Maximum tax rate, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-131. 
Sec. 10-185. - Adding to sales price. 
Licensees shall, as far as practicable, add the amount of the tax imposed under this subdivision to the sales price or charge, which shall be a debt from the purchaser to the licensee until paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. If any licensee shall neglect, fail or refuse to collect such tax upon any, every and all retail sales made by the licensee or the licensee's agents or employees of alcoholic beverages which are subject to the tax imposed under this subdivision, the licensee shall be liable for and shall pay the tax. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2233) 
Sec. 10-186. - Sale of distilled spirits itemized separately. 
Every licensee for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink operating a place of business in the city shall, at the time of collecting for food and drinks served, itemize separately the price of distilled spirits served. If the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the licensee may be deferred in a like manner; however, the licensee shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2234) 
Sec. 10-187. - Due date of taxes. 
All taxes collected by any licensee or agent under this subdivision shall be due and payable to the mayor or the mayor's designee monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period, as set forth in section 10-181. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2235) 
Sec. 10-188. - Return. 
(a)  Required. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the licensing division of the department of finance in such form as the mayor or the mayor's designee may prescribe by every licensee or agent liable for the payment of tax under this subdivision. 
(b)  Contents. All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, the amount of tax due for the related period and such other information as may be required by the mayor or the mayor's designee. 
(c)  Delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due, to the Licensing Division, Department of Finance, Room 104, City Hall, 55 Trinity Avenue SW, Atlanta, GA 30335. 
(d)  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8 (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq.). 
(Code 1977, § 14-2236) 
Sec. 10-189. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax. If the mayor or the mayor's designee is not satisfied with the return of the tax levied under this subdivision or the amount of the tax levied under this subdivision required to be paid to the city by any person, the mayor may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the mayor's possession or that may come into the mayor's possession. One or more than one deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more than one monthly period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or any fraction of a month from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the mayor or the mayor's designee may offset overpayments, for a period, against underpayments, for another period, against penalties and against the interest on underpayments. 
(d)  Penalty for negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, a penalty of 15 percent of the amount of such deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any section of this subdivision or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(f)  Notice of deficiency determination. The mayor or the mayor's designee shall give to the licensee written notice of the mayor's deficiency determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at the licensee's address as it appears in the records of the license division, department of finance. For service by mail or any notice required by this subdivision, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States post office. 
(g)  Time limits. Except for a fraud, intent to evade this subdivision or authorized rules or regulations or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall last expire. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2237) 
Sec. 10-190. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any licensee fails to make a return for the tax levied under this subdivision, the mayor or the mayor's designee shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the mayor or the mayor's designee. Upon the basis of this estimate, the mayor or the mayor's designee shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or for more than one period. 
(b)  Offsets; interest. In making a determination, the mayor or the mayor's designee may offset overpayments for a period or penalties and against the interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or any fraction of a month from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this subdivision or rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent penalty provided in section 10-191. 
(e)  Notice. Promptly after making a determination, the mayor or the mayor's designee shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2238) 
Sec. 10-191. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay. 
Any licensee who fails to pay the tax imposed under this subdivision to the city or who fails to pay any amount of such tax required to be collected and paid to the city within the time required shall pay a penalty of 15 percent of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in section 10-191(c). 
(Code 1977, § 14-2239) 
Sec. 10-192. - Collection of unpaid tax. 
(a)  Action for collection. At any time within three years after any tax levied under this subdivision or any amount of tax required to be collected under this subdivision becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the mayor or the mayor's designee may bring an action in the courts of this state or any other state or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Successors or assigns of operator to withhold tax from purchase. If any licensee liable for any amount under this subdivision sells or terminates the business, the licensee's successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the license division, department of finance, showing that the amount has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, the purchaser becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by the purchaser to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the license division of the department of finance shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at the purchaser's address as it appears on the records of the license division, department of finance, of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells the business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event shall last occur. 
(d)  Tax credit, penalty or interest erroneously collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously collected or received by the city under this subdivision, it may be offset as provided in section 10-189(c). If the operator or person determines that such person has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the mayor or the mayor's designee, such person will have three years from date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts due and payable from the person by whom it was paid or such person's successors or assigns. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2240) 
Secs. 10-193—10-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OPERATIONAL RULES 

Sec. 10-206. - Fingerprinting of employees at adult entertainment establishment selling alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Required. No person shall perform job duties/functions of any type either directly as an employee or agent, or indirectly, as an independent contractor or other person, at an adult entertainment establishment, as defined in section 16-29.001(3)(e) and which is licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises until such person has been fingerprinted by the department of police and has been issued a permit by the department of police indicating such person is eligible to perform job duties /functions at the particular establishment at issue. This shall include all employees, independent contractors, agents, managers and performers and entertainers and any other persons who desire to perform and/or perform job duties /functions at an adult entertainment establishment licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. When an annual permit holder changes the location of employment, the permit holder must apply with the department of police for an amended permit listing the new location. An amended permit shall issue without necessity of the payment of an additional annual permit fee, or additional fingerprinting if the application for an amended permit is filed during the time an annual permit is in effect. The issuance of an amended permit shall not extend the permit term. An application fee of $50.00 is due at the time of original or amended permit application. 
(b)  Investigation. The department of police shall make a complete search relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted. If there is a record of a violation of this chapter, no permit will be issued and it shall be illegal for the person to perform job duties/functions of any type at the establishment at issue; however, all persons excluded from performing job duties/functions at an adult entertainment establishment under this subsection may appeal to the license review board. 
(c)  Permit term, fee. Any permit issued under this section shall expire 12 months from the date of issue. The annual/renewal fees charged for issuance of the permit shall be $200.00. 
(d)  Management to keep permits. The management of such establishments shall keep all permits issued under this section in a place so that they may be inspected by any member of the department of police at any time. If employment is terminated, the permit shall be returned to the employee by the management. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-2122, 19-14.008; Ord. No. 1999-13, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-36, § 1, 5-25-01; Ord. No. 2014-17(14-O-1232), § 13, 5-28-14 ; Ord. No. 2016-11(16-O-1150), § 1, 5-11-16 ) 
Sec. 10-207. - Employment of persons with prior convictions. 
(a)  No licensee under this chapter shall employ in any premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages any person in any capacity except performers, entertainers and musicians, who have been convicted in this or any other country within three years immediately prior to the application for employment of soliciting for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, unlawfully dealing in narcotics, sex offense or other charge relating to the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages or any other crime involving moral turpitude. No such person shall be employed by the licensee if this employment would violate the terms of any probation or parole of the person. 
(b)  No licensee under this chapter shall lease any premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages any person in any capacity except performers, entertainers and musicians, who have been convicted in this or any other country within three years immediately prior to the application for employment of an offense constituting solicitation for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, unlawful dealing in narcotics, sex offense or other charge relating to the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages or any other crime involving moral turpitude. The licensee or lessee shall employ no such person if this employment would violate the terms of any probation or parole of the person. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2123; Ord. No. 2001-26, § 5, 3-27-01; Ord. No. 2002-89, § 5, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 2014-17(14-O-1232), § 14, 5-28-14 ) 
Sec. 10-208. - Entertainment by underage persons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to provide entertainment in an establishment licensed under this article unless such person has obtained written permission from such person's legal guardian. 
(Ord. No. 2010-16(10-O-0466), § 3, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 10-209. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Packaged distilled spirits. Retail merchants licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package, shall be allowed to engage in the sale of such distilled spirits between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. Monday through Saturday and on Sunday from 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(b)  Packaged wine or malt beverages. Retail merchants licensed to sell wine or malt beverages by the package, shall be allowed to engage in the sale of such beverages 24 hours a day, Monday through Saturday and on Sunday from 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. Notwithstanding this sub-subsection, a licensed farm winery tasting room located within a special entertainment district may sell packaged wine on Sunday from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight, as permitted by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2. 
(c)  Sale of wine or malt beverages for on premises consumption. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7 and those licensees located within a special entertainment district as defined by Code section 10-211 and those licensees that elect to be subject to Code section 10-94(a)(7), all other licensees for the sale of wine or malt beverages for consumption on the premises shall be authorized to engage in the sale of wine or malt beverages on Monday through Friday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. of one day and 2:30 a.m. of the following day and on Saturday from 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 a.m. on Sunday. Wine and/or malt beverages may be sold on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. midnight only in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons; and in restaurants (as defined in Code section 10-1). Wine and/or malt beverages may also be served on Sunday in conjunction with the issuance of both an outdoor festival permit pursuant to Code section 138-204 and a special event permit pursuant to Code section 10-8. 
(2)  Anytime December 31st falls on a Sunday, beer and wine may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:30 p.m. Sunday, December 31st, to 2:30 a.m. Monday, January 1st, only in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons; and in restaurants (as defined in Code section 10-1). Anytime December 31st falls on a Sunday, all other establishments licensed to sell beer and wine by the drink for consumption on the premises may sell such beer and wine between the hours on 12:01 a.m. Monday, January 1st, to 2:30 a.m. Monday, January 1st. Anytime St. Patrick's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day and Labor Day fall on a Monday, beer and wine may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:30 p.m. of that particular prior Sunday, to 2:30 a.m. Monday, on the date of that particular holiday, only in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons; and in restaurants (as defined in Code section 10-1). Anytime Independence Day falls on a Sunday, beer and wine may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:30 p.m. of that particular Sunday, to 2:30 a.m. Monday, the next day, only in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons; and in restaurants (as defined in Code section 10-1). 
(3)  This section shall apply in all respects to private clubs, as defined by Code section 10-1, except as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-7-2. 
(4)  Those licensees that elect to be subject to Code section 10-94(a)(7) shall be authorized to engage in the sale of wine and malt beverage on Monday through Thursday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., on Friday and Saturday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and midnight and on Sunday, subject to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7, between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(d)  Sale of distilled spirits by the drink or for on premises consumption. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7, and those licensees located within a special entertainment district as defined by Code section 10-211 and those licensees that elect to be subject to Code Section 10-94(a)(7), all licensees for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink on the premises shall be authorized to engage in the sale of those distilled spirits only on Monday through Friday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. of one day and 2:30 a.m. of the following day and on Saturday from 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 a.m. on Sunday. Distilled spirits may be sold on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. only in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons; and in restaurants (as defined in Code section 10-1). Distilled spirits may also be served on Sunday in conjunction with the issuance of both an outdoor festival permit pursuant to Code section 138-204 and a special event permit pursuant to Code section 10-8. 
(2)  Anytime December 31st falls on a Sunday, distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:30 p.m. Sunday, December 31st, to 2:30 a.m. Monday, January 1st, only in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons; and in restaurants (as defined in Code section 10-1). Anytime December 31st falls on a Sunday, all other establishments licensed to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises may sell such distilled spirits between the hours on 12:01 a.m. Monday, January 1st, to 2:30 a.m. Monday, January 1st. Anytime St. Patrick's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day and Labor Day fall on a Monday, distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:30 p.m. of that particular Sunday, to 2:30 a.m. Monday, the next day, only in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons; and in restaurants (as defined in Code section 10-1). Anytime Independence Day falls on a Sunday, distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:30 p.m. of that particular Sunday, to 2:30 a.m. Monday, the next day, only in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons; and in restaurants (as defined in Code section 10-1). 
(3)  This section shall apply in all respects to private clubs, as defined by Code section 10-1, except as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-7-2. 
(4)  Those licensees that elect to be subject to Code Section 10-94(a)(7) shall be authorized to engage in the sale of distilled spirits on Monday through Thursday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., on Friday and Saturday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and midnight and on Sunday, subject to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7, between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(e)  Sale of wine or malt beverages for on-premises consumption within a special entertainment district. Except as otherwise provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7, all licensees in wine or malt beverages for consumption on the premises within a special entertainment district as defined by Code section 10-211 shall be authorized to engage in the sale of those wines or beverages in the following manner: 
(1)  Wine and/or malt beverages may be sold on Monday through Friday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. of one day and 4:00 a.m. of the following day and on Saturday from 9:00 a.m. to 2:55 a.m. on Sunday. 
(2)  Wine and/or malt beverages may be sold on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. only in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons; and in restaurants (as defined in Code section 10-1). Notwithstanding this subsection, a licensed farm winery tasting room located within a special entertainment district may sell wine for on-premises consumption on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight, as permitted by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2. Wine and/or malt beverages may also be served on Sunday in conjunction with the issuance of a special event permit pursuant to Code section 10-8. Wine and/or malt beverages may also be sold by the drink for on-premises consumption within special entertainment district on Mondays between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. 
(3)  Anytime December 31st falls on a Sunday, beer and wine may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:30 p.m. Sunday, December 31st, to 4:00 a.m. Monday, January 1st, only in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons; and in restaurants (as defined in Code section 10-1). Anytime December 31st falls on a Sunday, all other establishments licensed to sell beer and wine by the drink for consumption on the premises may sell such beer and wine between the hours on 12:01 a.m. Monday, January 1st, to 4:00 a.m. Monday, January 1st. Anytime St. Patrick's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day and Labor Day fall on a Monday, beer and wine may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:30 p.m. of that particular prior Sunday, to 4:00 a.m. Monday, on the date of that particular holiday, only in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons; and in restaurants (as defined in Code section 10-1). Anytime Independence Day falls on a Sunday, beer and wine may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:30 p.m. of that particular Sunday, to 4:00 a.m. Monday, the next day, only in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons; and in restaurants (as defined in Code section 10-1). 
(4)  This section shall apply in all respects to private clubs, as defined by Code section 10-1, except as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-7-2. 
(f)  Sale of distilled spirits by the drink or for on-premises consumption within a special entertainment district. Except as otherwise provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7, all licensees for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink on the premises within a special entertainment district as defined by Code section 10-211 shall be authorized to engage in the sale of those distilled spirits in the following manner: 
(1)  Distilled spirits may be sold by the drink or for on-premises within a special entertainment district on Monday through Friday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. of one day and 4:00 a.m. of the following day and on Saturday from 9:00 a.m. to 2:55 a.m. on Sunday. 
(2)  Distilled spirits may be sold by the drink or for on-premises within a special entertainment district on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. only in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons; and in restaurants (as defined in Code section 10-1). Distilled spirits may also be served on Sunday in conjunction with the issuance of a special event permit pursuant to Code section 10-8. Distilled spirits may also be sold by the drink for on-premises consumption within a special entertainment district on Mondays between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. 
(3)  Anytime December 31st falls on a Sunday, distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:30 p.m. Sunday, December 31st to 4:00 a.m. Monday, January 1st, only in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons; and in restaurants (as defined in Code section 10-1). Anytime December 31st falls on a Sunday, all other establishments licensed to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises may sell such distilled spirits between the hours on 12:01 a.m. Monday, January 1st, to 4:00 a.m. Monday, January 1st. 
(4)  Anytime St. Patrick's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day and Labor Day fall on a Monday, distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:30 p.m. of that particular Sunday, to 4:00 a.m. Monday, the next day, only in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons; and in restaurants (as defined in Code section 10-1). Anytime Independence Day falls on a Sunday, distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:30 p.m. of that particular Sunday, to 4:00 a.m. Monday, the next day, only in public stadiums, coliseums and auditoriums with a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons; and in restaurants (as defined in Code section 10-1). 
(g)  Time limit for clearing patrons from premises. All licensed premises described in subsections (c), (d), (e) and (f) of this section shall be closed to the public at the time set by this section for the discontinuance of the sale of alcohol and the premises cleared of patrons within 30 minutes after the time set by this section for discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(h)  Occupancy time. Upon clearing patrons from the premises 30 minutes after the sale of alcohol has been discontinued as provided for in subsection (g) of this section, establishments licensed for on premises alcoholic beverage consumption, excluding restaurants as defined in the Code by section 10-1, shall remain closed and shall not re-open earlier than 6:00 a.m. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as altering the hours alcoholic beverages may be sold as otherwise provided for in this section. 
(i)  Extended Sunday alcohol sales . Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including the sale of wine and/or malt beverages and the sale of distilled spirits, may be sold on Sundays between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served; and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2126; Ord. No. 2000-9, §§ 1, 2, 2-21-00; Ord. No. 2000-63, §§ 1, 2, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2001-26, §§ 6, 7, 3-27-01; Ord. No. 2001-39, §§ 1, 2, 5-30-01; Ord. No. 2003-115, §§ 1—5, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2004-09, §§ 1—5, 2-24-04; Ord. No. 2004-38, § 1, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 2005-37, §§ 1, 2, 6-23-2005; Ord. No. 2010-27(10-O-0780), § 2, 6-16-10; Ord. No. 2012-40(12-O-1003), § 1, 8-29-12; Ord. No. 2014-09(14-O-1103), § 1, 3-12-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-17(14-O-1232), § 15, 5-28-14 ; Ord. No. 2019-07(18-O-1395), § 5, 8-15-18 ) 
State Law reference— Sales on Sunday and Christmas Day, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 10-210. - Sale on election days. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b), the sale of alcoholic beverages on election dates is authorized. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2144) 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 66. 
Sec. 10-211. - Special entertainment districts. 
(a)  Definition. As required by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7(c)(2), the term "special entertainment district" means contiguous properties upon which is located a festival marketplace and entertainment project which is financed in whole or in part by public funds and which contains a minimum of 200,000 square feet of gross leasable space for retail sales and entertainment purposes and which is located in the central business district; provided, however, more than 50 percent of such contiguous properties must be owned or controlled by the city or some other governmental or quasigovernmental entity. 
(b)  Intent and declaration. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7(c)(2), it is the intention and declaration of the city to provide for the creation of special entertainment districts and to regulate the licensing, sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages therein. 
(c)  Modifications and exceptions. The licensing and regulation of alcoholic beverages in special entertainment districts shall be the same as that required for the city at large, with the following modifications and exceptions: 
(1)  In addition to the requirements imposed by section 10-62, a license for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in a special entertainment district may issue to an applicant for the operation of a freestanding bar. A freestanding bar, as used in this subsection, means a bar facility which is not required to meet the definition of premises, as defined in section 10-1. Further, as provided in the definition of premises, any area or patio shall be immediately adjacent to the main licensed facility and located on property owned or leased by such licensee; however, licensed establishments in special entertainment districts shall be exempt from the remaining requirements applicable to such immediately adjacent areas of patios. 
(2)  Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in a special entertainment district. 
i.  The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in a special entertainment district shall only be permitted in or on the commercial facilities and shall not be permitted in or on the public facilities, including the mall facilities, except as provided herein. The term "commercial facilities" as used in this subsection means the retail food and beverage service facilities, including any common area seating facilities specifically provided for the consumption of food and beverages, which common area seating facilities are not required to be owned or leased by any particular alcoholic beverage licensee. The term "public facilities" as used in this subsection means the parking facilities, plazas, streets and sidewalks. The term "mall facilities" as used in this subsection as such term pertains to Underground Atlanta, means those areas within Underground Atlanta commonly known as Upper Alabama Street, Lower Alabama Street, Lower Pryor Street and Kenney's Alley, including any adjacent enclosed entrance structures, escalators and elevators, service areas and loading docks. 
ii.  Notwithstanding the prohibition stated herein in section 10-211(c)(2)(i) above and in section 10-212 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances, those establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages which are adjacent to and which have an entrance or exit into any of the following areas within Underground Atlanta commonly known as: "Kenny's Alley", "Lower Alabama Street", "Lower Pryor Street", the "Exchange Area" or the "Food Court" are not prohibited from allowing the removal and consumption of alcoholic beverages beyond their licensed premises as long as any such alcoholic beverages which are removed or consumed beyond the premises of the licensed establishment are consumed only within these specifically named areas within Underground Atlanta. Furthermore, "restaurants," as such term is defined in section 10-1 of this chapter, which are licensed to sell alcoholic beverages and which are adjacent to and which have an entrance or exit onto the portions of Upper Alabama Street which lie between Central Avenue and Pryor Street or between Pryor Street and Peachtree Street are not prohibited from allowing the removal and consumption of alcoholic beverages beyond their licensed premises as long as any such alcoholic beverages which are removed or consumed beyond the premises of the licensed establishment are only consumed within the above described portions of Upper Alabama Street and while patrons of such licensed restaurants are seated at tables owned by the restaurant which are completely enclosed, except for a single point of ingress and egress that is controlled by the licensee of such restaurant, by a wall, fence, shrubbery or other decorative material no less than 30 inches in height. Before any alcoholic beverage may be sold or consumed in any of the above-referenced areas, the management entity of the special entertainment district must utilize a security plan that has been approved by the Atlanta Police Department. Any time an additional restaurant which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages leases space with an entrance or exit onto the portions of Upper Alabama Street which lie between Central Avenue and Pryor Street or between Pryor Street and Peachtree Street, and before any alcoholic beverages can be consumed off premises by patrons of the additional restaurant, the management entity of the special entertainment district must submit to the Atlanta Police Department a security plan reflecting such addition which must be utilized by the management entity-of the special entertainment district upon approval by the Atlanta Police Department. 
iii.  Any alcoholic beverages which are consumed in either Kenny's Alley, Lower Alabama Street, Lower Pryor Street, the Exchange Area, the Food Court or on the above-described portions of Upper Alabama Street shall only be provided and sold by establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on premises consumption which have either an entrance or exit into Kenny's Alley, Lower Alabama Street, Lower Pryor Street, the Exchange Area, the Food Court or onto the portions of Upper Alabama Street which lie between Central Avenue and Pryor Street or between Pryor Street and Peachtree Street. Any alcoholic beverages which are consumed in any of the above-referenced areas shall be dispensed and transported only in plastic containers bearing the name of the respective licensed establishment from which the alcoholic beverage was dispensed. 
iv.  Notwithstanding the definition of "premises" contained in section 10-1 of this chapter, alcoholic beverage licensees are required to adequately supervise and monitor the areas within which their patrons are lawfully allowed to consume alcoholic beverages and the failure to do so may be grounds to deny, revoke, suspend, or refuse to renew a license, or assess a fine against any licensee in accordance with the provisions of City of Atlanta Alcohol Code Section 10-109 if such violations are found to be attributable to the licensee. 
v.  Kenny's Alley, Lower Alabama Street, Lower Pryor Street, the Exchange Area, the Food Court and the above-described portions of Upper Alabama Street shall be cleared of patrons within 30 minutes after the time set by section 10-209(e) and (f) of this chapter for the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  The provisions of section 10-8(b) of this Code, pertaining to the issuance of permits for special events, shall be applicable in special entertainment districts. Further, the provisions of section 10-126(a)(7) which provides as follows: 
"(7) Each special event shall last a maximum of seven consecutive days, and no more than two special event permits shall be issued to any applicant in any calendar year, shall not be applicable to special events held within a special entertainment district. 
a.  Section 10-212(b) prohibiting the removal of alcoholic beverages beyond a selling establishment's licensed premises shall not be applicable to special events held within a special entertainment district. 
b.  The fee requirements of section 10-126 shall not apply to special events held within a special entertainment district unless the applicant is the current holder of an annual license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
c.  The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages during special events held within a special entertainment district shall be permitted only as follows: 
1.  Monday through Sunday—12:00 noon until 2:00 a.m. of the following day. 
2.  Sunday—12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight. 
d.  Alcoholic beverages shall be dispensed and transported only in plastic containers during special events held within a special entertainment district. 
(4)  Adult businesses, as defined in part 16, shall not be permitted in special entertainment districts. 
(d)  Underground Atlanta. It is found and declared that the area of the central business district bound on the north by Wall Street, on the west by Peachtree Street and at one point, by Broad Street, on the south by Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive and on the east by Washington Avenue complies with the definition of special entertainment district as set forth in subsection (a) of this section and is established as the Underground Atlanta special entertainment district. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-2243—14-2246; Ord. No. 1996-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-8-96; Ord. No. 1996-13, § 1, 3-25-96; Ord. No. 2003-64, §§ 1, 2, 1-8-96; Ord. No. 2003-82, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2005-38, §§ 1—4, 6-23-05) 
Sec. 10-212. - Sale or delivery to unlicensed premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this article to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverage by the package beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to allow the sale or delivery of any alcoholic beverage by the drink to any area other than the premises covered in the application for license, private, meeting and dining rooms located on the premises of the licensee and the designated rooms of any guest in a hotel or motel in which is located a licensee under this article. It shall also be unlawful for any person to remove any alcoholic beverage served by the drink to any area beyond the licensed premises. Each retail licensee licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall have the following notice prominently displayed at all exits and printed on any menus which the licensee distributes: 
"It is unlawful for any person to remove any alcoholic beverage served here to any area beyond these premises. 
Atlanta City Code." 
(c)  Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the owner or operator of an establishment commonly known as a "drive-in restaurant," which has as its primary source of income the sale of prepared foods and which serves at least a portion of such prepared foods to patrons in motor vehicles parked on the property of such restaurant, may, by obtaining a valid license for the sale of malt beverages for consumption on the premises, sell and serve malt beverages by the drink to patrons within motor vehicles parked on the property of such drive-in restaurant, and malt beverages thus served may be consumed within such parked motor vehicles. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2129) 
Sec. 10-213. - Posting signs at package stores. 
(a)  Each person holding a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail in package form shall post a sign in a prominent place in the retail store where such alcoholic beverages are sold, which sign shall read as follows: 
"It is unlawful to consume alcoholic beverages on these premises or within 100 feet of this store, except as specifically authorized by law." 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink and the consumption of such alcoholic beverages on the premises where such are sold and when such sales and consumption are expressly authorized by law and an appropriate license is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 1995-43, § 11(14-2152, 14-2153), 8-28-95) 
Sec. 10-214. - Additional rules for nonprofit performing arts theaters, museums and botanical gardens. 
Any applicant granted a license under section 10-58 pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption at nonprofit performing arts theaters, museums and botanical gardens shall, in addition to meeting all other sections of this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages, be subject to the following additional rules: 
(1)  Sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made not more than one hour before curtain time and during intermission, but sales shall not be authorized following the conclusion of the performance and sales shall not be made prior to 6:00 p.m. or later than 11:00 p.m.; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply to nonprofit museums, nonprofit botanical gardens or to nonprofit theaters operating in conjunction with nonprofit museums. No sales shall be authorized during any matinee or Sunday performances. 
(2)  All sales shall be made in bar glassware, and no sales shall be made in paper cups or any other temporary-type receptacle. 
(3)  No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed out of the area designated in the licensee's application or be allowed within the auditorium area of any theater. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2090(1)—(3)) 
Sec. 10-215. - Sanitation; unlawful conduct; fire prevention. 
(a)  All premises licensed under this article shall be kept clean, in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the applicable sections of this Code governing the conditions of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace or any obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practice on the premises. 
(c)  The department of fire shall, upon request of the license review board, inspect the premises and report the findings to the board. All premises licensed under this article shall conform at all times with all sections of this Code pertaining to fire protection. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2130) 
Sec. 10-216. - Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for licensees under this article or their agents to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2132) 
Sec. 10-217. - Advertisement of malt beverages or wine. 
No licensee operating premises wherein malt beverages, wine or both are sold shall operate lighted electrical signs or devices advertising these beverages or wines, except during the hours that these products are being offered for sale to the public. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2134) 
Sec. 10-218. - Exterior advertisements of distilled spirits. 
No sign of any kind, painted or electric, advertising any brand or price of distilled spirits shall be permitted on the exterior or in the window of any licensed premises. No placard or sign of any kind which is visible from the exterior of the licensed premises shall make reference to the price of any distilled spirits sold therein; provided, however, that tags showing the prices of individual bottles or containers may be posted with numbers sufficiently large to be clearly visible to the public. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2140) 
Sec. 10-219. - Purchase price of drinks credited against admission or cover charge. 
No licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall authorize or permit the purchase price of any alcoholic beverage sold by the licensee to a customer to be credited against any minimum, admission or cover charge imposed upon the customer by the licensee. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2136) 
Sec. 10-220. - Employees mingling with customers on licensed premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any employees of nightclubs or of lounges to dance or sit with customers in the premises or for any customer to be permitted to purchase food or drink for employees in these premises for the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution or sodomy or any other unlawful act. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether this purpose is manifested are that the employee or customer is a known prostitute, pimp or sodomist. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this subsection unless the arresting officer first affords the employee or customer an opportunity to explain that conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating this subsection if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. For the purpose of this subsection, a known prostitute, pimp or sodomist is a person who, within one year prior to the date of arrest for violation of this subsection, has within the knowledge of the arresting officer been convicted of violating any section of this Code or other ordinance of the city or any law of any state defining and punishing acts of soliciting, committing or offering or agreeing to commit prostitution or sodomy. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages by the drink under this section shall only be served by employees of the licensee. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2137) 
Sec. 10-221. - Coin-operated devices and amusement machines on licensed premises where packaged distilled spirits sold. 
No retail dealer in distilled spirits by the package shall permit on the premises any slot machines or mechanical music boxes or pinball machines of any kind or any coin-operated machines or any machines operated for amusement purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2141) 
Sec. 10-222. - Underage persons on licensed premises. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "underage person" means a person under 18 years of age. 
(b)  No person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages shall allow any underage person to be in, frequent or loiter about the premises of the licensee unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. However, underage persons shall be permitted in restaurants, outdoor markets, courtyard markets or private clubs without being accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. This section shall not apply to underage persons who are employees as authorized under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-16(10-O-0466), § 4, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 2015-18(15-O-1158), § 5, 5-13-15 ; Ord. No. 2017-25(17-O-1194), § 6, 5-15-17 ) 
Sec. 10-223. - Nondiscrimination in admission or service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city who serves the public or for any private club who serves persons in addition to the members or guests of members or any employee or agent thereof to discriminate against any person insofar as admission to the premises or in the sale of products in an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages because of such person's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, disability or age, except that nothing in this provision shall prohibit the imposition of age limits up to 21. For purposes of this section, any private club claiming exemption under this subsection must be incorporated as a nonprofit corporation under the laws of the state or officially certified as a nonprofit association by the United States Internal Revenue Service. For purposes of this subsection, the term "licensed alcoholic beverages establishment" means the premises for which the subject license was issued. 
(b)  A finding by the board of such discriminatory admission or service practice as forbidden in subsection (a) of this section shall constitute sufficient grounds for the nonrenewal, revocation or suspension of such license by the mayor in accordance with section 10-109. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2145; Ord. No. 2000-78, 12-12-00) 
State Law reference— Underaged persons on premises that sell alcohol, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24.1. 
Sec. 10-224. - Discrimination in admission fees or membership fees; notice of admission charges or membership fees. 
(a)  No retail licensee, licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, who requires an admission fee or periodic membership fee before permitting any person to enter the licensed premises shall discriminate as to the amount of such fees because of any person's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, disability or age, except that nothing in this provision shall prohibit the imposition of age limits up to 21. 
(b)  Any retail licensee, licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, who requires an admission fee or periodic membership fee as a condition of admission of any person to the licensed premises shall prominently display, unobstructed in a place clearly visible at the point of entry, a sign setting forth the amount of the admission fee or periodic membership applicable to all patrons, as well for the time at which application for any membership may be required. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2146; Ord. No. 2000-78, 12-12-00) 
Cross reference— Discrimination generally, § 94-66 et seq. 
Sec. 10-225. - Proof of age. 
(a)  No retail licensee licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption who requires proof of age before permitting any person to enter the licensed premises shall require proof of age other than as provided in this section. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, any document issued by an agency of municipal, state or federal government for the purpose of identification that has affixed the name, date of birth and photograph of the individual to whom it was issued shall constitute acceptable proof of age, and the licensee shall require no other identification for proof of age. 
(c)  A person who produces proof of age from a local or state jurisdiction outside the state where no photograph is affixed as provided in subsection (b) of this section may be required to produce additional proof of age at the discretion of the licensee or the licensee's designated employee; however, if such identification contains a photograph, no other identification for proof of age shall be required by the licensee. 
(d)  A licensee subject to subsection (a) of this section shall prominently display, unobstructed in a place clearly visible at the point of entry, a sign with the following notice verbatim: 
PROOF OF AGE REQUIREMENT : YOU MAY BE REQUESTED TO SHOW NO MORE THAN ONE CURRENTLY VALID PICTURE IDENTIFICATION WITH NAME AND DATE AFFIXED AS ISSUED BY ANY AGENCY OF GOVERNMENT. MORE THAN ONE IDENTIFICATION MAY BE REQUESTED , IF NO VALID PICTURE IDENTIFICATION IS PRESENTED. 
IT IS UNLAWFUL FOR THIS ESTABLISHMENT TO DISCRIMINATE IN ADMISSION TO THESE PREMISES OR IN THE SALE OF PRODUCTS ON ACCOUNT OF A PERSON'S RACE, SEX, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, OR NATIONAL ORIGIN. 
IF YOU BELIEVE THAT THIS LAW HAS BEEN VIOLATED CALL OR WRITE THE PERMITS SECTION OF THE ATLANTA DEPARTMENT OF POLICE, 175 DECATUR STREET, S.E., ATLANTA, GEORGIA 30303. 
(e)  Any licensee subject to subsection (a) of this section who has a sign in existence and prominently displayed in the licensed establishment on the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection derives shall not be required to replace that sign to reflect any change in language created by this subsection. 
(f)  A licensee subject to this section shall maintain the sign required by subsection (d) of this section in good repair and in accordance with any further stipulation, including the posting of the current address and telephone number of the department of police within five days of written notice by the department of police of any change. 
(g)  A licensee or the licensee's designee shall make a good-faith effort to ascertain that any person requesting admission to the premises or to purchase an alcoholic beverage is of legal drinking age as provided by law. For the purpose of this subsection, any person who supplies proof of age as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed to be of legal drinking age. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2147; Ord. No. 2013-24(13-O-1183), § 4, 7-16-13) 
Sec. 10-226. - Certain promotions prohibited. 
(a)  All on-premises alcoholic beverage licensees are prohibited from selling or giving away alcoholic beverages under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Serving multiple drinks for a single price or offering all you can drink for a set price. 
(2)  Making a single price the basis for a required purchase of two or more servings. 
(3)  Serving alcoholic beverages by the pitcher, except to two or more persons at any one time. 
(4)  Offering to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week. 
(5)  Offering or delivering any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons. 
(6)  Increasing the volume of distilled spirit, malt beverage or wine contained in an alcoholic beverage without increasing proportionally the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week. 
(7)  Using coupons or other special promotional items as an inducement to purchase alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to private functions not open to the public. The term "private function not open to the public" means any function wherein the licensee has agreed to the use of licensee's establishment by a person for a set period of time for valuable consideration. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2148; Ord. No. 2004-12, §§ 1, 2, 3-9-04) 
Sec. 10-227. - Dress codes. 
Any retail licensee licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption who utilizes a dress code in determining who may be admitted to the premises must apply such dress code uniformly to all persons who request admittance to the establishment. Such a dress code must remain consistent on any given date or for any special event and shall not be used to discriminate among patrons. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2149) 
Sec. 10-228. - Conduct of employees, entertainers and other persons in certain establishments. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "alcoholic commercial establishment" means any hotel, motel, restaurant, park, nightclub, lounge, bar or private club where alcoholic beverages are dispensed or consumed, but the definition excludes any theater which sells alcoholic beverages pursuant to sections 10-58 and 10-214 or any auditorium as defined in section 10-1. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the following acts in any alcoholic commercial establishment or for any licensee to knowingly permit or allow such acts to be performed: 
(1)  For any person to touch, caress or fondle an entertainer or dancer, except to place money in garters worn for such purposes. 
(2)  For any dancer in such establishment to leave the premises and return during the same shift, without signing out on a log provided by the employer stating the dancer's name, destination and expected time of return. 
(3)  For any dancer to, by bending, stooping and other postural movements, display the interior of the dancer's anus or vagina. 
(c)  The owner or manager of such adult commercial entertainment establishment shall submit to the licensing division of the department of police a copy of its rules and regulations for the conduct of its patrons and employees. 
(d)  Failure to comply with this section shall be considered as due cause to suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any license issued by the city pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-2150) 
State Law reference— Prohibited sexual conduct on premises that serve alcohol, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq. 
Chapter 14 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General powers relative to amusements and entertainments, § 1-102(c)(18). 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30; identification of coin-operated vending machines or amusement devices, § 30-1; automobile or motorcycle races, § 30-526 et seq.; Civic Center, § 46-36 et seq.; outdoor festivals, § 138-186 et seq. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; amusement rides, O.C.G.A. § 34-12-1 et seq.; billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq.; coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Manner of gaining entrance to places of amusement, entertainment or exhibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any building, tent or other enclosure used for the purpose of public or private amusement, entertainment or exhibition without the consent of the persons in control thereof or without having first paid the entrance or admission fee fixed by any persons in control thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3011) 
State Law reference— Theft of services, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-5. 
Sec. 14-2. - Permit required to own or operate place of public entertainment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate any theater, moving picture house or other place of public entertainment without first filing a written application with the chief of police for a permit, which application shall state the name of the applicant and such other information as the mayor or the mayor's designee may desire. An application fee of $100.00 is due at the time of application. The mayor shall pass upon the application and upon favorable review, issue a permit. Annual/renewal fees for a permit for theaters, moving picture houses or other places of public entertainment are $500.00. The obtaining of a permit does not exempt the applicant from paying any license tax required by the city, this section being in addition thereto. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3005; Ord. No. 1999-21, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 14-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 9, approved Sept. 26, 2006, effective Jan. 2, 2007, repealed § 14-3 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to permit to conduct entertainments at shopping centers, parking lots, similar locations as enacted by Code 1977, § 14-3006. The user's attention is directed to Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances for similar provisions. 
Sec. 14-4. - Approvals required for permit issuance to theater or assembly hall using electricity. 
All theaters employing the use of electric power or wiring of any description shall have the approval of the director, bureau of buildings, the appropriate electrical inspector and the department of fire. No permit shall be issued for any theater or assembly hall until the electrical inspector, bureau of buildings and department of fire shall have given their written approval that the requirements of this Code and other ordinances pertaining to the building have been complied with. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3007) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and fire safety standards, § 78-56 et seq. 
Land development code reference— Electrical code, § 8-2101. 
Sec. 14-5. - Shooting galleries. 
(a)  Permit required. Any person desiring to open a shooting gallery shall make a written application for a permit to the department of police. This application will be considered at a regular meeting of the license review board which shall conduct a hearing and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. 
The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(b)  Renewal of permit. Owners or operators of shooting galleries shall renew their permits not later than January 1 of each year with the department of police. 
(c)  Shooting by minors and drunken persons. It shall be unlawful for persons conducting any shooting gallery to allow minors, except with the consent of their parents or guardians, or drunken persons to practice shooting therein. 
(d)  Restrictions in fire district. All shooting galleries located within the fire district shall close at 12:00 midnight of each day on which they are opened for business and shall not open until after 8:00 a.m. the following day. When so closed, the entire business of the galleries shall cease. No shooting or operation of targets or any of the activities of the place shall then be carried on. After 10:00 p.m. each day, only smokeless powder shall be used, and no loud bells or gongs shall be attached to targets. 
(e)  Additional location restrictions. No shooting gallery shall be located within 800 feet of any other shooting gallery, and no shooting gallery shall be located within 800 feet of any of the following uses: 
(1)  From any structures in residential use. 
(2)  From any public or private school. 
(3)  From any public or private park or recreation facility. 
(4)  From any public library branch. 
(5)  From any church or similar place of religious worship. 
(6)  From any public or private hospital or mental health care facility. 
(7)  From any child care or day care facility. 
The distance in this subsection shall be measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of the site proposed to be occupied by the shooting gallery to the closest property line of any use identified above. 
(f)  An applicant for a permit to operate a shooting gallery shall include with their application, a plat of survey prepared and sealed by a surveyor registered in the state certifying that all of the locational requirements in subsection (e) have been met. 
(g)  An applicant for a new permit to operate a shooting gallery, who has acquired a previously permitted location may, within one year after the expiration of the previous owner's permit, apply for a shooting gallery permit for that location even though the location may not meet distance requirements contained in this section, though it shall meet and qualify under all other requirements of this section for the granting of a new permit. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3008; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 1, 11-6-08; Ord. No. 2013-22(13-O-1028), § 1, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 14-6. - Theatrical performances. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, the term "theatrical performances" includes the exhibition or showing of motion pictures and every kind of stage play, exhibition, performance or recital where any admission fee is charged or accepted. The only exceptions to this section shall be exhibitions or performances of an educational or religious character where no admission fee is charged or where the total receipts from admission fees, collections or contributions shall be devoted exclusively to religious or charitable purposes. 
(b)  Accepting or soliciting contributions. It is unlawful for any person to accept, as a condition precedent to admission to any of these performances, any cash or other thing of value or to solicit volunteer contributions of patrons where no admission fee under any guise or character is exacted. 
(c)  Opening hours. It is unlawful for any person directly or indirectly to begin any theatrical performance between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. unless the performance shall have been concluded before 3:00 a.m. 
(d)  Hours when prohibited. It is unlawful for any person directly or indirectly to give any theatrical performance or any part or parcel of a performance between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(e)  Presence during prohibited hours. No person shall be in any theater or public place where theatrical performances are given between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., except necessary employees. 
(f)  General admission ticket sales. It is unlawful for any person directly or indirectly to offer for sale any ticket to a theatrical performance which is for general admission. All tickets sold to theatrical performances must indicate a specific seat to which the holder of that ticket is assigned. This subsection shall not apply to movie theaters or to other theaters with seating capacities of 2,500 or less. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3001) 
Sec. 14-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 10, adopted Sept. 26, 2006, effective Jan. 2, 2007, repealed § 14-7 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to carnivals, sideshows, similar exhibitions as enacted by Code 1977, §§ 14-3003, 19-14.009. The user's attention is directed to Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances for similar provisions. 
Sec. 14-8. - Skating and other rinks. 
No license shall be issued by the chief financial officer to any person for a skating rink, walking rink or rink of like character, except by order of the mayor. Any person desiring a permit shall make application to the department of police stating the location, size and kind of structure to be used, which shall be acted on by the mayor at the mayor's discretion. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3004) 
Sec. 14-9. - Game centers. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Game center means any place or premises on which there is provided coin-operated or fee-paid mechanical, electronic or other similar devices primarily manufactured for amusement and entertainment purposes. 
Mechanical devices includes but is not limited to pool tables, billiard tables, pinball machines, electronic pingpong, electronic tennis or other similar devices. 
(b)  Permit required. Any person desiring to operate a game center shall make written application for a permit to the department of police. The license review board shall conduct a hearing at a regular meeting of the license review board on the application and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. At such time that the permit is granted by the mayor, the game center shall be allowed to open for business. 
(c)  The bureau of planning shall notify the councilmembers (district and at-large) for the council district and council post and the NPU chair for the NPU in which any such game center is to be located, that an application for a permit to operate a game center is to be considered by the license review board. Such notification shall include the name of the applicant, address of the proposed game center and the date and time of the hearing before the license review board. 
(d)  Distance from schools. No permit for a game center shall be issued where the place of business of the applicant is within 300 yards of any public school or public schoolgrounds located in residentially zoned districts nor shall any permit be issued where the place of business is located within 300 feet of public schoolgrounds and where the place of business is located within a commercially zoned business district. 
(e)  School-age children on premises during school hours. No child of school age shall be allowed on the premises of a game center during school hours while school is in session. Any game center found not in compliance with this subsection is subject to having its permit revoked. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3013; Ord. No. 1999-55, §§ 1, 2, 7-15-99; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 2, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 14-10. - Crowding at circuses and shows. 
It shall be unlawful for any person being in charge of or assisting in the management of any circus, show, wild west show, horse show, dog show or similar exhibition to which the public is invited through the sale of tickets of admission or the giving of passes to permit the attendance of the public in numbers in excess of the number of seats provided or to fail to provide means of access to and exit from the seats or to permit the means of access and exit to become crowded before, during or after performances. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3002) 
Sec. 14-11. - Transient theatrical companies using electrical equipment. 
Transient theatrical companies shall be required to furnish all necessary plugging boxes and plugs or to use house plugs and boxes and all necessary wire for the construction of the lights carried by them. The chief electrical inspector shall inspect, in the inspector's discretion, all electrical effects belonging to those transient companies. The theater electrician shall be a competent electrician and shall be required to pass an examination to be conducted by that inspector. The inspector shall be notified at least one day before a performance by the company of the transient company that will use electrical apparatus, and on failure to do so the permit shall be revoked. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3009) 
Land development code reference— Electrical code, § 8-2101. 
Sec. 14-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 11, adopted Sept. 26, 2006, effective Jan. 2, 2007, repealed § 14-12 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to fire protection for tent shows as enacted by Code 1977, § 14-3010. The user's attention is directed to Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances for similar provisions. 
Sec. 14-13. - Indecent or immoral shows. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or perform in any hall, house or public place any indecent, immoral or lewd play or dance or to sing to a public audience any sacrilegious, indecent, vulgar or lewd song. It shall be the duty of the police and city officers to arrest every person violating this section in their presence or on complaint of any citizen of a violation of this section by any person. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3012) 
State Law reference— Obscenity, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80 et seq. 
Secs. 14-14—14-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOXING AND WRESTLING MATCHES 

Sec. 14-36. - Jurisdiction. 
The mayor or the mayor's designee shall have jurisdiction over all professional boxing, sparring and wrestling matches or exhibitions in the city. The matches or exhibitions shall be held in accordance with this article and the rules and regulations established by the mayor or the mayor's designee. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3041) 
Sec. 14-37. - Duties of Civic Center director. 
(a)  The Civic Center director shall have police powers to carry out the rules and regulations of the mayor or the mayor's designee with respect to professional boxing and wrestling contests. The Civic Center director shall keep appropriate records and account to the chief financial officer for all funds collected in such form as may be required by the chief financial officer or by the rules of the mayor or the mayor's designee. 
(b)  The Civic Center director shall keep a record of the admissions and receipts, together with the dates of exhibitions and other data which will fully inform the chief financial officer of the business done. The report shall be made to the municipal clerk. 
(c)  The Civic Center director shall perform other duties with regard to this article as specified by rules and regulations of the mayor or the mayor's designee. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3042) 
Cross reference— Civic Center, § 46-36 et seq. 
Sec. 14-38. - Permit. 
(a)  The promoter, prior to conducting a boxing, sparring or wrestling match or exhibition, shall obtain a permit whenever the event is not held in the Civic Center. 
(b)  Application for the permit shall be in writing to the mayor or the mayor's designee, and a check payable to the city for $100.00 will accompany the application. The application shall set forth such facts as the mayor may require and shall be verified by the applicant. 
(c)  The mayor or the mayor's designee may grant or refuse the application after an investigation into the merits of the proposed contest or may revoke a permit, if it appears upon investigation that the match or contest will be detrimental to the interest of boxing or wrestling or the peace and good order of the city. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-3043, 19-14.010; Ord. No. 1999-22, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 14-39. - Bond of promoter. 
Every person engaged in or desiring to engage in the business of promoting boxing or wrestling shall, before any permit to engage therein is granted under section 14-38, deposit with the chief financial officer a bond in the sum of $5,000.00. The bond shall be approved by the mayor. The bond shall guarantee the faithful performance of all contracts entered into by the promoter and the payment of all damages sustained by any person because of the promotion and the carrying on of boxing or wrestling matches. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3044) 
Sec. 14-40. - Licensing of promoters, referees, judges and others. 
All promoters, referees, judges, timekeepers, boxers, wrestlers, managers, trainers and seconds in connection with boxing or wrestling matches or exhibitions held in the city shall obtain a license before an event is held. Application for a license shall be made in writing to the mayor or the mayor's designee accompanied by a check payable to the city. The promoter's license shall be $2,000, and all others listed in this section shall be $100.00 each. Each license shall be good for one year from the date of issuance. The mayor or the mayor's designee may revoke any license at any time, if it appears upon investigation that the license should be revoked in the interest of boxing or wrestling or the peace and good order of the city. The mayor or the mayor's designee may make a charge for licensing of all clubs and participants and revise the fees to be charged in accordance with the rules and regulations governing boxing and wrestling. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-3045, 19-14.011; Ord. No. 1999-22, § 2, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 14-41. - Fire protection. 
No boxing, sparring or wrestling match or exhibition shall be held in the city outside the Civic Center without the promoter first obtaining the written approval of the department of fire. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3046) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and fire safety standards, § 78-56 et seq. 
Secs. 14-42—14-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOTION PICTURE THEATERS 

Sec. 14-61. - Wiring. 
All wiring in motion picture theaters shall be installed under the direct supervision of the chief electrical inspector, and if the chief electrical inspector condemns any wiring, it shall be reinstalled under the direction and approval of the chief electrical inspector. If the owner or operator of a motion picture theater refuses to conform to the directions of the inspector in matters mentioned in this section, the license of the owner and operator shall be ipso facto void, and the theaters shall be immediately closed as unsafe for patronage. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3081) 
Land development code reference— Electrical code, § 8-2101. 
Sec. 14-62. - Smoking, drinking in motion picture machine operating room; responsibility of operator for condition of room. 
No smoking or drinking will be permitted in any motion picture machine operating room. The operator shall be held responsible for the condition of the operating room where the operator is employed, and upon conviction for violation of this Code or any ordinance respecting the condition thereof or imposing any duty upon the operator, the operator's license shall become void. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3082) 
Sec. 14-63. - Persons allowed in motion picture machine operating room. 
(a)  Only the following persons shall be allowed in the operating room of any theater or moving picture show during the progress of any public or private performance, in connection with which any machine, machinery or equipment housed by the operating room is being used: 
(1)  The chief electrical inspector or the inspector's deputized agents; 
(2)  The director, bureau of buildings; 
(3)  The manager of the theater; 
(4)  The licensed operators who have charge of the machines; and 
(5)  Such other persons as, in the judgment of the inspector, may be necessary to the proper inspection, adjustment or maintenance of any machine, machinery or equipment housed in the room affecting or in any way having to do with the operation of sound devices, provided that all these other persons shall have been given permits by the inspector to be present therein. 
(b)  In addition to the operators permitted by this section in the projection room of a theater, it shall be permissible for such persons, not more than two in addition to operators on duty, as may be designated by the manager of the theater, to enter the room, and no other shall be permitted to enter. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3083) 
Sec. 14-64. - Indecency, lewdness in motion picture theaters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sing or repeat or cause to be sung or repeated to a public audience in any motion picture theater any vulgar, lewd, immoral, indecent or immorally suggestive song or opera or part of song or opera or recitation or part of recitation or play or part of play or to perform any immoral, indecent, lewd or immorally suggestive dance or movement in the nature of a dance. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3084) 
Sec. 14-65. - Indecent, immoral vaudeville performances. 
It shall be unlawful for any actor or performer, either male or female, to appear in any motion picture theater which has vaudeville performances in connection therewith in indecent, immoral or immorally suggestive dress or costume. It shall be unlawful for any actor or performer therein, either male or female, to give or render coarse jokes or ribald, lewd or immorally suggestive dances or movements in the nature of a dance of the same prohibited character. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3085) 
Sec. 14-66. - Obscene motion pictures. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to show or cause to be shown in a motion picture theater or other public place where an admission charge is made an obscene motion picture or similar exhibition or process. 
(b)  Test for obscenity. The test for obscenity as applied to this section is whether or not, according to contemporary community standards, as applied by the average person, the motion picture contains any scene which causes the dominant effect of the motion picture to tend to stir the sex impulses or to lead to sexually impure and lustful thoughts or to appeal to prurient interests. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3086) 
State Law reference— Obscenity, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80 et seq. 
Secs. 14-67—14-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate and control billiard rooms, § 1-102(17). 
State Law reference— Local regulation of billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-86. - Applicability of article. 
This article relates to any of the games played on a table bordered by an elastic ledge or cushion, with balls which are impelled by a cue, including the games known as billiards and pool, and also miniature pool tables and the operation thereof. For the purposes of this article, premises operating any of those games are billiard rooms. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3101) 
Sec. 14-87. - Authority of police officers. 
The police chief shall designate one or more officers to obtain all of the information indicated in this article and to make a report on any matter pertinent to whether or not a license should be granted or revoked at any time. All departments of the city shall cooperate with these officers. The officers shall have admittance at all times to billiard rooms before and after a license may be issued and shall report all violations of this article in writing to the police chief. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3108) 
Sec. 14-88. - Condition, arrangement of premises. 
Billiard rooms are subject to the disapproval of the director, bureau of sanitary services. No screen, curtains, blinds, partitions or other obstructions shall be placed in billiard rooms, except that washrooms and storage closets are permitted. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3110) 
Sec. 14-89. - Opening and closing hours. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any billiard room between the hours of 2:55 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. Sunday, between the hours of 12:00 midnight Sunday to 6:00 a.m. Monday and between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on other days of the week. During the hours when the billiard room is closed, only regular employees performing necessary work shall be in the billiard room. However, this section shall not apply to establishments which have licenses to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3109) 
State Law reference— Authorized restrictions on operating hours, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2(b)(2). 
Sec. 14-90. - Gambling and similar pursuits. 
Dice, cards, dominoes, baseball and sport tickets and all other games of chance or gambling are prohibited in billiard rooms, whether partitioned or not, or in any room connecting therewith nor shall any checks be given which can be redeemed for merchandise or cash. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3111) 
Secs. 14-91—14-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— License authorized, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2(b)(1). 

Sec. 14-101. - Required; permit prerequisite to issuance. 
No billiard room shall be maintained without a license. Application for a permit to open a billiard room shall be filed at least ten days before the time of granting a license. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3102) 
Sec. 14-102. - Application. 
Every applicant for a billiard room license shall file written application with the department of police, giving the full name and address, and the full names and addresses of all parties interested shall be given if more than one. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall contain the names and addresses of all officers, as well as the state where organized, and the designation of the manager. The application shall further state the exact address where the room is to be conducted; the number of tables; the age of the applicant or manager if a corporation; whether a citizen of the United States; when, where and how long the applicant previously operated a billiard room; and the name and address of the owner of the property where the room is to be opened. The application must be signed by the applicant or if a corporation by the manager. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3103) 
Sec. 14-103. - Investigation, report. 
The police chief shall transmit the application for a billiard room license to the license review board, which shall cause a complete investigation to be made into all the particulars of this division. When the investigation has been completed, the license review board shall hold a public hearing on the application at a regularly scheduled license review board meeting and shall recommend to the mayor that the application for a license be granted or denied. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3104; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 3, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 14-104. - Rejection of application. 
Every application for a license to operate a billiard room shall be rejected where the applicant is not of good character or has suffered a revocation of a previous license or if any other regulations have been violated. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3105) 
Sec. 14-105. - Expiration, renewal, transfer. 
All billiard room licenses shall expire annually at the time fixed by the mayor or the mayor's designee and shall be renewed not later than January 1 of each year. No transfer of a license shall be made except with the consent of the mayor endorsed thereon. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3106) 
Sec. 14-106. - Posting. 
A billiard room license must be posted in the billiard room where it can easily be seen. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3110) 
Sec. 14-107. - Revocation. 
A billiard room license shall be revoked by the mayor for any violation of this article or other city laws pertaining thereto. The licensee shall be given ten days' notice of the revocation by the chief financial officer, on which the chief financial officer may have a full hearing, the revocation then to be finally determined. All misrepresentations as to operators or their successors, either with regard to character or former conduct of any billiard room, shall be grounds for revocation. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3107) 
Secs. 14-108—14-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-57, § 1, adopted July 24, 2001, repealed §§ 14-131—14-135 and 14-146—14-148 in their entirety. Formerly said sections pertained to definitions, right of entry for purpose of inspection, duty of operator or manager to enforce article, frequenting by intoxicated persons, dances operated exclusively for minors, required license fee, license application, license issuance, license rejection and revocation as related to dancehalls. The user of this Code is directed to ch. 14, art. IX, divs. 1 and 2 for similar provisions. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 14-131—14-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BUNGEE JUMPING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bungee jumping means a free fall by a person from a height and the descent is limited by attachment to the bungee cord. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3191) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-172. - Investigation by police department. 
The police chief shall designate one or more officers to obtain all of the information indicated in this article and to make a report on any matter pertinent to whether or not a license should be granted or revoked at any time. All departments of the city shall cooperate with these officers. The officers shall have admittance at all times to the bungee jumping operation before and after a license may be issued and shall report all violations of this article in writing to the police chief. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3199) 
Secs. 14-173—14-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 14-186. - Required. 
No bungee jumping operation shall be maintained without a license. Application for a license to conduct a bungee jumping operation shall be filed on forms provided by the police chief at least 30 days before the time of granting a license. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3192) 
Sec. 14-187. - Permits and insurance required. 
Prior to making application for a license under this division, the applicant must first obtain a permit from the state, a special use permit from the city and an insurance policy in the amount of $1,000,000.00. The permit from the state, the special use permit and the insurance policy shall be attached to the application. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3193) 
Sec. 14-188. - Contents and filing of application. 
Every applicant for license under this division shall file written application with the department of police giving the full names and addresses of all interested parties. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall contain the names and addresses of all officers, as well as the state where organized, besides designation of a manager. The application shall further state the exact address where the operation is to be conducted; the number of sites; the age of the applicant or manager if a corporation; whether a citizen of the United States; when, where and how long the applicant previously operated a bungee jumping operation; and the name and address of the owner of the property where the bungee jumping operation is to be opened. The application must be signed by the applicant or if a corporation by the manager. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3194) 
Sec. 14-189. - Review. 
The police chief shall transmit the application for a license under this division to the license review board. All such applications for licenses shall be acted upon by the license review board after a public hearing and the license review board shall report its recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3195; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 4, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 14-190. - Fee. 
The fee for a license to conduct a bungee jumping operation shall be $1,000.00. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3200) 
Sec. 14-191. - Term, transfer. 
All bungee jumping licenses shall expire annually at the time fixed by the mayor or the mayor's designee and shall be renewed not later than January 1 of each year. No transfer of a license shall be made except with the consent of the mayor endorsed thereon. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3196) 
Sec. 14-192. - Effect of state revocation of permit. 
Whenever the state shall revoke any permit for the operation of bungee jumping, the city license to conduct a bungee jumping operation shall be automatically revoked without any action by the license review board or any city officer. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3197) 
Sec. 14-193. - Grounds for denial, revocation of license. 
(a)  Upon a finding of due cause, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the mayor shall have the authority to deny an application for a new permit under this division or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership and to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license which has been issued or which may be issued by the city to the licensee under this division. 
(b)  Due cause for the denial of applications for new licenses or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership or for revocation, suspension or refusal to renew a license shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Failure to obtain a permit from the state or revocation of a permit from the state; 
(2)  Failure to obtain a special use permit from the city or revocation of a special use permit from the city; 
(3)  Failure to provide and maintain a public liability insurance policy in the amount of $1,000,000.00; 
(4)  Conviction of a felony; 
(5)  Providing any false or misleading information or making any material omission on any application for a license; 
(6)  Failure to comply with all regulations promulgated by the state governing the operation of bungee jumping; and 
(7)  Failure to comply with all sections of this article or any other city laws applicable to this article. 
(c)  No application for a new license or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership shall be denied and no license which has been issued shall be revoked, suspended or refused renewal except upon a finding of due cause as provided in subsection (b) of this section and after a hearing and upon a ten-day written notice to the licensee. The notice shall state the place, date, time and purpose of such hearing and shall set forth the charge upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(d)  The license review board shall conduct the hearing and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the conclusions and recommendations of the board, may deny an application for a new license or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership and may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license. 
(e)  For due cause for a violation of this article which results in an emergency situation in which continued operation of the bungee jumping operation by the licensee endangers the health, welfare or safety of the public, the mayor or the mayor's designee may suspend any license under this article. Any such suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the next regular or called meeting of the license review board. 
(Code 1977, § 14-3198) 
Secs. 14-194—14-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BURLESQUE THEATERS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate and control theatrical performances and shows, § 1-102(c)(18) 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-216. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adequate parking means one parking space for each 50 square feet of customer service area within the premises of the applicant. 
Burlesque theater means a place where musical entertainment is carried out consisting of a series of unrelated episodes and dances, all with the purpose of depicting or suggesting sex-centered subjects or objects, and which is not licensed by the city to sell alcoholic beverages therein. 
Church means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
College means only such state, county, city, church or other colleges as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state and does not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
License means the authorization by the mayor to conduct, operate and maintain a burlesque theater. 
Licensee means a person, real or artificial, holding any class of license issued under this article. 
Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one or more than three families customarily reside and does not include a mobile home, an apartment house having facilities for housing more than four families, a boardinghouse or roominghouse where there are five or more boarders or roomers or any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six months immediately prior to the filing of an application. 
School means only such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state and does not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Striptease means the removal of substantially all of the entertainer's apparel while dancing and the performing of gyrations of portions of the entertainer's body backward and forward in either fast or slow motion, including side-to-side and circular movements. 
Zoning chapter means part 16 of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6071(1), (3)—(7), (11)—(14)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-217. - Compliance with article required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a burlesque theater without having first complied with this article, including obtaining a license for the operation of a burlesque theater. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6072) 
Sec. 14-218. - Hours of operation. 
No licensee of a burlesque theater shall allow the operation of the burlesque theater between the hours of 3:25 a.m. to 12:00 noon, daily. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6079) 
Sec. 14-219. - Underage persons. 
No licensee of a burlesque theater shall allow any person who is not at least 18 years of age to be admitted to the burlesque theater. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6078) 
Secs. 14-220—14-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 14-231. - Application. 
(a)  Every person desiring to obtain a license to operate a burlesque theater shall make written application to the license review board upon forms to be prepared by the mayor. Among other provisions in the form, it shall state the name and address of the applicant, the place where the proposed burlesque theater is to be located, if a partnership, the names of the partnership, the names of the partners, if a corporation, the names of the officers and other information as may be required by the license review board. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a completed application, the license review board shall hold a public hearing on the application at a regularly scheduled license review board meeting and shall recommend to the mayor that the application for a license be granted or denied. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6073; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 5, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 14-232. - Annual renewal; fee. 
A license to operate a burlesque theater shall be renewed annually as of the date of the original issuance of the license. There shall be an initial and annual registration charge for the original issuance and renewal of each license issued pursuant to this article, which license fee shall not exceed $500.00 per annum. 
(Code 1977, § 19-14.023) 
Sec. 14-233. - Effect of applicant's conviction of crime. 
No license or renewal license for the operation of a burlesque theater shall be issued to any person where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal shareholder, directly beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within three years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or the United States or any municipal ordinance relating to sex offenses and related matters and alcohol or drug offenses and related matters. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6074) 
Sec. 14-234. - Location restricted. 
No burlesque theater license shall be issued to any location which is within 400 feet of any private residence, church, school or college, measured in all directions from the nearest wall enclosing the proposed burlesque theater to the nearest point of the property line of any private residence, church, school or college. Additionally, no burlesque theater license shall issue on any property which is classified under the zoning ordinance of the city as R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-5, R-6 or R-G. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6076) 
Sec. 14-235. - Adequate parking required. 
No burlesque theater license shall be issued if the applicant cannot demonstrate that the proposed burlesque theater shall have adequate parking facilities as defined in section 14-216. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6077) 
Sec. 14-236. - Revocation. 
Any burlesque theater license issued shall be subject to revocation for the violation of this article, upon notification to the licensee and a hearing before the license review board. The notification shall contain a specification of the violation and shall be served upon the licensee, and the hearing on the revocation shall be held at least 14 days after service of the notice, at a time and place to be ascertained by the license review board. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6085) 
Secs. 14-237—14-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 14-246. - Minimum age. 
No burlesque theater licensee shall employ any person unless the person is 18 years old or older. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6082) 
Sec. 14-247. - Employment of persons convicted of crimes. 
No licensee shall employ in any burlesque theater any person in any capacity, including but not limited to performers, entertainers and musicians, who have, within three years of the date of their employment, been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor of any state or the United States or any municipal ordinance relating to sex offenses and related matters and alcohol or drug offenses and related matters. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6081) 
Sec. 14-248. - Fingerprinting. 
No person shall be employed by any burlesque theater unless the person shall have been fingerprinted by the department of police indicating the person is eligible for that employment. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6083) 
Sec. 14-249. - Performers mingling with patrons. 
No performer or entertainer in a burlesque theater shall be allowed to mingle with patrons or be in the company of patrons on the premises at any time during, after or before the performance. No performer or entertainer shall have any physical contact with the patrons during a performance. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6080) 
Secs. 14-250—14-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LINGERIE MODELING STUDIOS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-301. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent/licensee means that person, real or artificial, holding any class of license issued under this article who is designated by the applicant in the application for a license to operate a lingerie modeling studio. 
Lingerie modeling means entertainment or activity which consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments, as defined under "adult entertainment" in section 16-29.001(3)(e). 
Lingerie modeling studio means any place or commercial establishment wherein the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee or required to make a purchase in order to view entertainment or activity which consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments, as defined under "adult entertainment" in section 16-29.001(3)(e). 
Lingerie modeling studio employee means any person who is employed in any capacity by a lingerie modeling studio. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6071(2), (8)—(10)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-302. - Employees. 
(a)  Minimum age. No licensee under this article shall employ any person in or about the premises where lingerie modeling is to be performed unless such person is 18 years of age or older. 
(b)  Certain persons not to be employed. No licensee shall employ in a lingerie modeling studio as defined in section 14-301 any person in any capacity whatsoever, including, but not limited to, models, performers, entertainers or musicians, who have, within five years of the date of their employment, been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or of any municipal ordinance which conviction related to sexual offenses and related matters or alcohol or drug offenses and related matters or any other crime involving moral turpitude. No person, as above referred to, shall be employed by the licensee if this employment would violate the terms of any probation or parole of the person; provided however, that any person excluded from employment under the terms of this section shall have the right to appeal this exclusion to the license review board. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6616) 
Sec. 14-303. - Hours of operation. 
No licensee of a lingerie modeling studio shall allow the operation of such establishment between the hours of 3:25 a.m. and 12:00 noon, daily. 
(Code 1977, § 19-14.039) 
Sec. 14-304. - Minors prohibited. 
It shall be a ground for revocation for any licensee or employee to allow any minor to be on the lingerie modeling studio premises at any time. 
(Code 1977, § 19-14.038) 
Secs. 14-305—14-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 14-321. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a lingerie modeling studio as defined in section 14-301 without having first complied with the provisions of this article, including the obtaining of a license for the operation of a lingerie modeling studio. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6611) 
Sec. 14-322. - Application. 
(a)  Required, contents. All persons desiring to obtain a license to operate a lingerie modeling studio under this article shall make written application to the license and permits unit of the city police department upon forms to be prepared and approved by the unit. Each applicant shall submit the following information and certificates: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The location of the proposed lingerie modeling studio. 
(3)  The nature and character of the business. 
(4)  If a partnership, the name of the partnership and the names and addresses of the partners. 
(5)  If a corporation, the name of the corporation and the names and addresses of the officers and members of the board of directors and stockholders. 
(6)  Any bank accounts listed in the name of the applicant, or maintained by the applicant, whether an individual, partnership or corporation. 
(7)  Whether the applicant, or any partners, or any corporation officers or board members, or any principal shareholders, have, within the preceding five years, a record for any conviction for the violation of any statute of the several states, or the United States, or of any ordinance of any city in the United States. "Conviction" as used in this section shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere, or the forfeiture of a bond. 
(8)  A listing of all real property which the applicant, partnership or corporation is presently leasing, and names and addresses of all lessees and lessors of such property. 
(9)  A certified copy of the applicant's financial statement for the 12-month period ending one week before the filing of the application for license, and state of incorporation of such corporation, as well as the names and addresses of the agents and employees of such corporation for a period of two years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(10)  Documentation of oral agreements and copies of all written agreements among any persons or stockholders of corporations or partners of partnerships applying for licenses to engage in adult entertainment, which agreements reflect or control ownership or division of profits, sharing of revenues or payment of rents, or which agreements reflect any other arrangements in connection with ownership, rents, profit sharing or income application of use. 
(b)  Fee. All new and renewal applicants shall be charged a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $100.00, which shall be paid to the department of police at the time of filing of such application. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-6612(a), 19-14.035; Ord. No. 1999-27, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 14-323. - Investigation, granting or denial. 
(a)  Investigation. All applicants shall be investigated by the department of police and its findings shall be presented to the license review board at a public hearing on the application as provided in this division. 
(b)  Granting or denial. The license review board shall conduct the hearing and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-6612(b), 19-14.036; Ord. No. 1996-03, § 1, 1-8-96; Ord. No. 1997-73, § 2, 12-8-97; Ord. No. 1999-27, § 2, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 6, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 14-324. - Grounds for nonissuance. 
(a)  No license or renewal for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment shall be issued to any person where any individual, having an interest either as owner, partner, officer, or principal shareholder, directly beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of such application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal ordinance involving a crime of moral turpitude or relating to sexual offenses and related matters, to alcohol or drug offenses and related matters or to gambling offenses and related matters. 
(b)  No license shall be issued under this article if the application contains a material omission, untrue or misleading information, or if the application fails to indicate the true ownership of the proposed establishment. 
(c)  No license shall be issued under this article if the applicant fails to furnish any and all data, information, and records related to the operation of licensed establishments, when the same has been requested by the department of police or the license review board. 
(d)  No license shall be issued under this article if the proposed premises do not comply with the zoning ordinances, the fire code or the building code of the city. 
(e)  No license shall be issued under this article where the person applying has had a permit to conduct a similar type business denied or revoked within a period of five years. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6613) 
Sec. 14-325. - Renewal. 
Licenses to operate a lingerie modeling studio establishment shall be renewed annually as of the date of the original issuance of the license for a fee of $3,000.00. All applications for renewal licenses shall furnish all data, information and records requested by the license review board or the department of police. The chief of police or designee shall have the authority to renew the license, and such decision may be appealed to the license review board for a hearing and recommendation to the mayor for final action. 
(Code 1977, § 19-14.036; Ord. No. 1999-27, § 3, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 14-326. - Revocation; hearing. 
(a)  Any license issued under this article shall be subject to revocation for: 
(1)  The violation of any of the prohibitions contained in this article or in this Code. 
(2)  The violation of any other law, ordinance or regulation governing the operation of establishments licensed as lingerie modeling studios or which are reasonably related to the operation of such business. 
(3)  The violation of any occurrence which would have barred issuance of the original license. 
(4)  Permitting the solicitation of patrons on the licensed premises for prostitution or any other illegal act where the licensee, the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct. 
(5)  The failure to obtain prior approval of the mayor after hearing by the license review board for changing the type of establishment operated pursuant to this section. 
(6)  Failure by the licensee to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, patrons and others on the licensed premises, or on any property owned or leased by the licensee, including but not limited to the parking lots and parking areas, or on any parking lots or areas which may be lawfully used by patrons of a licensed establishment, in order to protect the safety and wellbeing of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. 
(7)  The violation of the human relations ordinance of the city, which violation shall be evidenced by receipt of an order by the human relations commission which shall contain findings of discrimination pursuant to chapter 94, article III of this Code. 
(b)  No application for new license or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership shall be denied, and no license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city or any licensee hereunder shall be revoked, suspended or refused renewal except upon a finding of due cause as defined in this article, and after a hearing and upon a five-day written notice to the licensee, stating the place, date, time and purpose of such hearing and setting forth the charge or charges upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(c)  Sworn officers of the department of police shall have the authority to inspect all areas of lingerie modeling studio establishments licensed under this article during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  No locking devices of any type shall be used by establishments to prevent or hinder the inspection of the licensed premises by the police department. 
(e)  The license review board shall conduct the hearings pursuant to this section and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving such conclusions, may deny applications for new licenses or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership, and may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any existing license. In lieu of suspension, revocation or the failure to renew under this article, the mayor may impose a fine upon any licensee, such fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation occurring on the licensed premises. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6614; Ord. No. 1996-03, § 2, 1-8-96; Ord. No. 1997-73, § 2, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 14-327. - Regulations. 
(a)  All modeling or dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(b)  No modeling or dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
(c)  No model or dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(d)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(e)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(f)  All areas of the establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five tenths foot candles per square foot. 
(Ord. No. 1997-73, § 2, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 14-328. - Physical layout of establishment. 
Any lingerie modeling studio having available for customers, patrons, or members, any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(Ord. No. 1997-73, § 2, 12-8-97) 
Secs. 14-329—14-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMPLOYEE PERMIT 

Sec. 14-351. - Required. 
Any individual working in a lingerie modeling studio as an independent contractor or as an employee shall first obtain a permit from the chief of police prior to beginning such work. Persons permitted under this article to exhibit or model lingerie or similar undergarments, as defined under "adult entertainment" in section 16-29.001(3)(e), may only provide such entertainment in an establishment licensed pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6617(a); Ord. No. 2000-7, § 2, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 14-352. - Application; fee. 
(a)  Application for an employee permit as required in this article shall be addressed to the chief of police of the city. The applicant shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  Name and address of any person having previously employed the applicant for a period of six weeks or longer. 
(3)  A record of any convictions for violations of federal or state laws or municipal ordinances. 
(b)  Each applicant for an employee permit shall pay $50.00 for certification of eligibility. Such payment is nonrefundable and shall accompany the application for a permit. Upon the issuance of a new or renewal permit, the permit holder shall pay to the police department an annual fee in the amount of $300.00. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-6617(b), 19-14.037; Ord. No. 1999-27, § 4, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2000-7, § 3, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 14-353. - Employees to be fingerprinted. 
No person shall be granted an employee permit until such person has been fingerprinted by the department of police. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6617(c)) 
Sec. 14-354. - Term. 
Permits issued pursuant to this article shall expire 12 months from the date of issue or when the holder changes the location of employment, or when revoked. The department of police may prescribe reasonable fees for certifying the eligibility for employment. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6617(d)) 
Sec. 14-355. - Employers, licensee or management to keep permits. 
The management of lingerie modeling studio establishments shall keep all permits issued under this article in a place so that they may be inspected by any member of the police department any time. In case employment is terminated, the permit shall be returned to the employee by the management of such establishment. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6617(e)) 
Sec. 14-356. - Grounds for nonissuance or revocation. 
(a)  No person shall be issued any employee permit who has, within five years of the date of proposed employment, been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation which related to sexual offenses and related matters, or alcohol or drug offenses or related matters. 
(b)  The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke an employee permit for violation of any provision of this article. The permit holder shall have the right to appeal such revocation to the license review board within ten days after the notice of revocation. After receiving the recommendation of the license review board, the mayor may revoke the permit. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6618; Ord. No. 1996-03, § 3, 1-8-96; Ord. No. 1997-73, § 2, 12-8-97) 
Sec. 14-357—14-369. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DANCEHALLS II 
DIVISION 1. - ADULT DANCEHALLS 

Sec. 14-370. - Application of this division. 
(a)  The terms and conditions of this division shall apply to all dancehall licenses, whether new or renewal, issued after the enactment of this division. 
(b)  All valid dancehall licenses in effect prior to the enactment of this division shall be governed by the terms and conditions of the current provisions contained in chapter 14, article V. However, all such license holders must apply for and obtain a renewal of their license, if desired, prior to January 1, 2002, under the terms and conditions of article IX. If said license holders fail to apply for and obtain a renewal of their license prior to January 1, 2002, then in no event shall they be permitted to operate any dancehall until awarded a license under article IX. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-371. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
Adult dance means any dance for patrons 18 years of age or older that is readily accessible to the public and which: 
(1)  Is held and conducted either directly or indirectly for a profit; or 
(2)  Requires a monetary payment or contribution from any of the persons admitted. 
Adult dancehall means any place where a dance for persons 18 years of age and older is conducted, operated or maintained and includes the premises in which the adult dancehall is conducted, operated or maintained including but not limited to all parking areas, hallways, bathrooms and all adjoining areas on the premises accessible to the public during the dance. 
Alcoholic beverages means and includes but is not limited to malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits. The terms "malt beverages", "wine", and "distilled spirits" shall have the same meaning as defined in chapter 10, article I, section 10-1. 
Applicant means the person who files an application to operate an adult dance or adult dancehall and in whose name the license is issued. 
Person means any individual, receiver, assignee, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, corporation, company, joint stock company, association, society, or any group or individuals, acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise. 
Promoter means a person or the legal entity who assumes the financial responsibilities of an adult dance and/or adult dancehall, including but not limited to, contracting with the principals, renting the site and collecting the gate revenues. 
Teens means those persons between the ages of 14 and 18 years of age. 
Owner, as used in this section, (except when specific reference is made to the owner of the physical location or premises), shall include the owner, operator, manager or other person having supervision over an adult dancehall as defined herein. 
Private party as used in this section means any event that is not readily accessible to the public and which is not held and conducted for a profit either, directly or indirectly, and which requires no monetary payment or contribution from any of the persons admitted. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-372. - Duty of operator or manager to enforce article. 
The applicant is considered, for purposes of this division, the owner, operator or manager of a teen dancehall. The applicant shall assure that the sections of this division are carried out. If the applicant fails to do so, either intentionally or by inadvertence, the applicant shall be deemed guilty of an offense for each such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-373. - Adult dancehall license. 
No person shall conduct or operate an adult dance unless an adult dancehall license is obtained in accordance with the provisions of this division. The license required by this section shall be in addition to any other license required by law, and the operation of such a place as herein described shall not be construed to be incidental to some other business. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-374. - Multiple licenses allowed. 
All dancehall license holders shall have either a teen dance hall license as provided in article IX, division 2, or an adult dance hall license as provided herein, or both. Adult and teen dances cannot, however, be conducted at the same time in the same place. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-375. - No alcoholic beverages allowed; intoxicated persons. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed on the premises where the adult dancehall is operated. 
(b)  No person under the influence of intoxicating liquor shall be admitted or allowed to remain at any adult dance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-376. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The requirements of this division shall not apply if the adult dance is limited to fewer than 100 persons. 
(b)  The requirements of this division shall not apply if the adult dance is sponsored, produced, or conducted under the auspices of an educational institution or by a nonprofit educational facility defined as a public or private academic institution, operated for nonprofit and accredited by the State of Georgia that offers a program or series of programs of academic study. 
(c)  The requirements of this division shall not apply if the adult dance is sponsored by a nonprofit tax-exempt organization, corporation or association recognized by the United States of America as exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to Section 501(c)(1) or (3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, 26 U.S.C. Section 501 as now existing or hereafter amended. 
(d)  The requirements of this division shall not apply if the adult dance is sponsored by a charitable or fraternal organization and that organization receives the proceeds of the event. 
(e)  The requirements of this division shall not apply if the adult dance is given by local merchants whose total proceeds are given to local charities. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall apply to dances conducted by or under the auspices of the city or the Atlanta Board of Education or by any club or organization specifically authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-377. - Dancing for hire. 
(a)  No person conducting, maintaining or carrying on an adult dance or adult dancehall shall permit any instructor who is under 21 years of age to give instructions in dancing to persons in any private room, booth, alcove or enclosure. For the purpose of this section the terms "private room, booth, alcove or enclosure" shall include any area within the adult dancehall which is not clearly visible at all times from the main dance floor located in such adult dancehall. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed or construed as applying to any place where dancing instruction by certified instructors is the principal activity of the business. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-378. - Identification requirements for adult dances; penalty. 
(a)  The person operating an adult dancehall shall require each person seeking admission to provide identification showing his or her age. 
(b)  Any person who shall by affirmative misrepresentation of age obtain admission to or permission to remain in any adult dance in violation of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person who knowingly or recklessly shall permit a person to enter or remain in any adult dance or adult dance hall in violation of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-379. - Application. 
(a)  The person desiring to conduct and/or operate an adult dance shall be responsible for obtaining an adult dancehall license. Each location of an adult dancehall must be approved by the department of police and must comply with all city laws including, but not limited to, building, zoning, and fire codes. The applicant must demonstrate compliance by providing proof of compliance with these codes. 
(b)  All persons desiring to obtain a license required under this division shall make written application to the city police department, licenses and permits unit. The application shall be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof and shall state the following: 
(1)  The name, address, and phone number of the applicant. 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the partner(s) or officers. 
(3)  If the applicant is an unincorporated association, corporation or partnership, the name of the unincorporated association, corporation or partnership, and the names and addresses of the limited partners, partners, officers and directors thereof. 
(4)  The dancehall operator's home and business address. 
(5)  The names, addresses, and phone numbers of the operator(s), manager(s), and employee(s) of the dancehall, as well as any other person whose duties may require that such person have contact with the public during dances. 
(6)  The name, address, and phone number of the owner(s) of the premises where the teen dancehall is located. 
(7)  The location(s) of the adult dancehall(s). 
(8)  The planned date(s) of each of the adult dance(s). 
(9)  Such other information reasonably related to the operation of the adult dancehall as may be required by the city's police department. 
(c)  A statement of any and all measures to be used to insure that adequate traffic control and crowd protection within the adult dancehall will be maintained and the measure to be taken to estimate crowd numbers to assure consistent compliance with the fire code. 
(d)  The applicant must provide proof that the premises is in compliance with all city laws including, but not limited to, building, zoning, and fire codes. 
(e)  A statement that the applicant will, in the conduct and operation of the adult dancehall, comply with all city laws. 
(f)  A statement from the owner or lessor of each planned location that the owner or lessor will appear before the license review board if specifically requested by the board in a proceeding where a fine, suspension or revocation is being considered with respect to the applicant. Once requested by the license review board, any failure by the owner or lessor to appear before the license review board may be considered a violation of this chapter in any subsequent applications or renewals for any license or permit issued by the city. 
(g)  The application shall be accompanied with a signed statement by three citizens of the city, certifying to the character of the applicant. 
(h)  Each time the location or dates of the dance change, as set forth in the applicant's original application, the applicant shall be required, on a form to be provided by the department of police, to notify and obtain written approval from the licenses and permits unit of the new location and/or dates of the dance(s) at least 30 days prior to the adult dance. The applicant shall be required to pay a fee of $100.00 each time they file an updated form requesting a change of location. The licenses and permits units shall be required to make a decision on said change application within 30 days of receipt of the application. The decision of the licenses and permits unit may be appealed by the applicant to the license review board, by written application, on forms to be provided by the licenses and permits unit, within five business days of the denial of the change application. The appeal shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the license review board after the request for the appeal is submitted to the licenses and permits unit by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-380. - Appearance before the license review board. 
(a)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the license review board or the department of police, and failure to furnish this data, information and records within 30 days from the date of the request shall be grounds for denial of the application. Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any person listed in the application requested by the license review board or the department of police to respond to questions reasonably related to the license and/or the operation of the business. The failure to produce the person within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of the application. 
(b)  All applicants shall be scheduled to appear before the license review board within 30 days of the completion of an investigation of their application by the city's police department. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-381. - Grounds for denial or nonrenewal of a license. 
In addition to all other grounds for denial stated in this division, no original, renewal, or amendment to any application for any license under this article shall be granted if the application or the evidence produced during a hearing before the license review board shows: 
(1)  The applicant is of bad moral character, has a bad reputation in the community, or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which an application is made. 
(2)  The applicant has had any license issued under the police powers of any local government previously suspended or revoked; provided, however, the license review board may waive this subsection if two years have passed since any prior revocation or suspension of any license held by the applicant. 
(3)  The applicant, as a previous holder of any dancehall license or alcoholic beverage license, has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to that business within a five-year period immediately preceding the date the application is heard by the license review board. 
(4)  The department of police was unable to verify any statement of information required to be disclosed on forms furnished by the police chief or to be able to adequately conduct a full investigation of an applicant or a place of business for any reason beyond the police chief's control. Once a license has been granted, information revealed that is contrary to representations made by the applicant on the application or any subsequent amendment thereto, shall be cause for denial or revocation of a license. 
(5)  The applicant provided an application that contains a material omission, untrue or misleading information. If any license has previously been granted, these circumstances shall constitute cause for revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-382. - Revocation. 
Any adult dancehall license granted shall be subject to revocation for due cause. Whenever in the opinion of the license review board there is cause to revoke the license, a written notice of intention to revoke shall be furnished to the holder thereof five days before a regular or called meeting of the board, at which time the holder of the license may make such showing that the licensee may deem proper. After a hearing, the board shall report its recommendations to the mayor. The board can recommend a fine, suspension, or revocation the license. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, affirm or revise the recommendation made by the license review board. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 7, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 14-383. - Due cause. 
Due cause is defined as: 
(1)  As used in this section, the term "due cause," for the denial of an application for an adult dancehall license or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership or for revocation, suspension or refusal to renew an adult dancehall license includes but is not limited to the following: 
a.  The conviction of any felony reasonably related to the ability of the licensee to operate and maintain the premises in a proper manner. 
b.  Permitting the solicitation of patrons on the licensed premises for prostitution or any other unlawful act where the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct. 
c.  The failure to furnish any and all data, information and records related to the operation of licensed establishments, when such has been requested by the department of police or the license review board. 
d.  The failure to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license as set forth in this division. 
e.  The failure to obtain prior approval of the mayor before operating a teen or adult dancehall. 
f.  Failure by the licensee to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, patrons and others on the licensed premises or on any property owned or leased by the licensee, including but not limited to parking lots and parking areas, or on any parking lots or areas which may be lawfully used by patrons of a licensed establishment, in order to protect the safety and well-being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. 
g.  The violation of chapter 94, which violation shall be evidenced by receipt of an order by the human relations commission which shall contain findings of discrimination pursuant to such chapter. 
h.  The violation of any other law, ordinance or regulation governing the operation of dancehalls or which are reasonably related to the operation of such establishments. 
i.  The failure of the licensee whose licensed premises directly abuts a public street to maintain all property outside the lot and property line and inside the curb line upon the public street, including any sidewalk. Said duty to maintain the above-designated property must be accomplished within reasonable time after the close of business each day. "Maintain" as used in this subsection shall mean keeping the specified area free of bottles, cups, trash and other debris. "Within a reasonable time" as used in this subsection shall mean within four hours of the close of business. 
j.  The violation by either the owner, the licensee, the management, an employee, an independent contractor, or anyone acting as an agent for or on behalf of any establishment licensed to sell alcohol of any of the city's ordinances which pertain to the posting of signage and/or banners found in chapters 138 and 16-28A of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances if such violation is reasonably related to the operation of an adult dancehall and the owner or licensee knew or should have known of the posting. The director of the bureau of buildings, or his designee, shall report all violations of such ordinances of which the bureau of buildings is aware to the city police department's licenses and permits unit within ten days of the occurrence of such violation. 
k.  The violation by either the owner, the licensee, the management, an employee, an independent contractor, or anyone acting as an agent for or on behalf of any establishment licensed to sell alcohol of the city's noise ordinance if such violation is reasonably related to the operation of an adult dancehall and the owner or licensee knew or should have known of the violation of the noise ordinance. 
l.  Upon a finding of due cause, the mayor shall have the authority to deny applications for new licenses or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership and to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license issued by the city to any licensee under this division. 
m.  No application for a new license or for a transfer of location or transfer of ownership shall be denied and no license issued by the city or any license under this division shall be revoked, suspended or refused renewal except upon a finding of due cause and after a hearing and upon a five-day written notice to the licensee, stating the place, date, time and purpose of such hearing and setting forth the charge upon which the hearing shall be conducted. 
n.  The commander of the licenses and permits unit, or his designee, shall also notify the city councilmember who represents the district within which the licensed establishment, which is subject to adverse action is located and all at-large councilmembers regarding the adverse action. Such notice shall provide the date, time and place of any hearing regarding the adverse action. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-384. - Appearance before the license review board. 
(a)  The license review board may consider, in addition to all other lawful grounds, when deciding whether to grant, deny, or revoke a new or renewal license, whether the applicant: 
(1)  Owned or managed an establishment where a crime involving prostitution, lewd conduct, or assault on a juvenile occurred in or upon the dancehall premises; 
(2)  Owned or managed an establishment where any act of or solicitation for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation was committed; or 
(3)  Was convicted for the possession of any weapon, or the possession or consumption of alcohol and/or marijuana, cocaine, or any other controlled substance. 
(4)  Or any employee, agent, promoter, partner, director, officer or manager thereof violated any of the provisions of this chapter or committed any act which is a ground for denial of a license issued pursuant to this chapter; or 
(5)  Provides information on the planned sites of the adult dancehall where the building, structure, equipment or location of the business does not comply with the requirements or fails to meet the standards of the applicable health, zoning, building, or fire and safety laws of the State of Georgia and the city, or the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  All grounds for consideration by the license review board contained in this section shall independently or in conjunction with other laws or ordinances, be grounds to deny or revoke a new or renewal license. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-385. - Issuance to persons with prior convictions. 
No original license for the operation of an adult dancehall shall be issued to any person, partnership or corporation for pecuniary gain if any individual having an interest the license, either as owner, partner or principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, or the individual's spouse shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere, within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application, for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal ordinance, except traffic violations. The term "conviction" includes an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime; if the violation is for a misdemeanor or municipal ordinance, the license review board may, after investigation, recommend waiver of that disqualification. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-386. - Security personnel. 
(a)  It shall be the obligation of every person licensed under this chapter to ensure that an adequate number of qualified security personnel are employed and are on the premises of the adult dancehall during and following each adult dance as is necessary to maintain order and ensure compliance with the laws of the State of Georgia and ordinances of the city. 
(b)  An "adequate number of security personnel" shall include at least two persons trained as law enforcement personnel, which may include off-duty Atlanta police officers or sworn police officers of other jurisdictions. 
(c)  At no time shall fewer than 25 percent of the security personnel in attendance at a teen dance have training as law enforcement personnel. Those security personnel not having law enforcement training must have received formal training in crowd control. 
(d)  At all times, there must be one police officer or security officer for each established entrance or exit on the premises. 
(e)  It shall be the further obligation of every person licensed under this chapter to employ during and following each adult dancehall, at least one security officer to patrol the sidewalks and public areas, including but not limited to, adjacent parking lots within 400 feet used by the patrons and any areas abutting the adult dancehall. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-387. - Police supervision. 
The presence of any policeman at any adult dancehall shall not relieve the proprietor thereof, or any of his employees, from the responsibility of the provisions of this chapter or for violations of any law or ordinance or lawful rule of the chief of police or from responsibility for maintaining decency and order in said public dancehall. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-388. - Right of entry for purpose of inspection. 
Adult dancehalls shall at all times be open to the public authorities for entrance and inspection. All peace officers of the city shall have free access to adult dancehalls when a dance is being conducted for the purpose of inspection and to enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-389. - Hours of operation. 
No adult dance or adult dancehall shall be conducted, operated, or otherwise open to the public between the hours 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01; Ord. No. 2004-38, § 2, 6-24-04) 
Sec. 14-390. - Fees. 
The annual fee for an adult dancehall license shall be $500.00. Such license shall be valid only for the calendar year issued, unless the city otherwise specifies on the license. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-391. - Date for payment of license fees; prorated fees. 
All annual license fees under this division shall be paid in advance on or before January 1 of each year. Any person granted a new or renewal license under this division during a calendar year shall pay the full license fee without proration, except that the fee for a new or renewal license granted after June 30 in any calendar year shall be 50 percent of the annual license fees for the remainder of that calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-392. - Operating without a license; penalty. 
Any person who shall conduct or operate an adult dance or dancehall without a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-393. - Violation of a municipal ordinance. 
Upon conviction of a violation of any provision of this division, a person may be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and costs, or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days, or work on the public streets or work on the public works of the city for not more than 60 days, or be subject to any one or more of the punishments, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-394. - Action by the license review board. 
If by action of the police department, a cause for imposition of penalty, fine, suspension or revocation is forwarded to the license review board (for a first violation or any subsequent violations) for review, the applicant shall provide a written statement from the owner or lessor of the location verifying the applicant has notified the owner/lessor that a violation of this division by the applicant occurred at the owner/lessor's location upon appearance before the license review board. 
(Ord. No. 2001-57, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-395. - Severability 
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this Code, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of the provisions of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application and, to this end, the provisions of this Code are hereby declared to be severable. 
Secs. 14-396—14-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TEEN DANCEHALLS 

Sec. 14-411. - Application of this division. 
(a)  The terms and conditions of this division shall apply to all dancehall licenses, whether new or renewal, issued after the enactment of this division. 
(b)  All valid dancehall licenses in effect prior to the enactment of this division shall be governed by the terms and conditions of the current provisions contained in chapter 14, article V. However, all such license holders must apply for and obtain a renewal of their license, if desired, prior to January 1, 2002, under the terms and conditions of article IX. If said license holders fail to apply for and obtain a renewal of their license prior to January 1, 2002, then in no event shall they be permitted to operate any dancehall until awarded a license under article IX. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-412. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
Alcoholic beverages means and includes but is not limited to malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits. The terms "malt beverages", "wine", and "distilled spirits" shall have the same meaning as defined in chapter 10, article I, section 10-1. 
Applicant means the person who files an application to operate a teen dance or teen dancehall and in whose name the license is issued. 
Owner, as used in this section, (except when specific reference is made to the owner of the physical location or premises), shall include the owner, operator, manager or other person having supervision over a teen dancehall as defined herein. 
Person means any individual, receiver, assignee, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, corporation, company, joint stock company, association, society, or any group or individuals, acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise. 
Private party as used in this section means any event that is not readily accessible to the public and which is not held and conducted for a profit, either directly or indirectly, and which requires no monetary payment or contribution from any of the persons admitted. 
Promoter means a person or the legal entity who assumes the financial responsibilities of a teen dance and/or teen dancehall, including but not limited to, contracting with the principals, renting the site and collecting the gate revenues. 
Teen dance means any dance for teenagers between the ages of 14 and 18 years of age that is readily accessible to the public and which: 
(1)  Is held and conducted either directly or indirectly for a profit; or 
(2)  Requires a monetary payment or contribution from any of the persons admitted. 
Teen dancehall means any place where a "teen dance" is conducted, operated or maintained and includes but is not limited to all parking areas, hallways, bathrooms and all adjoining areas on the premises accessible to the public during the dance. 
Teens means those persons between the ages of 14 and 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-413. - Duty of operator or manager to enforce division. 
The applicant is considered, for purposes of this division, the owner, operator or manager of a teen dancehall. The applicant shall assure that the sections of this division are carried out. If the applicant fails to do so, either intentionally or by inadvertence, the applicant shall be deemed guilty of an offense for each such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-414. - Teen dancehall license. 
No person shall conduct or operate a teen dance unless a teen dancehall license is obtained in accordance with the provisions of this division. The license required by this section shall be in addition to any other license required by law, and the operation of such a place as herein described shall not be construed to be incidental to some other business. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-415. - Multiple licenses allowed. 
All dancehall license holders shall have either a teen dance hall license as provided herein or an adult dance hall license as provided in article IX, division 1, or both. Adult and teen dances cannot, however, be conducted at the same time in the same place. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-416. - Chaperones. 
Any person desiring to operate a dance for teens, whether or not an admission fee is charged, must have at least two adults per 100 persons at all times as chaperones when the dance is in progress, and a minimum of one chaperone for every additional 100 persons present at the dance. The dance shall terminate on or before 1:00 a.m. The chaperones must be over the age of 21. Security or law enforcement personnel can not be counted as chaperones. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-417. - Termination time. 
All teen dances shall terminate on or before 1:00 a.m. of any day on which a dance is held. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-418. - No alcoholic beverages allowed. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed on the premises where the teen dancehall is operated. 
(b)  No person under the influence of intoxicating liquor shall be admitted or allowed to remain at any teen dance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-419. - Participants. 
Participants in attendance at the teen dance shall be limited to teenagers between the ages of 14 and 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-420. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The requirements of this division shall not apply if the teen dance is limited to fewer than 100 persons. 
(b)  The requirements of this division shall not apply if the teen dance is sponsored, produced, or conducted under the auspices of an educational institution or by a nonprofit educational facility defined as a public or private academic institution, operated for nonprofit and accredited by the State of Georgia that offers a program or series of programs of academic study. 
(c)  The requirements of this division shall not apply if the teen dance is sponsored by a nonprofit tax-exempt organization, corporation or association recognized by the United States of America as exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to Section 501(c)(1) or (3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, 26 U.S.C. Section 501 as now existing or hereafter amended. 
(d)  The requirements of this division shall not apply if the teen dance is sponsored by a charitable or fraternal organization and that organization receives the proceeds of the event. 
(e)  The requirements of this division shall not apply if the teen dance is given by local merchants whose total proceeds are given to local charities. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall apply to dances conducted by or under the auspices of the city or the Atlanta Board of Education or by any club or organization specifically authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-421. - Additional prohibitions—Minors. 
In accordance with the curfew laws of the city, no person under the age of 16 shall enter, remain, or dance in any teen dancehall after 11 p.m. on Sundays through Thursdays and after 12:00 midnight on Friday or Saturday unless accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian. In addition, no person shall falsely represent himself or herself as a parent or legal guardian of any minor person in order that such minor person may attend or remain at a teen dancehall. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-422. - Dancing for hire. 
(a)  No person conducting, maintaining or carrying on a teen dance or teen dancehall shall permit any instructor who is under 21 years of age to give instructions in dancing to persons in any private room, booth, alcove or enclosure. For the purpose of this section the terms "private room, booth, alcove or enclosure" shall include any area within the teen dancehall which is not clearly visible at all times from the main dance floor located in such teen dancehall. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed or construed as applying to any place where dancing instruction by certified instructors is the principal activity of the business. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-423. - Age restrictions; identification requirements; penalty. 
(a)  No person conducting or operating a teen dance or teen dancehall shall permit, either by act or omission, any person under the age of 14 years to enter or remain on the premises without a parent or legal guardian present. 
(b)  No person conducting or operating a teen dance or teen dancehall shall permit, either by act or omission, any person over the age of 18 years, who is not a chaperone, parent, legal guardian, or a bona fide employee of the person operating the teen dancehall to enter or remain upon the premises. 
(c)  The person operating a teen dancehall shall require each person seeking admission to provide identification showing his or her age. 
(d)  Any person who, by affirmative misrepresentation of age, obtains admission to or permission to remain in any teen dance or teen dancehall in violation of this division, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(e)  Any person who permits a person to enter or remain in any teen dance or teen dance hall in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-424. - Application. 
(a)  The person desiring to conduct and/or operate a teen dance shall be responsible for obtaining a teen dancehall license. Each location of a teen dancehall must be approved by the department of police and must comply with all city laws including, but not limited to, building, zoning, and fire codes. The applicant must demonstrate compliance by providing proof of compliance with these codes. 
(b)  All persons desiring to obtain a license required under this division shall make written application to the city's police department, licenses and permits unit. The application shall be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof and shall state the following: 
(1)  The name, address, and phone number of the applicant. 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the partner(s) or officers. 
(3)  If the applicant is an unincorporated association, corporation or partnership, the name of the unincorporated association, corporation or partnership, and the names and addresses of the limited partners, partners, officers and directors thereof. 
(4)  The dancehall operator's home and business address. 
(5)  The names, addresses, and phone numbers of the operator(s), manager(s), and employee(s) of the dancehall, as well as any other person whose duties may require that such person have contact with the public during dances. 
(6)  The name, address, and phone number of the owner(s) of the premises where the teen dancehall is located. 
(7)  The location(s) of the teen dancehall(s). 
(8)  The planned date(s) of each of the teen dance(s). 
(9)  Such other information reasonably related to the operation of the teen dancehall as may be required by the city police department. 
(c)  A statement of any and all measures to be used to insure that adequate traffic control and crowd protection, within the teen dancehall, will be maintained and the measure to be taken to estimate crowd numbers to assure consistent compliance with the fire code. 
(d)  The applicant must provide proof that the premises is in compliance with all city laws including, but not limited to, building, zoning, and fire codes. 
(e)  A statement that the applicant will, in the conduct and operation of the teen dancehall, comply with all city laws. 
(f)  A statement from the owner or lessor of each planned location that the owner or lessor will appear before the license review board if specifically requested by the board in a proceeding where a fine, suspension or revocation is being considered with respect to the applicant. Once requested by the license review board, any failure by the owner or lessor to appear before the license review board may be considered a violation of this chapter in any subsequent applications or renewals for any license or permit issued by the city. 
(g)  The application shall be accompanied with a signed statement by three citizens of the city, certifying to the character of the applicant. 
(h)  Each time the location or dates of the dance change, as set forth in the applicant's original application, the applicant shall be required, on a form to be provided by the department of police, to notify and obtain written approval from the licenses and permits unit of the new location and/or dates of the dance(s) at least 30 days prior to the adult dance. The applicant shall be required to pay a fee of $100.00 each time they file an updated form requesting a change of location. The licenses and permits units shall be required to make a decision on said change application within 30 days of receipt of the application. The decision of the licenses and permits unit may be appealed by the applicant to the license review board, by written application, on forms to be provided by the licenses and permits unit, within five business days of the denial of the change application. The appeal shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the license review board after the request for the appeal is submitted to the licenses and permits unit by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-425. - Appearance before the license review board. 
(a)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the license review board or the department of police, and failure to furnish this data, information and records within 30 days from the date of the request shall be grounds for denial of the application. Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any person listed in the application requested by the license review board or the department of police to respond to questions reasonably related to the license and/or the operation of the business. The failure to produce the person within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of the application. 
(b)  All applicants shall be scheduled to appear before the license review board within 30 days of the completion of an investigation of their application by the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-426. - Grounds for denial or nonrenewal of a license. 
In addition to all other grounds for denial stated in this division, no original, renewal, or amendment to any application for any license under this article shall be granted if the application or the evidence produced during a hearing before the license review board shows: 
(1)  The applicant is of bad moral character, has a bad reputation in the community, or does not have sufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which an application is made. 
(2)  The applicant has had any license issued under the police powers of any local government previously suspended or revoked; provided, however, the license review board may waive this subsection if two years have passed since any prior revocation or suspension of any license held by the applicant. 
(3)  The applicant, as a previous holder of any dancehall license or alcoholic beverage license, has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to that business within a five-year period immediately preceding the date the application is heard by the license review board. 
(4)  The department of police was unable to verify any statement of information required to be disclosed on forms furnished by the police chief or to be able to adequately conduct a full investigation of an applicant or a place of business for any reason beyond the police chief's control. Once a license has been granted, information revealed that is contrary to representations made by the applicant on the application or any subsequent amendment thereto, shall be cause for denial or revocation of a license. 
(5)  The applicant provided an application that contains a material omission, untrue or misleading information. If any license has previously been granted, these circumstances shall constitute cause for revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-427. - Revocation. 
Any teen dancehall license granted shall be subject to revocation for due cause. Whenever in the opinion of the license review board there is cause to revoke the license, a written notice of intention to revoke shall be furnished to the holder thereof five days before a regular or called meeting of the board, at which time the holder of the license may make such showing that the licensee may deem proper. After a hearing, the board shall report its recommendations to the mayor. The board can recommend a fine, suspension, or revocation the license. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, affirm or revise the recommendation made by the license review board. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 8, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 14-428. - Due cause. 
Due cause is defined as: 
(1)  As used in this section, the term "due cause," for the denial of an application for a teen dancehall license or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership or for revocation, suspension or refusal to renew a teen dancehall license includes but is not limited to the following: 
a.  The conviction of any felony reasonably related to the ability of the licensee to operate and maintain the premises in a proper manner. 
b.  Permitting the solicitation of patrons on the licensed premises for prostitution or any other unlawful act where the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct. 
c.  The failure to furnish any and all data, information and records related to the operation of licensed establishments, when such has been requested by the department of police or the license review board. 
d.  The failure to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license as set forth in this division. 
e.  The failure to obtain prior approval of the mayor before operating a teen or adult dancehall. 
f.  Failure by the licensee to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, patrons and others on the licensed premises or on any property owned or leased by the licensee, including but not limited to parking lots and parking areas, or on any parking lots or areas which may be lawfully used by patrons of a licensed establishment, in order to protect the safety and well-being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. 
g.  The violation of chapter 94, which violation shall be evidenced by receipt of an order by the human relations commission which shall contain findings of discrimination pursuant to such chapter. 
h.  The violation of any other law, ordinance or regulation governing the operation of dancehalls or which are reasonably related to the operation of such establishments. 
i.  The failure of the licensee whose licensed premises directly abuts a public street to maintain all property outside the lot and property line and inside the curb line upon the public street, including any sidewalk. Said duty to maintain the above-designated property must be accomplished within reasonable time after the close of business each day. "Maintain" as used in this subsection shall mean keeping the specified area free of bottles, cups, trash and other debris. "Within a reasonable time" as used in this subsection shall mean within four hours of the close of business. 
j.  The violation by either the owner, the licensee, the management, an employee, an independent contractor, or anyone acting as an agent for or on behalf of any establishment licensed to sell alcohol of any of the city's ordinances which pertain to the posting of signage and/or banners found in chapters 138 and 16-28A of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances if such violation is reasonably related to the operation of a teen dancehall and the owner or licensee knew or should have known of the posting. The director of the bureau of buildings, or his designee, shall report all violations of such ordinances of which the bureau of buildings is aware to the city police department's licenses and permits unit within ten days of the occurrence of such violation. 
k.  The violation by either the owner, the licensee, the management, an employee, an independent contractor, or anyone acting as an agent for or on behalf of any establishment licensed to sell alcohol of the city's noise ordinance if such violation is reasonably related to the operation of a teen dancehall and the owner or licensee knew or should have known of the violation of the noise ordinance. 
l.  Upon a finding of due cause, the mayor shall have the authority to deny applications for new licenses or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership and to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license issued by the city to any licensee under this division. 
m.  No application for a new license or for a transfer of location or transfer of ownership shall be denied and no license issued by the city or any license under this division shall be revoked, suspended or refused renewal except upon a finding of due cause and after a hearing and upon a five-day written notice to the licensee, stating the place, date, time and purpose of such hearing and setting forth the charge upon which the hearing shall be conducted. 
n.  The commander of the licenses and permits unit, or his designee, shall also notify the city councilmember who represents the district within which the licensed establishment, which is subject to adverse action is located and all at-large councilmembers regarding the adverse action. Such notice shall provide the date, time and place of any hearing regarding the adverse action. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-429. - Appearance before the license review board. 
(a)  The license review board may consider, in addition to all other lawful grounds, when deciding whether to grant, deny, or revoke a new or renewal license, whether the applicant: 
(1)  Owned or managed an establishment where a crime involving prostitution, lewd conduct, or assault on a juvenile occurred in or upon the dancehall premises; 
(2)  Owned or managed an establishment where any act of or solicitation for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation was committed; or 
(3)  Was convicted for the possession of any weapon, or the possession or consumption of alcohol and/or marijuana, cocaine, or any other controlled substance. 
(4)  Or any employee, agent, promoter, partner, director, officer or manager thereof violated any of the provisions of this chapter or committed any act which is a ground for denial of a license issued pursuant to this chapter; or 
(5)  Provides information on the planned sites of the adult [teen] dancehall where the building, structure, equipment or location of the business does not comply with the requirements or fails to meet the standards of the applicable health, zoning, building, or fire and safety laws of the State of Georgia and the city, or the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  All grounds for consideration by the license review board contained in this section shall independently or in conjunction with other laws or ordinances, be grounds to deny or revoke a new or renewal license. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-430. - Issuance to persons with prior convictions. 
No original license for the operation of a teen dancehall shall be issued to any person, partnership or corporation for pecuniary gain if any individual having an interest, either as owner, partner or principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, or the individual's spouse shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere, within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application, for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal ordinance, except traffic violations. The term "conviction" includes an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime; if the violation is for a misdemeanor or municipal ordinance, the license review board may, after investigation, recommend waiver of that disqualification. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-431. - Security personnel. 
(a)  It shall be the obligation of every person licensed under this chapter to ensure that an adequate number of qualified security personnel are employed and are on the premises of the teen dancehall during and following each teen dance as is necessary to maintain order and ensure compliance with the laws of the State of Georgia and ordinances of the city. 
(b)  An "adequate number of security personnel" shall include at least two persons trained as law enforcement personnel, which may include off-duty Atlanta police officers or sworn police officers of other jurisdictions. 
(c)  At no time shall fewer than 25 percent of the security personnel in attendance at a teen dance have training as law enforcement personnel. Those security personnel not having law enforcement training must have received formal training in crowd control. 
(d)  At all times, there must be one police officer or security officer for each established entrance or exit on the premises. 
(e)  It shall be the further obligation of every person licensed under this chapter to employ during and following each teen dancehall, at least one security officer to patrol the sidewalks and public areas, including but not limited to, adjacent parking lots within 400 feet used by the patrons and any areas abutting the teen dancehall. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-432. - Police supervision. 
The presence of any policeman at any teen dancehall shall not relieve the proprietor thereof, or any of his employees, from the responsibility of the provisions of this chapter or for violations of any law or ordinance or lawful rule of the chief of police or from responsibility for maintaining decency and order in said public dancehall. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-433. - Right of entry for purpose of inspection. 
Teen dancehalls shall at all times be open to the public authorities for entrance and inspection. All peace officers of the city shall have free access to teen dancehalls when a dance is being conducted for the purpose of inspection and to enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-434. - Hours of operation. 
No teen dance or teen dancehall shall be conducted, operated, or otherwise open to the public between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-435. - Readmission fee. 
No person conducting or operating a teen dance or teen dancehall shall permit any person, other than an employee, to leave the dance or dancehall and return unless that person pays a readmission fee equal to, or greater than, one-half the original price of admission. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-436. - Fees. 
The annual fee for a teen dancehall license shall be $500.00. Such license shall be valid only for the calendar year issued, unless the city otherwise specifies on the license. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-437. - Date for payment of license fees; prorated fees. 
All annual license fees under this division shall be paid in advance on or before January 1 of each year. Any person granted a new or renewal license under this division during a calendar year shall pay the full license fee without proration, except that the fee for a new or renewal license granted after June 30 in any calendar year shall be 50 percent of the annual license fees for the remainder of that calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-438. - Operating without a license; penalty. 
Any person who shall conduct or operate a teen dance or dancehall without a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-439. - Violation of a municipal ordinance. 
Upon conviction of a violation of any provision of this division, a person may be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and costs, or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days, or work on the public streets or work on the public works of the city for not more than 60 days, or be subject to any one or more of the punishments, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-440. - Action by the license review board. 
If by action of the police department, a cause for imposition of penalty, fine, suspension or revocation is forwarded to the license review board (for a first violation or any subsequent violations) for review, the applicant shall provide a written statement from the owner or lessor of the location verifying that the applicant has notified the owner/lessor that a violation of this division by the applicant occurred at the owner/lessor's location upon appearance before the license review board. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 14-441. - Severability. 
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this Code, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of the provisions of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application and, to this end, the provisions of this Code are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2001-56, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Secs. 14-442—14-460. - Reserved. 
Chapter 18 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General authority relative to animals, § 1-102(c)(35). 
Cross reference— Pets at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, § 22-108; livestock at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International airport, § 22-109; pets in Oakland Cemetery, § 38-51; health and sanitation, ch. 86; donation of horses and dogs for police purposes, § 98-50; acceptance of gifts of animals by commissioner of parks, recreation and cultural affairs, § 110-5; protection of animals in parks, § 110-69; pets in parks, § 110-70; horseback riding in parks, § 110-71; animal-drawn vehicles generally, § 162-26 et seq.; specific provisions applicable only to animal-drawn vehicles, § 162-146 et seq. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; animals generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Enforcement. 
The mayor may negotiate and execute contracts with the boards of public health of Fulton and DeKalb Counties to effectuate the enforcement of this chapter within their respective counties. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4016) 
Sec. 18-2. - Removal of carcasses of small animals. 
(a)  Authority. The director, bureau of sanitary services shall deliver to the city dumping grounds the carcasses of small animals, such as sheep, dogs and the like. 
(b)  Notice of death, existence of carcass. Any person owning the carcass of any small animal or any person on whose premises a small animal should die or be found dead, within three hours of its death or the discovery thereof, shall notify the sanitation inspector of the district wherein the dead animal may be found or the director, bureau of sanitation services of the location of the animal, unless the owner within that time shall remove or cause or procure the removal of the carcass to a place designated by the director, bureau of sanitation services. 
(c)  Charges established. Any collection or disposal of dead animal carcass received from private agencies providing care and treatment to animals shall be accompanied by payment of the required fee, which shall cover the cost of such service to be rendered. 
(d)  Determination of amounts. The rates referred to in subsection (c) of this section shall be determined annually by the commissioner of public works and shall be based on the current cost of collection and disposal of dead animals. A schedule of the charges shall be filed with the municipal clerk by the commissioner of public works not later than the second week following adoption of the annual budget and shall be made effective January 1 of each year. 
(e)  Payment. Payment of collection and disposal shall be made by coupons purchased from the city before the dead animal is collected and transported to the disposal facility. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4017) 
Cross reference— Municipal solid waste collection and disposal system, § 130-36 et seq. 
Sec. 18-3. - Disposal of carcasses of large animals. 
The police chief or the director, bureau of sanitary services, upon becoming informed of any dead horse, mule, cow or other large animal within the city limits, shall cause the carcass to be properly buried or disposed of so as not to create a nuisance. No person other than those employed to do so shall remove the carcass of the animal, provided that the owner or the owner's authorized agent may remove the carcass from the city under the direction of a sanitation inspector, but no one other than a sanitation inspector shall bury the animal within the city limits. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4018) 
Cross reference— Municipal solid waste collection and disposal system, § 130-36 et seq. 
Sec. 18-4. - Sale of carcasses of animals unfit for food. 
When the carcass of an animal slaughtered for meat has been condemned as unfit for food under health rules, the owner may sell it for use in making tallow or the hide may be utilized or for any proper similar purpose, provided that this disposition is made within three hours after condemnation. The owner shall file with the bureau of sanitary services a receipt from the purchaser showing the time of delivery. Blank forms for these receipts shall be furnished by the bureau of sanitary services without charge. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4019) 
Sec. 18-5. - Cruelty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to overload, cruelly treat, maim, bruise, deprive of necessary sustenance, ill use or in any manner whatsoever torture or abuse any animal. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4015) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
Sec. 18-6. - Keeping animals infected with contagious disease. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have and to keep any animal infected with a disease which may contaminate other animals and which may be a health hazard. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4014) 
Sec. 18-7. - Enclosures for keeping small animals. 
Small animals, such as dogs, rabbits, guinea pigs, chickens, turkeys and the like, may be kept within the city limits, subject to the following: 
(1)  Condition, size. All these animals must be provided with adequate housing. The houses, hutches, pens or other enclosures wherein animals are kept shall have a solid floor made of cement or other suitable washable material, except when pens are 75 feet or more from the nearest neighbor's residence or place of business. Floor space in all these houses, hutches, pens or enclosures, wherever located, must have the following minima: 
a.  Dogs and miniature pot bellied pigs, 100 square feet per animal over four months of age. 
b.  Rabbits or guinea pigs, four square feet per animal over four months of age. 
c.  Turkeys, four square feet per bird over four months of age. 
d.  Chickens and similar fowl, two square feet per bird over four months of age. 
e.  Bantams, one square foot per bird over four months of age. 
(2)  Location. Pens or yards where such animals and birds are kept shall be placed at the following minimum distances from any residence or business establishment: 
a.  Distance from any residence, except that of owner, or any business establishment, 50 feet. 
b.  Distance from owner's residence, five feet. 
(3)  Maximum number. The maximum number of such animals which may be kept on a single premises shall not exceed the following: 
a.  Dogs, ten. 
b.  Rabbits or guinea pigs, 75. 
c.  Turkeys, chickens, bantams or similar fowl, 25. 
d.  Miniature pot-bellied pigs, 1. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4012; Ord. No. 2002-16, §§ 2, 3, 3-12-02) 
Sec. 18-8. - Sanitation of enclosures; storage, removal, use of manure. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person having authority to control the use of any stable, pen, shed, stall or other place where animals are kept to allow it to become filthy, malodorous or insanitary. Every person who owns or keeps animals shall maintain in connection therewith a bin or pit in which the manure from those animals shall be placed pending removal. The bin or pit shall be provided with covers or other devices approved by the director, bureau of sanitary services sufficient to prevent the ingress and egress of flies and other insect pests. The bin or pit shall be located at a point most remote from the house of the nearest neighbor and most remote from any street or avenue but must remain on the premises of the owner. All persons controlling places where animals are kept shall remove all manure from the bins or pits before it shall become malodorous or insanitary. 
(b)  Use of manure as fertilizer. The person may use manure upon such person's premises for the purpose of enriching such person's own ground or for any other purpose to which manure can properly be put, when not offensive or insanitary, and may remove manure from bins, pits or other places where deposited for any purpose when the manure is not offensive or insanitary. 
(c)  Drainage. All places wherein livestock are kept shall have adequate drainage sufficient to prevent standing water in yards or pens. 
(d)  Use of chemical agents. All yards or pens wherein livestock are kept shall be regularly covered with lime or other suitable chemical agents, as may be approved by the sanitary engineer, to prevent bad odors or nuisances to neighbors. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4013) 
Sec. 18-9. - Removal of canine fecal matter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing, harboring or having care, charge, control or custody of any dog not to remove any feces left by that dog on any sidewalk, gutter, street, lot or other public area. Dog waste shall be immediately removed by placing said matter in a closed or sealed container and thereafter disposing of it in a trash receptacle, sanitary disposal unit or other closed or sealed refuse container. 
(b)  Each and every violation of this code section shall be punishable to the extent provided by code section 1-8. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to visually impaired persons who have the charge, control or use of a guide dog. 
(Ord. No. 1996-57, § 1, 8-12-96) 
Sec. 18-10. - Ordinances shall not be breed specific. 
The ordinances contained in this chapter which apply to dogs shall be enforced against all dogs generally, and shall not be interpreted as being applicable to any specific breed of dog to the exclusion of any others. 
( Ord. No. 2017-89(17-O-1809), § 1, 12-13-17 ) 
Sec. 18-11. - Nuisance animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, or any person having temporary custody or control, of an animal or animals to fail to restrain the animal(s) from, or the allow the animals, to bark, meow, whine, howl, or to make other sounds common to the species, persistently or continuously for a period of 20 minutes or longer when every animal is not contained within an enclosure sufficient to baffle loud noises and render them reasonably unobjectionable. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, persistently or continuously shall mean nonstop utterances for 20 consecutive minutes with individual interruptions of less than 20 seconds at a time during the 20-minute utterances. 
(c)  The prohibitions contained in this section shall not apply to any facility operated by or under contract for the state, Fulton or DeKalb Counties, or the City of Atlanta for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats, and other animals; to any veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians which operates for such purpose in addition to its customary purposes; or to any facility operated, owned, or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, or other nonprofit organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals. 
(d)  This section may be enforced by animal control officers duly authorized to issue citations within the City of Atlanta or a sworn law enforcement officer with jurisdiction to enforce laws in the City of Atlanta. 
(e)  Each separate occasion is considered a separate violation. The owner or person having temporary custody or control of the animal(s) may be charged with a violation of this section when either the animal control officer or sworn law enforcement has received, from at least two unrelated adult witnesses from different addresses, or from one adult witness with a recorded video showing the alleged violation, a sworn affidavit attesting to the committing of a nuisance pursuant to this section, or the animal control officer or law enforcement officer has witnessed the commission of such offense. Affidavit(s) attesting to the nuisance must come from residents or business owners/operators within a 1,000-foot radius of the property where the violation occurred. 
(f)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  For a first violation, the penalty shall be a fine in the amount of $150.00. 
(2)  For a second violation, the penalty shall be a fine in the amount of $250.00. 
(3)  For a third violation, the penalty shall be a fine in the amount of $350.00. 
(4)  For a fourth violation, the penalty shall be a fine in the amount of $500.00 
(5)  For all subsequent violations, the penalty shall be a fine in the amount of $1,000.00. 
(g)  This section shall be applicable in the City of Atlanta, generally, in addition to section 18-129 of article IV of this chapter, applicable to the portion of the city within Fulton County, and any similar provision of article III of this Chapter, applicable to the portion of the city within DeKalb County. 
( Ord. No. 2018-57(18-O-1663), § 1, 11-14-18 ) 
Secs. 18-12—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIVESTOCK 

Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
At large includes every animal classed as livestock running freely beyond the limits of the lands of its owner or manager, upon the streets or upon private or public property. 
Livestock includes horses, mules, cows, sheep, goats, hogs and all other animals used or fit either for food or labor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-32. - Running at large. 
No person having custody, control or charge of any animal classed as livestock shall suffer it to run at large or open any enclosure where the animal may be confined or in any way release the animal from any confinement for the purpose of permitting it to escape therefrom. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4002) 
Sec. 18-33. - Impounding livestock at large. 
Whenever any officer of the city having police authority shall find any livestock at large, the officer shall impound the animal and make an immediate report thereof to the police chief, who shall comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. §§ 4-3-3—4-3-11, as to the appraisement, care and disposition of the impounded livestock. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4003) 
Sec. 18-34. - Driving through streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any animal classed as livestock through the streets or public places of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4004) 
Sec. 18-35. - Leaving horses in streets unattended or unbitted. 
(a)  No horse shall be left unattended in any street nor shall any horse be unbitted in any street. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to horses being used by on-duty police officers. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4005) 
Sec. 18-36. - Grazing livestock on private property. 
(a)  Permission required. No person shall be permitted to herd or graze cattle or other livestock on any lot in the city without first securing permission in writing from the owner or agent of the owner of the lot. 
(b)  Enforcement. Any cattle or other livestock found upon any lot, contrary to subsection (a) of this section, shall be considered as running at large and shall be taken up, advertised and sold in accordance with section 18-33. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4006) 
Sec. 18-37. - Keeping hogs or pigs prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep hogs or pigs within the corporate limits of the city, with the exception of miniature potbellied pigs. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4007; Ord. No. 2002-16, § 1, 3-12-02) 
Sec. 18-38. - Sale and feed stables. 
(a)  Petition required. Sale and feed stables may be operated only in sections of the city zoned for industrial uses. Any person desiring to open, operate or maintain a sale or feed stable in any section of the city shall first file a petition with the department of police for a license or permission to open and operate the stable. The petition shall distinctly and fully describe the lot or house at or in which the stable is to be located, giving its number, if any, or if no number the names of the owners of adjoining property. The petition shall not be entertained by the department of police unless it bears the written consent and approval of the owners of a majority of the real estate lying within a radius of 150 feet of the location, measuring in all directions. 
(b)  Action on petition. The petition, when filed as provided in subsection (a) of this section, shall be referred to the license review board for action, and no action shall be taken by the mayor until it is returned thereto by the board with its approval. When so approved and returned, the petition shall be considered by the mayor and if, in the mayor's judgment, the location of the stable will not be injurious to persons living in the neighborhood or amount to a nuisance or discomfort, the mayor shall grant the applicant permission to open, operate and maintain the stable. Without that sanction, neither the chief financial officer nor any other officer shall issue a permit or license therefor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4008) 
Sec. 18-39. - Keeping hoofed animals. 
Hoofed animals, such as horses, cows, goats, sheep and the like, may be kept within the city limits, subject to the following: 
(1)  Housing and enclosures. All these animals must be provided with adequate housing, pens or enclosures. Floor space in such housing, pens or enclosures must have the following minima: 
a.  Horses, mules, asses or cows, 200 square feet per animal over four months of age. 
b.  Sheep or goats, 150 square feet per animal over four months of age. 
(2)  Location. Housing, pens or enclosures where such animals are kept shall be placed at the following minimum distances from any residence or any business establishment regularly used by large numbers of people: 
a.  Distance from any residence except that of owner, 150 feet. 
b.  Distance from nearest business establishment, 150 feet. 
c.  Distance from owner's residence, 25 feet. 
(3)  Maximum number. The maximum number of such animals which may be kept on a single premises shall not exceed the following: 
a.  Horses, mules, asses or cows, five. 
b.  Sheep or goats, ten. 
(4)  Application to city property. The provisions of this section 18-39 shall not apply when the livestock and/or hoofed animals are located on property owned or leased by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4009; Ord. No. 2007-02, § 1, 1-22-07) 
Sec. 18-40. - Location of private stables. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or use a private stable nearer than 75 feet to any residence or place of business, without the consent of the owner and occupant of the adjacent residence or place of business. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4010) 
Sec. 18-41. - Stalls on ground level. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to house or stall horses, mules or cows in any building at a higher level than that of the first or ground floor thereof. This shall apply to all buildings, whether used specifically for the housing of animals or for any other purpose. 
(Code 1977, § 14-4011) 
Secs. 18-42—18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO PORTION OF CITY WITHIN DEKALB COUNTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 1, approved June 27, 2012, amended Art. III, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. III pertained to dogs. See also the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 

Sec. 18-61. - DeKalb County Animal Control Code incorporated by reference. 
The provisions of the DeKalb County Code of Ordinances, at Chapter 5, (entitled Animals), are hereby incorporated by reference into this article and made a part of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 1, 6-27-12; Ord. No. 2017-89(17-O-1809), § 3, 12-13-17 ) 
Sec. 18-62. - Duty of owner to keep dog under control. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or for any person having a dog in such person's possession and control to permit the dog to be out of control and unattended off the premises of the owner in that part of the city within DeKalb County or upon the property of another person without permission of the owner or person in possession thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 1, 6-27-12) 
Sec. 18-63. - Definition of dog under control. 
A dog is under control if the dog is controlled by a leash, is at heal or is beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands or is within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets or is within the property limits of the dog's owner. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 1, 6-27-12) 
Sec. 18-64. - Disposition of impounded dogs. 
(a)  The designated enforcement agency of the city shall notify immediately by registered or certified mail the owner of each dog impounded if the owner is known or can be reasonably ascertained. The owner may, within seven days after the mailing of the notice, reclaim the dog by the payment of an impoundment fee of $7.50 plus a boarding fee of $3.00 for each day the dog was impounded, the annual permit fee if not paid and the cost of rabies inoculation if the dog was not wearing a current rabies inoculation tag. 
(b)  The designated enforcement agency may offer for adoption to any person any dog unredeemed or unclaimed by the owner after seven days upon payment of the required license fee, cost of rabies inoculation and impoundment fee of $7.50. 
(c)  If a dog is not claimed by the owner within the time prescribed or adopted within ten days after impoundment, the designated enforcement agency shall dispose of it in a manner as humane and painless as possible or may donate it to any public or private institution for disposition. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 1, 6-27-12) 
Sec. 18-65. - Duty of owner of dog to secure annual permit. 
The owner or possessor of each dog who shall own or shall possess the dog on January 1 of each year shall, within 30 days thereafter and not later than when the dog shall be six months of age, and the owner and possessor of each dog which shall be acquired or possessed after January 1 of each year shall, within 30 days thereafter or by the time the dog is six months of age, obtain from the designated enforcement agency an owner's permit and pay an annual owner's permit fee of $3.00 per dog, with the maximum charge per family of $10.00, regardless of the number of dogs six months old or over. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 1, 6-27-12) 
Sec. 18-66. - Enforcement agency designated. 
As an enforcement agency of the city for that portion of the city lying within DeKalb County, there is designated for the primary responsibility of the enforcement of this article the animal control unit for DeKalb County and, when called upon by this unit, the officers and employees of the DeKalb County Health Department or DeKalb County Police Department. These agencies, their officers and employees are clothed with the power of the city for the purpose of the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 1, 6-27-12) 
Sec. 18-67. - Procedure. 
Upon information known to or complaint lodged with any officer or member of the animal control unit, the DeKalb County Police Department or the DeKalb County Health Department that any owner or possessor of a dog is in violation of this article, a summons shall be issued by an officer of the animal control unit requiring the owner or possessor of the dog to appear before the judge of the municipal court of the city on a day and time certain, to stand trial for violation of this article. If this violation has not been witnessed by an officer or other employee of the city or county, a subpoena shall be issued to the person making the complaint to be and appear on the day and time set to testify on behalf of the city. If the owner or possessor of any dog is not known and the dog is upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, school grounds, public places and premises of another prohibited by this article, upon complaint made to or information known to the animal control unit, the unit shall immediately take possession of the dog and impound it according to rules and regulations provided by law or by ordinance of this city for the detention, control and disposition of dogs impounded pursuant to any applicable law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 1, 6-27-12) 
Sec. 18-68. - Disposition of funds. 
The owner's permit fee, impoundment fee and cost of rabies inoculation referred to in this article shall be paid to the designated enforcement agency and retained by the agency. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 1, 6-27-12) 
Sec. 18-69. - Statistical data. 
The enforcement agency will, upon request of the city, furnish periodic reports of the number of dogs impounded, as well as other statistical data as may be requested with respect to the control of dogs and prevention of rabies. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 1, 6-27-12) 
Secs. 18-70—18-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO PORTION OF CITY WITHIN FULTON COUNTY 
DIVISION 1. - APPLICABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 18-100. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to that portion of the city within Fulton County. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 2, 6-27-12) 
Sec. 18-101. - Violations. 
Violations of this article are punishable as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 2, 6-27-12) 
Sec. 18-102. - Enforcement. 
Any deputy sheriff of Fulton County, as provided for in any agreement existing between the city and Fulton County, shall be clothed with the power of the city for the purpose of the enforcement of this section, including, without limitation, the power to arrest, the issuance and service of summons and the service of all processes and orders of the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 2, 6-27-12) 
Secs. 18-103—18-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033) , § 1, adopted June 14, 2017, amended division 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 2, §§ 18-115—18-130, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 2, 6-27-12. 

Sec. 18-115. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandonment means the intentional or complete forsaking of any animal by its owner, without making reasonable arrangements for the adequate care and custody of the animal to be assumed by another person or the failure to return and resume responsibility of an animal at the designated time as arranged with the custodian. Abandonment also means releasing or leaving an animal on any property, public or private, with the intention of deserting the animal. An animal shall also be considered abandoned when it has been unattended and without adequate food, water, ventilation or shelter, for a period in excess of 36 hours, regardless of where such animal may be found or kept. 
Adequate food means sufficient quantity of noncontaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance that is appropriate to the species, breed, size, age, and health of the animal, or at the direction of a licensed veterinarian, which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid, or contaminated food is not adequate food. 
Adequate shelter means a protective covering for an animal that is of adequate size and provides adequate protection to maintain the animal in a state of good health, and that prevents pain, suffering, or significant risk to the animal's health. Adequate shelter shall consist of a completely enclosed structure with four sides with a door opening, a constructed floor, and a roof. It should also be clean, dry, and compatible with current weather conditions, in addition to age, size, species, and condition of the animal. The structure should be of sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, turn around, lie down, and go in and out of the structure comfortably. To be adequate, some type of bedding that is quick drying, such as hay or pine straw, must be provided to maintain comfortable temperatures within the structure during times when the ambient, outside temperature is below freezing. In addition, the structure shall include a heavy plastic or rubber flap to cover the door and/or window openings during the months of November through March. From April through October, the structure shall either be shaded or moved out of direct sunlight. If the shelter is made of wood, it shall be raised at least two inches off the ground to prevent seepage or rotting. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, lean-tos, metal or plastic drums, boxes, abandoned vehicles, porches, decks, or material that does not provide sufficient protection from the elements. 
Adequate water means clear, potable water in adequate supply. Examples of inadequate water include, but are not limited to: snow, ice, and contaminated water. 
Animal control officer means "dog control officer" and shall refer to an individual employed by the county or its designee to perform and execute the provisions of this article, and whose office shall have the power to issue citations in violation of this article, and as deputized by the Fulton County Sheriff. 
Animal control shelter means the facilities operated by the county or its designee for the confining of dogs, cats, or other animals impounded under the provisions of this article. 
Cat means cat, or any domesticated feline, of either sex, whether vaccinated against rabies or not. 
Classified animal means any animal that has been classified as either a dangerous or vicious dog or animal pursuant to this article or comparably classified by the State of Georgia, or by any court, hearing officer, or authorized government agency of any other state, county or municipality. 
Classified animal pen means a padlocked pen, as that term is defined in this article, made entirely of industrial gauge fencing with a door or gate equipped with a working lock. The classified animal pen must contain adequate shelter, as that term is defined in this chapter, but must also contain a minimum 100-square foot area outside the adequate shelter. 
Commercial guard/security dog means any dog that is purchased, leased, or rented and that is trained to guard, protect, patrol, or defend any commercial property, public or private, upon and within which it is located. A dog shall not be considered a guard or security dog if it has been classified as a dangerous or vicious dog. 
Cruelty means causing death or unjustifiable pain or suffering to any animal by an act, omission, or neglect. Cruelty also includes transporting an unrestrained animal in an open-air vehicle or in the trunk of any vehicle, or leaving an animal unattended in a closed vehicle without proper ventilation or temperature control where the animal may suffer from physical harm from dangerous temperatures. Cruelty also means allowing or causing any animal to train for or engage in an animal fight operated for sport, entertainment or gaming purposes. Routine medical procedures by a licensed veterinarian shall not be regarded as cruelty. 
Current vaccination/license tag means a vaccination/license tag bearing a number which shows the license is valid for a one- or three-year period. The licensing period runs concurrently with the vaccination period. 
Custodian means any person which has been entrusted with the responsibility and care of a dog, cat, or other animal by its owner. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion caused by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph: or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills or seriously injures a pet animal. 
(4)  No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or vicious dog for actions that occur while the dog is being used by a law enforcement or military officer to carry out the law enforcement or military officer's official duties. No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog if the person injured by such dog was a person who, at the time, was tormenting or abusing the dog or who in the past has been observed or reported to have tormented or abused the dog, was committing a willful trespass, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Dog means dog, or any domesticated canine, of either sex, whether vaccinated against rabies or not. 
Domestic animal/fowl means any animal/fowl domesticated by humans so as to live and breed in a tame condition for the advantage of humans. Pen raised skunks are categorized as those skunks acceptable by the State of Georgia and may be kept in Georgia as pets. 
Exotic animal means any animal of any kind which is not indigenous to the State of Georgia, but not included in the definition of a domestic animal, but shall include any hybrid animal which is part exotic animal. 
Harborer means any person which has provided sustenance and/or shelter to a dog, cat, or other animal for a period of more than seven days. 
Livestock means all animals of the equine, bovine, or swine class, including goats, sheep, mules, horses, hogs, cattle, and other grazing animals. 
Necessary sustenance means the provision of adequate food, water and shelter. 
Neglect means endangering an animal's health by failing to provide or arrange to provide the animal with adequate food and water if the animal is dependent upon a person for the provision of food or drink, or the act of restraining an animal in a manner that endangers the animal's life or health. Other acts considered to be neglect include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Failing to provide reasonable care or seek veterinary care for an injury or illness that seriously endangers the life or health of an animal; or 
(2)  Leaving an animal outside and exposed to excessive heat or cold without providing the animal with adequate shelter or protection from the heat or cold, or exposing an animal to unsanitary conditions. 
Nuisance means whatever is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health and whatever renders or tends to render the soil, air, water, or food impure or unwholesome, or unreasonably offends or impairs the senses of smell, sight, and hearing. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of an animal. In the case of an animal owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Person means person, firm, corporation, municipality, society, or association. 
Public nuisance animal means an animal that: 
(1)  Is repeatedly found at large, except cats; or 
(2)  Damages the property of anyone other than the owner; or 
(3)  Because of temperament, conditioning, or training, has a propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack, bite, or injure humans or other animals without provocation; or 
(4)  On one or more occasion, has caused physical injury to humans or other animals without provocation, whether on public or private property; or 
(5)  Chases or acts so as to menace pedestrians or other persons using public ways. 
Qualified adoption facilitator, rescue group and animal shelter means an organization offering animals for adoption so long as the organization is licensed as a shelter by the State of Georgia, or, if not incorporated in Georgia, is a non-profit organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; and has the express mission/business function of facilitating the sterilization and adoption of homeless and unwanted animals. A copy of the state license or the Internal Revenue Service letter of non-profit designation shall be provided to the county upon request. 
Records means records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records of an animal control officer. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, significant puncture wounds, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admissions to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Tether means any chain, rope, leash, tie out, or wire designed to restrain an animal which is attached to an animal or to an animal's collar or halter and is also attached to a stationary object. 
Unsanitary conditions means an animal living space, shelter, or exercise area contaminated by health hazards, irritants, pollutants, items, excessive animal excrement, or conditions that endanger or pose a risk to an animal's health. 
Vaccinate means immunization against rabies if a vaccination certificate documents that the animal received a primary rabies vaccine, approved by the United States Department of Agriculture, from a licensed veterinarian at least 28 days previously and that booster vaccinations have been administered on an annual or triennial schedule, in accordance with the Georgia Rabies Manual or as described on the individual vaccine label. 
Vaccination certificate means a certificate issued at the time of vaccination of the dog, cat, or other animal and bearing thereon the signature of the vaccinator; the name, color, breed, age, and sex of the dog, cat, or other animal; the name and address of the owner; the date of expiration of the vaccination; and the spay or neuter status, if known. 
Vaccination/license tag means a metal tag bearing a number which is issued to the animal owner after showing proof of vaccination for the animal and paying, when required, the license fee. This tag is issued by Fulton County or its designee. 
Veterinarian means any person who holds a license to practice the profession of veterinary medicine in the State of Georgia; the veterinary license number shall be the same as that recorded by the Georgia Board of Veterinary Examiners. 
Vicious dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack; or 
(2)  Has been previously classified as a dangerous dog and has attacked or bitten a human or pet animal subsequent to the dangerous dog classification. 
Wildlife/fowl means any animal/fowl of any kind which is indigenous to the State of Georgia, but not included in the definition of a domestic animal/fowl, and shall include any hybrid animal/fowl which is part wild animal/fowl. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-116. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person who does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by this article, upon conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to fine, imprisonment, or any combination thereof, in accordance with section 1-8 of this Code. Each act or omission in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  For any violation of this article, the court may impose the following conditions in any combination thereof: 
(1)  Prohibit the offender from owning, possessing, or having on the offender's premises in the City of Atlanta any animal during the term of the sentence; 
(2)  Require that the animal be removed from the City of Atlanta; 
(3)  Require that the animal be surrendered to the animal control shelter; 
(4)  Require that the animal be humanely euthanized; 
(5)  Require payment of restitution to the victim(s); 
(6)  Require payment of costs for impound, housing, veterinary care, and humane euthanasia. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article as it pertains to a public nuisance animal shall be guilty of violating the City of Atlanta Code and shall be fined not less than $250.00 for a second conviction, and not less than $500.00 for a third conviction. 
(d)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article as it pertains to a dangerous dog shall be guilty of violating the City of Atlanta Code and will be fined not less than $500.00 for a second conviction, and not less than $750.00 for a third conviction or subsequent conviction. 
(e)  If the owner of a dangerous or vicious dog fails to comply with section 18-170 or section 18-173 of this article and his/her dog attacks or bites a human, of if the owner of a dangerous or vicious dog knowingly and willfully fails to comply with section 18-170 or section 18-173 of this article and his/her dog aggressively attacks and causes severe injury to or the death of a human, in addition to any penalties provided in this Code or state law, the animal control officer shall immediately confiscate the dog and place it in quarantine for a period of time as provided by the health department and thereafter the dog may be humanely destroyed. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-117. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or provision of this article shall be held invalid, such part shall be deemed severable, and the invalidity thereof shall not affect the remaining parts of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-118. - Courts. 
The Fulton County Magistrate Courts or the courts wherein the county has a contractual agreement for providing animal control services shall hear cases and assess fines for violations of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-119. - Enforcement of article. 
Fulton County or its designee shall enforce this article by means of impoundment and court citations. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-120. - Dog/cat license required. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each owner, custodian, or harborer of any dog or cat over four months of age kept, maintained, or harbored within the unincorporated area of Fulton County, or within any municipality in Fulton County, who has or may enter into an agreement with Fulton County for animal control services, to obtain a dog/cat license for such dog or cat. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having custody of any dog or cat over four months of age brought into the areas of Fulton County designated in subsection (a) of this section to obtain a dog or cat license for such dog or cat within 14 days from the date of entry. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-121. - Vaccination/license tag required. 
(a)  In order to maintain a centrally located record of all vaccinated dogs, cats, or other animals kept, maintained, or harbored in any area of Fulton County, including those within the corporate city limits of any municipality in Fulton County, the owner, custodian, or harborer of such dog, cat, or other animal is required to apply to the Fulton County Animal Control shelter for a vaccination/license tag. 
(b)  A vaccination/license tag shall be issued upon presentation of a certificate showing that the dog, cat, or other animal for which the tag is issued has been vaccinated against rabies as prescribed by this article, provided that the owner, custodian, or harborer of any dog or cat in the areas of Fulton County designated in section 18-120(a) also make payment of a license fee to be set by the county manager. The vaccination/license tag will be available to the public throughout the year and is issued by Fulton County or its designee. The tag shall be valid for the same period as the time specified by the vaccination. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian, or harborer of any dog in the areas designated in subsection (a) of this section to affix such vaccination/license tag to a collar worn by the dog at all times, except that the wearing of a vaccination/license tag is not required for show dogs where the wearing of such tag could damage the coat, and except when dogs are boarded in kennels or veterinary clinics, or in an area zoned for agricultural purposes where the owner or custodian of the dog in question is using the dog for hunting purposes, and has on his/her person a valid hunting license. In the latter case, the owner, custodian, or harborer shall have the tag or vaccination certificate in his/her possession where it may be shown on demand by any duly constituted authority. 
(d)  Should the vaccination/license tag become lost, misplaced, or stolen, it shall be the duty of the owner, custodian, or harborer of the dog or cat to obtain a replacement tag. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination/license tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued, or to remove a vaccination/license tag from any animal without the consent of the owner or custodian. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-122. - Special permits. 
(a)  Each premises where there are four or more dogs over the age of four months kept, maintained or harbored for a period of 14 days or longer, shall require a special permit. The owner or person in possession of the premises where the dogs are located shall be required to apply to the Fulton County Animal Control Shelter for a special permit. 
(b)  A special permit will be issued upon payment of $150.00 and proof that the premises and dogs covered by the special permit meet the requirements set out in this article. 
(c)  The special permit will be valid for one year from the date of issue, provided it is not revoked during the year for violations of this article. Application to renew a special permit must be made at least 14 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. 
(d)  All commercial kennels which are subject to a business license fee shall be exempt from the annual special permit fee. 
(e)  All commercial kennels must be licensed by the Georgia Commissioner of Agriculture pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-11-3. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-123. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to overload, poison, cruelly treat, maim, tease, bruise, deprive of necessary sustenance or medical attention, improperly use, deprive of shade and shelter, or in any manner whatsoever, torture, kill, abuse, or commit any act of cruelty towards any animal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to neglect an animal. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly abandon, or aid in the abandonment of any animal on any property, public or private. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to transport any dog in an open bed truck except when safely confined in a portable kennel or safely restrained by a harness to prevent the animal from escaping out of the vehicle or having the ability to extend over the end of the vehicle while it is in motion. 
(e)  An animal control officer or law enforcement officer may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle if the animal exhibits distress, including but not limited to, excessive panting or drooling, seizures, state of unconsciousness, or hyperactivity. If the vehicle is damaged during such removal, the animal control officer or law enforcement officer shall not be liable for any damage to the vehicle. 
(f)  An animal control officer or law enforcement officer who is responding to the notification of abandoned animal may enter the property by reasonable means under the circumstances to remove or render aid to the abandoned animal. 
(g)  Any person who has been convicted of cruelty, neglect, or abandonment of an animal as provided in this article, or state law, and has been required to or has voluntarily relinquished ownership of such animal shall not be allowed to own a pet in their household in the City of Atlanta for a minimum of one year from the date of conviction. A nolo contendere plea is considered a conviction for the purpose of this subsection. 
(h)  This section shall not be construed to limit in any way the authority or duty of any law enforcement officer, animal control officer, or veterinarian. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-124. - Running at large. 
(a)  Generally. Within the unincorporated area of Fulton County or within any municipality in Fulton County which has or may enter into an agreement with Fulton County for animal control services, the running at large of dogs, domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, exotic animals, public nuisance animal, dangerous, or vicious dogs, or dogs trained or in training as guard dogs is prohibited, with the exception of cats. Owners of wildlife or exotic animals must have the necessary state and/or federal permits on their person when transporting their animals. 
(b)  (1)  Dogs. It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or harborer of any dog to allow or permit such dog to leave the premises of the owner or other person having custody of the dog unless such dog is securely under leash; said leash being not more than six feet long, and under the control of a competent person. Dogs must be confined to the premises of the owner or other person having custody of the dog and shall be restrained by means of a fence or wall or other enclosure, or restrained individually by a leash under the control of a competent person. Excluded are those dogs participating in or training for obedience trials, field trials, dog shows, tracking work, or law enforcement. Also, the requirements of this subsection shall not apply in any area zoned for agriculture where the owner or person having custody of the dog is at the time in question using the dog for hunting purposes, and has on his/her person a valid hunting license and proof of vaccination. 
(2)  An electronic confinement system shall be considered an acceptable enclosure when the equipment is properly maintained and in continuous working order, and the animal to be contained within wears the appropriate electronic collar when within the system perimeters. 
(3)  In cases where an animal has been deemed a public nuisance animal two or more times, has been classified as a dangerous or vicious dog, or is in training or has been trained to be a guard dog, an electronic animal confinement system may not be used as either the primary or secondary enclosure. 
(4)  Individuals who contain an animal by means of an electronic animal confinement system and are found to be in violation of this section or have been deemed as restraining a dangerous animal shall thereafter restrain the animal by means of a fence, wall or other enclosure, or such animal shall be restrained individually by a leash or chain. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian, or harborer of any dog to restrain or anchor such animal by means of a tether. 
Notwithstanding the prior sentence, a dog may be temporarily restrained by means of a tether while the dog is attended by its owner, custodian, or harborer. 
(6)  Any tether used to temporarily confine a dog while attended by its owner, custodian, or harborer as provided in subsection (5), above, must be attached to a properly fitted collar or harness and shall not be wrapped directly around the dog's neck. Such tethers shall not be excessively heavy or weighted so as to inhibit the dog's movement. 
(c)  Restraint of domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife and exotic animals. It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian, or harborer of any domestic animal, livestock, wildlife, or exotic animal, to allow or permit such animal to leave the premises of the owner or other person having custody of such unless securely under leash, in a carrying case, or restrained by some other means and under the control of a competent person, with the exception of cats. 
(d)  Confinement of domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, exotic animals, public nuisance animals, and dangerous or vicious dogs. Domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, exotic animals, public nuisance animals, classified dogs, and guard dogs shall be securely confined to the premises of the owner or other person having custody of such by means set forth under the provisions of this article, or approved by Fulton County or its designee and/or as required by state or federal regulations, with the exception of cats. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-125. - Commercial guard/security dogs. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all persons who train, keep, use, or maintain any guard/security dog to have signs conspicuously posted on the premises where the guard/security dog is located to warn of the presence of the dog. This warning shall consist of a warning sign placed at each entrance and exit to the premises and in a position to be legible from the sidewalk or ground level adjacent to the sign (eye level). If the premises is not enclosed by a wall or fence, a sign shall be placed at every entrance and exit to each structure on the premises in which a guard/security dog is located. Each sign shall measure at least ten inches by 14 inches and shall contain block lettering stating "warning, guard dog on duty." In addition, for dogs rented or leased, the sign shall set forth the name, address, and phone number of the responsible person or persons, to be notified during any hour of the day or night. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any person who keeps, uses, or maintains a guard/security dog to ensure the dog is vaccinated against rabies and licensed as required by section 34-202(b). The dog also must have the current vaccination tag affixed to a collar worn by the dog at all times as required by section 34-202(c). 
(c)  It shall be the duty of any person that sells, leases, and/or rents any guard/security dog to be used within the City of Atlanta to notify the Fulton County Animal Control, of the location and number of guard/security dogs in use, kept, or maintained at a particular location. The animal control office shall maintain a record of the location, number of guard/security dogs, and current rabies vaccination and licensure of all guard/security dogs utilized within the City of Atlanta. The person that sells, leases, and/or rents a guard/security dog to be used in the City of Atlanta shall furnish the following information to the Fulton County Animal Control Office: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the location where a guard dog is located. 
(2)  Name, breed, sex, and current license tag information of each guard dog at any location in the City of Atlanta. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to transport any guard/security dog in an open bed truck, and the vehicle transporting guard dogs shall be identified as to the business owner. It shall be unlawful to transport any guard dog in the City of Atlanta except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Each dog shall be placed in separate holding bins. 
(2)  Each holding bin shall be enclosed and measure 48 inches long by 18 inches wide by 30 inches high. 
(3)  Each holding bin will be adequately ventilated. 
(e)  No guard/security dog shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied to any inanimate objects such as a tree, post, or building, outside of its own enclosure. 
(f)  A guard/security dog shall be confined by the owner/custodian/harborer within a building or secure enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape of its own volition. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-126. - Confinement of female dogs in heat. 
It shall be the duty of any owner, custodian, or harborer of any female dog in heat within the areas designated in section 34-201(a), when she is left unattended, to securely confine such dog so as to prevent contact with another dog except for planned breeding. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-127. - Skunks and foxes. 
(a)  All skunks, except pen raised skunks, and all foxes from whatever geographic region including Alaska and Canada are forbidden to be purchased, sold, owned, possessed, or harbored. Pen raised skunks and foxes in possession as of July 1, 1987, are grandfathered. 
(b)  Pen raised skunks, other than black and white skunks, may be purchased and kept as pets after securing a permit from the Fulton County Animal Control. The Fulton County Animal Control is responsible for ensuring that purchasers of pen raised skunks are made knowledgeable of the proper care, handling, and confinement. No pet store shall allow the purchase of pen raised skunks without being first presented with the permit issued by the Fulton County Animal Control. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-128. - Wildlife or exotic animal. 
Each owner, custodian, or harborer of any wildlife or exotic animal must obtain all necessary state and/or federal permits and/or meet all state and/or federal requirements for keeping such an animal. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-129. - Nuisances. 
(a)  Any public nuisance animal may be impounded and the owner or possessor charged for a violation of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any domestic animal or livestock except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Any housing or enclosure used by any domestic animal or livestock shall be well-drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors and otherwise clean and sanitary. Animal excrement shall be disposed of in a manner approved by Fulton County or its designee. 
(2)  A domestic animal or livestock shall be kept at the following minimum distances from any occupied building except the dwelling unit of the owner (exceptions: licensed veterinary hospitals, commercial kennels, grooming parlors and public or commercial horse facilities): 

 
(3)  Except in an area zoned for agriculture, each domestic animal or livestock shall be provided with the following average minimum floor or ground area in the enclosure or housing in which it is kept (exceptions: licensed veterinary hospitals, commercial kennels, grooming parlors and public and commercial horse facilities): 

 
(4)  Except in the areas zoned for agriculture, the maximum number of domestic animals or livestock that may be kept on any single premises shall not exceed the following (exceptions: licensed veterinary hospitals, commercial kennels, grooming parlors, and public and commercial horse facilities): 

 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-130. - Animals as prizes. 
It shall be unlawful to offer as a prize or gift any animal in any contest, raffle, or lottery, or as an enticement for fundraising or for entry into any place of business. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-131. - Cruelty to elephants. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "bullhook" shall mean a device or instrument containing a spike, hook, or any combination thereof. A bullhook is also known as an ankus, ankusha, elephant goad, or elephant hook. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a bullhook on an elephant within any area described in section 34-201(a) of this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use on an elephant any device or instrument that inflicts pain on, or causes or is likely to cause injury to, an elephant, except as necessary to administer legitimate medical treatment or in response to an immediate threat to public safety. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 1, 6-14-17 ) 
Secs. 18-132—18-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 18-150. - Vaccination required. 
(a)  The owner, custodian, or harborer of each dog or cat over four months of age, kept, maintained, or harbored in any area of Fulton County, including any dog or cat within the corporate city limits of any municipality in Fulton County, is required to maintain a current rabies vaccination on such dog or cat. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having custody of any dog or cat over four months of age brought into Fulton County from outside the county to have such dog or cat vaccinated within 14 days from the date of entry, provided that when the owner or person having custody of the dog or cat produces evidence satisfactory to the health department through its designee that such dog or cat has a current vaccination, as prescribed by this article, such dog or cat will not be required to be vaccinated again until the expiration date of the current vaccination. 
(c)  Only a licensed veterinarian shall be entitled in connection with his/her practice, on the request of any owner of a dog, cat, or other animal, to vaccinate such dog, cat, or other animal against rabies, with a vaccine as set forth in the definition of vaccinate in section 18-115, provided that at the time of vaccination he furnishes two copies of the vaccination certificate to the owner, forwards one copy to the Fulton County Animal Control, and maintains one copy for his/her files. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 2, 6-27-12) 
Sec. 18-151. - Rabies cases to be reported. 
It shall be the duty of any person knowing of a rabid animal, or of any animal showing symptoms of rabies, to immediately report such animal to the health department or its designee and give as much pertinent information as possible. Any bite by an animal shall be reported to the health department or its designee. The animal control office, in order to maintain an effective epidemiological surveillance and control program, shall maintain a record of its rabies related activities, including investigation and confirmation of rabies in animals in the manner and frequency stipulated by the health department. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 2, 6-27-12) 
Sec. 18-152. - Quarantine. 
(a)  In the event a dog or cat has bitten a human, such animal shall be immediately confined at the animal control shelter, veterinary hospital, or other such premises deemed acceptable by the health department or its designee for a period of ten days from the date of the bite to be observed for symptoms of rabies. 
(b)  In the event a warmblooded animal other than a dog or cat has bitten a human or other warmblooded animal, or in the event a warmblooded animal has been bitten by another warmblooded animal, the recommendations contained in the Rabies Control Manual compiled by the Georgia Department of Public Health shall be followed. 
(c)  All expenses incurred for boarding an animal for the quarantine period as well as other applicable fees shall be paid by the owner or custodian of the biting animal. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, custodian, or harborer to fail to surrender a dog, cat, or other animal which has bitten a human, upon the sworn statement of the person bitten. Such animal will be placed under quarantine or submitted for laboratory examination at the discretion of the health department or its designee. The provisions of this division shall apply, regardless of whether or not such animal has a current rabies vaccination and tag. 
(e)  When rabies has been found to exist in any warmblooded animal, or where its existence is suspected, the health department or its designee may designate a geographical area within which quarantine of all owned warmblooded animals shall be maintained. Such animals shall be immediately confined to the premises designated and in a manner approved by the health department or its designee, whether or not such animals have been vaccinated against rabies. 
(f)  No warmblooded animal shall be brought into or removed from a quarantined area or premises without written approval of the health department or its designee. 
(g)  Quarantine ordered by the health department or its designee shall be maintained for such period as deemed necessary to protect the public health. 
(h)  Quarantined areas or premises where rabid animals or animals suspected of having rabies remain at large, may be posted, by the health department or its designee with signs which read as follows: "Rabies suspected" or "rabies-keep away from animals." Such signs shall be conspicuously displayed in a place designated by the health department or its designee and shall not be removed except by the health department or its designee. Such signs shall not be defaced. 
(i)  The owner, custodian, or harborer of each animal subject to a quarantine invoked by the health department or its designee under the terms of this article shall be notified of the quarantine, the particular animals subject thereto, and shall be given such other information as the health department or its designee deems necessary. 
(j)  Every animal showing clinical signs of rabies, as determined by the health department or its designee, shall be immediately destroyed; and/or the heads of all animals suspected of having had rabies at the time of death shall be submitted to the Epidemiology Office, Department of Human Resources, for examination by the Department of Public Health Laboratory. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 2, 6-27-12; Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 2, 6-14-17 ) 
Secs. 18-153—18-169. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VICIOUS ANIMALS AND DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033) , § 3, adopted June 14, 2017, amended division 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 4, §§ 18-170—18-172, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 2, 6-27-12. 

Sec. 18-170. - Precautions to be taken by owners. 
(a)  No person owning or having custody or control of any public nuisance animal, dangerous dog or vicious dog shall permit it to run at large, or permit it to run loose on or within the premises of such person in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person lawfully entering such premises. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any public nuisance animal, dangerous dog or vicious dog, or anyone having any such animal in his/her possession or custody, to ensure that the public nuisance animal, dangerous dog or vicious dog is kept under restraint, as prescribed in subsections (d), (e), and (f) of this section and that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the public nuisance animal, dangerous dog or vicious dog from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner, custodian, or harborer, and it is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, locked pen, or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition. Such enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended so that children are prevented from entry and to prevent the public nuisance animal, dangerous dog or vicious dog from escaping. 
(c)  For owners of a public nuisance animal, dangerous dog or vicious dog whose animal lives out-of-doors, a portion of their property should be fenced with a perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter fence, the public nuisance animal, dangerous dog or vicious dog must be humanely confined inside a locked pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides, a secure top attached to all sides, the sides must be securely set into the ground or onto a concrete pad, or securely attached to a wire bottom. The gate to the kennel must be locked when the animal is unattended. This enclosure shall provide protection from the elements. 
(d)  A public nuisance animal, dangerous dog or vicious dog shall not be upon any street or public place except when securely restrained by leash not more than six feet in length and humanely muzzled when appropriate, as determined by the animal control officer, and in the charge of a competent person. 
(e)  Whenever outside of its enclosure, as provided for in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, but on the owner's property, a public nuisance animal, dangerous dog or vicious dog must be attended by the owner or custodian and restrained by a secure collar, muzzled when appropriate, as determined by the animal control officer, and on a leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(f)  No public nuisance animal, dangerous dog or vicious dog shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied while unattended by the owner or custodian to any inanimate object such as a tree, post, or building. 
(g)  A warning sign (i.e., beware of dog) shall be conspicuously posted denoting a public nuisance animal, dangerous dog or vicious dog on the premises. These signs are exempt from building permit requirements. 
(h)  Failure to keep any public nuisance animal, dangerous dog or vicious dog confined or under restraint as provided for in this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as hereinafter provided. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 3, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-171. - Notice to dangerous or vicious dog owners. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog within a dog control officer's jurisdiction, the dog control officer shall make such investigation necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
(b)  When a dog control officer determines that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the dog control officer shall mail a dated notice to the dog's owner within 72 hours. Such notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's determination and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing from the animal control hearing board on the dog control officer's determination within seven days after the date shown on the notice; provided, however, that if an animal control hearing board has not been established for the jurisdiction, the owner shall be informed of the right to request a hearing from the probate court for such jurisdiction where the dog was found or confiscated within seven days after the date shown on the notice. The notice shall provide a form for requesting the hearing and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the dog control officer's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this article. If an owner cannot be located within ten days of a dog control officer's determination that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, such dog may be released to an animal shelter or humanely euthanized, as determined by the dog control officer. 
(c)  When a hearing is requested by a dog owner in accordance with subsection (b) of this Code section, such hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days after the request is received; provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the animal control hearing board or probate court for good cause shown. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the animal control hearing board or probate court conducting the hearing shall mail to the dog owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the animal control hearing board or probate court conducting the hearing shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's determination. 
(d)  Within ten days after the hearing, the animal control hearing board or probate court which conducted the hearing shall mail written notice to the dog owner of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the notice of classification shall specify the date upon which that determination shall be effective. If the determination is that the dog is to be euthanized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
(e)  Judicial review of the animal control hearing board's final decision may be had in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.9. Judicial review of a probate court's final decision shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 5-3-2 and costs shall be paid as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-3-22. 
(f)  If the animal control hearing board classifies the animal as dangerous or vicious, and no appeal is filed, the owner shall be required to obtain from the animal control officer an annual certificate of registration in compliance with the requirements of this article. No vicious or dangerous animal shall be released to its owners until such certificate is issued by the animal control officer. 
(g)  If the owner fails to obtain the certificate of registration within 30 days of the issuance of the order classifying the animal as dangerous or vicious, the animal may be euthanized no earlier than 35 days after the issuance of the order so classifying the animal. The animal shall not be euthanized if the owner appeals the animal control board's classification order. During the pendency of the appeal and any further appeals, the animal shall not be euthanized, provided that in the event the classification order is upheld at the conclusion of all appeals, the animal may be euthanized no earlier than 35 days after the final order upholding the classification if the owner does not obtain the required certificate of registration within 30 days after the date of the final order of court upholding the classification order. During the pendency of any such appeal by the owner, the animal shall not be released to its owner until the appeal is concluded and the certificate of registration is issued to the owner, if applicable. In such event, the animal will be housed at a licensed veterinarian's office or a licensed commercial kennel and the cost of such detention shall be borne by the owner of the animal. In the event the county appeals the court's order, the animal shall not be released to its owner until the appeal is concluded and the certificate of registration is issued to the owner, if applicable. In the event of an appeal by the county, the animal will be housed in the animal control shelter and the cost of such detention shall be borne by the county. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 3, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-172. - Certificate of registration. 
(a)  The owner of a classified animal must be 18 years old or older; annually obtain a certificate of registration for the animal from the county; and, pay an annual registration fee of $100.00 in addition to the regular license fee. This registration fee is subject to change as dictated by the county board of commissioners. At the time of renewal, the animal control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with all applicable provisions of this article. The requirements of this section apply to any classified animal living in the City of Atlanta. 
(b)  Certificates of registration are nontransferable and no more than one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. The certificate of registration shall be issued to the owner upon receipt of all of the following: 
(1)  Written evidence that the animal is permanently identified by insertion of a microchip by a licensed veterinarian. Said chip must be registered with the chip parent company and Fulton County Animal Control within 30 days of an order classifying the animal as dangerous or vicious or within such later time as specified by a court of competent jurisdiction or within 30 days of the conclusion of any appeal of a court's order that upholds the classification of an animal as dangerous or vicious; 
(2)  A copy of a current policy of insurance in the minimum amount of $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the State of Georgia, insuring the owner of a dangerous animal, and $75,000.00 insuring the owner of a vicious animal, against liability for any personal injuries or property damage inflicted by the dangerous animal or vicious animal; or a copy of a current surety bond in the foregoing respective amounts issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of Georgia, payable for property damage or personal injury caused by the dangerous or vicious animal; 
(3)  Written or photographic proof that the animal will be confined in a classified animal pen; and 
(4)  Written evidence that the animal has been sterilized by a licensed veterinarian. 
(c)  The owner of a classified animal shall notify Fulton County Animal Control within 24 hours if the animal dies. If the animal dies, the body must be available for microchip scanning to provide positive identification of the dangerous animal or vicious animal. A vicious animal shall not be transferred, sold or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished to a governmental facility or a veterinarian to be euthanized. If a dangerous animal is sold or given to another person, the current owner listed on the most current certificate of registration must provide Fulton County Animal Control with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner within 30 days of the sale or transfer of such animal. New owners of dangerous animals are subject to all requirements of this article upon transfer of such animal and such new owner must register the animal in his or her name within 30 days of the sale or transfer of the animal to such new owner. 
(d)  The owner of a classified animal must notify Fulton County Animal Control in writing within 15 days after changing his/her address. Such written notice shall provide the owner's new address and telephone number. The owner shall promptly obtain a new certificate of registration reflecting the new address if such address is located within the county. 
(e)  The owner of any classified animal shall notify Fulton County Animal Control in writing within 30 days after moving a classified animal into the county. Such written notice shall provide the address and telephone number of the owner and the owner shall obtain a certificate of registration for the animal within 30 days after moving into the county. 
(f)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this article. No person shall be the owner of more than one vicious animal. No certificate of registration for a vicious animal shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: 
(1)  A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.1; 
(2)  The felony of dog fighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or 
(3)  A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy as provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1; 
(4)  From the time of conviction until two years after completion of his or her sentence. The restrictions imposed by this section also apply to any person residing with such convicted person. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 3, 6-14-17 ) 
Sec. 18-173. - Confinement of dangerous or vicious animals. 
(a)  Classified animals shall be confined in a classified animal pen. 
(b)  The owner of a classified animal must post signs on all means of ingress and egress to the premises where the animal resides. Such signs shall read in letters at least three-quarters of an inch high: "Dangerous/Vicious Animal on Property." Such signs shall be no smaller than eight and one-half by 11 inches. 
(c)  Whenever outside its classified animal pen, but on the owner's property, a classified animal shall be attended by the owner, muzzled by any means sufficient to prevent the biting of persons or animals, and restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. Such leash shall not exceed six feet in length. 
(d)  No classified animal shall be permitted off the property of its owner unless accompanied by the owner, muzzled by any means sufficient to prevent the biting of persons or animals, and restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. Such leash shall not exceed six feet in length. In the alternative, the classified animal when off the owner's property may be contained in a closed and locked cage or crate. 
(e)  The owner of a classified animal shall make the animal and the area of confinement available for periodic, unannounced inspections by the animal control officer to ensure compliance with the confinement requirements of this chapter. 
(f)  Under no circumstances shall Fulton County or its designee or any employee thereof be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog as a result of failure to enforce the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2017-30(17-O-1033), § 3, 6-14-17 ) 
Secs. 18-174—18-189. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION 

Sec. 18-190. - Impoundment of dogs, domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, and exotic animals. 
(a)  Any citizen may pick up and impound any animal running at large in Fulton County, provided said animal is promptly surrendered to the Fulton County Animal Control to allow the person having the right of possession an opportunity to reclaim their animal. 
(b)  Dogs, domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, and exotic animals within any of the following classes may be captured and impounded from the areas noted in subsection 18-120(a) (with the exception of subsections (b)(1), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(5), and (b)(6) of this section which shall also apply to any area of Fulton County not under contract for animal control services). 
(1)  Dogs or cats without a current rabies vaccination. 
(2)  Dogs or cats without a current Fulton County license. 
(3)  Dogs not wearing a current vaccination/license tag. This shall include dogs wearing a tag that was not issued for said dog. 
(4)  Warmblooded animals which have bitten a human or another warmblooded animal and warmblooded animals which have been bitten by another warmblooded animal suspected of having rabies. 
(5)  Warmblooded animals suspected of having rabies. 
(6)  Unconfined warmblooded animals in quarantine areas. 
(7)  Animals whose safety, health, or life is in immediate danger. 
(8)  Animals whose ownership is unknown. 
(9)  Dogs, domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, or exotic animals roaming at large, with the exception of cats. 
(10)  Vicious animals or dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs not properly confined or restrained as defined in section 18-170. 
(11)  Commercial guard/security dogs not properly confined or restrained as defined in section 18-125. 
(12)  Dogs in heat not properly confined as defined in section 18-126. 
(c)  No animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this article by virtue of a vaccination, tag, or certificate. 
(d)  Any animal control officer empowered to perform any duty under this article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for impounding a dog or other animal which the officer is in immediate pursuit of with the exception of any occupied building into which the dog or other animal may enter. In the latter case, if the occupant or owner of the premises gives permission to the animal control officer to enter the premises, the officer may remove said dog or other animal. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to, in any manner, interfere with, hinder, resist, obstruct, or molest the animal control officer in the performance of his/her duties, or for any person to remove any animal from the animal control vehicle or animal control shelter without the permission of the animal control officer. 
(f)  When the owner of the dog or other animal impounded under the provisions of this article, can be readily identified and located, the health department or its designee shall notify the owner of the impoundment. A reasonable attempt to contact the owner shall be satisfied by a telephone call to the owner's residence, when possible, or a postcard sent to the owner's residence through the U.S. Postal System. 
(g)  A dangerous dog shall be immediately impounded by any animal control officer, or by a law enforcement officer if: 
(1)  The owner of the dangerous dog does not secure the liability insurance or surety bond required by section 18-171(c); 
(2)  The dangerous dog is not validly registered as required by section 18-171(c); or 
(3)  The dangerous dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure as specified in section 18-170(b) or (c). 
Any dangerous dog impounded under the provisions of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this section, and upon payment of reasonable impoundment costs. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this section within 20 days of the date the dog was impounded, said dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 2, 6-27-12) 
Sec. 18-191. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Every animal impounded under the provisions of this article which is found upon arrival at the animal control shelter to be diseased or injured, and whose ownership is unknown or is relinquished in writing, shall, at the discretion of the health department or its designee, be immediately destroyed if not accepted by an organization approved by the health department or its designee, and provided such organization signs a receipt for the animal. In the event an owner cannot be contacted and the severity of the injury or disease of the animal dictates that euthanasia is a humane course of action, the animal will be destroyed and the owner, if known, notified as soon as possible. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the health department or its designee, the release of an impounded animal will impair the safety of the public, such animal will be held pending a court order disposition. 
(c)  Any animal impounded under the provisions of this article shall be held a minimum of three days from the day of impoundment or such longer period of time as deemed reasonable by the director of animal control. Animals under observation for rabies symptoms shall remain in the animal control shelter for such period of time as the health department or its designee may deem necessary to protect the public health. Exception: Livestock shall be held a minimum of 14 days. 
(d)  Impounded animals not claimed within three days of the day of impoundment or at the end of the quarantine period shall be disposed of (euthanized) in a humane manner as approved by the health department or its designee. No animal impounded under the provisions of this article shall be released to any person or organization for the purpose of live animal experimentation. 
(e)  Before the release of any impounded animal, the owner shall pay the following: 
(1)  A vaccination fee on any unvaccinated animal when a vaccination is required by this article. 
(2)  A license fee for any unlicensed dog or cat in an area covered by this article. 
(3)  An impoundment fee. 
(4)  A daily boarding fee. 
(f)  The county manager shall establish reasonable vaccination, license, impoundment, and boarding fees. In some instances the amount of impoundment and boarding fees will be on a cost-incurred basis. 
(g)  Proceeds from license, impoundment, and boarding fees shall be applied to the annual operating budget of the Fulton County Animal Control for animal and rabies control, enforcement activity, and operation of the animal facility. 
(h)  The health department or its designee shall exercise every reasonable care to prevent injury, illness, death, escape, or pilfering of any animal with which it deals but shall not be responsible for any such occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 2, 6-27-12) 
Sec. 18-192. - Adoption of impounded animals. 
(a)  The Fulton County Animal Control as a designee of the Fulton County Health Department shall cooperate with the Atlanta. Humane Society and any other approved organization by offering for adoption or placement cats and/or dogs not claimed by the person having the right of possession or any cat and/or dog that may be designated as a stray. 
(b)  Organizations with a continuing interest in adopting animals from the animal control shelter must register with the Fulton County Animal Control on the forms provided and be designated as an approved adoption organization. 
(c)  All animals housed at the animal control shelter shall be under the authority of the animal control director or his/her designee. No animal will be released for adoption or placement prior to the holding period required by section 18-191(c) and with the written approval of the animal control director or his/her designee. 
(d)  The animal control director may confer ownership (permit adoption) of any animal which has become the property of the animal control shelter to an approved organization, subject to conditions prescribed by the animal control director including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Payment of any vaccination, licensing, or veterinary costs shall be the responsibility of the receiving organization; 
(2)  Evidence satisfactory to the animal control director that the animal has been, or will be, examined by a veterinarian and vaccinations against rabies and other diseases administered; and 
(3)  Evidence satisfactory to the animal control director that the animal has been, or will be, neutered or spayed. 
(e)  The Atlanta Humane Society will have the right of first refusal on adoptable animals at the animal control shelter. Other approved organizations interested in the adoption of a cat and/or dog may call the animal control shelter on Monday and Thursday morning to question the availability of adoptable animals. The animal control director may also contact an approved organization if an animal is available for adoption. No animal shall be held more than 24 hours past the time of notification. 
(f)  The Fulton County Health Department or its designee shall be held harmless and free from liability for any animal adopted to or placed with an approved adoption organization. 
(Ord. No. 2012-30(12-O-0784), § 2, 6-27-12) 
Secs. 18-193—18-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PET SHOPS 

Sec. 18-211. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal care facility means an animal control center or animal shelter, maintained by or under contract with any state, county, or municipality, whose mission or practice is, in whole or significant part, protecting the welfare of animals and placing animals in permanent homes or with animal rescue organizations. 
Animal rescue organization means any not-for-profit organization which has tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes. 
Cat means cat, or any domesticated feline, of either sex, whether vaccinated against rabies or not. 
Dog means dog, or any domesticated canine, of either sex, whether vaccinated against rabies or not. 
Pet shop means an establishment, for which an occupation tax certificate issued pursuant to chapter 30 is necessary, where dogs and cats are sold, exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal rescue organization, as defined herein. 
( Ord. No. 2018-55(18-O-1655), § 1, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 18-212. - Prohibition on the retail sale of animals. 
(a)  A pet shop shall not sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter, auction, or otherwise dispose of dogs or cats. Nothing in this section shall prevent a pet shop from providing space and appropriate care for dogs or cats offered for adoption and owned by an animal care facility or an animal rescue organization. 
(b)  A pet shop shall not offer for adoption any dog or cat which is younger than eight weeks old. 
(c)  Each dog or cat sold, delivered, offered for sale, bartered, auctioned, or otherwise disposed of in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. Each dog or cat offered for adoption which is younger than eight weeks old shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2018-55(18-O-1655), § 1, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 18-213. - Recordkeeping and disclosures. 
(a)  A pet shop shall maintain records sufficient to document the source of each dog or cat the pet shop acquires, of at least one year following the date of acquisition. Such records shall be made available immediately upon request by an official or officer empowered to enforce this chapter. 
(b)  A pet shop that offers space for the adoption of dogs or cats shall post, in a conspicuous location on the enclosure of each such animal, a sign listing the name of the animal care facility or animal rescue organization from which the pet shop acquired each dog or cat. 
(c)  Each dog or cat offered for adoption in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. Each recordkeeping violation under this section regarding a particular dog or cat shall constitute a separate offense. Each failure to post a sign as required by this section regarding a particular dog or cat shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 2018-55(18-O-1655), § 1, 11-14-18 ) 
Sec. 18-214. - Penalties. 
Any person found guilty of violating this article shall, at a minimum, be punished by a fine of $500.00 for each offense. 
( Ord. No. 2018-55(18-O-1655), § 1, 11-14-18 ) 
Chapter 22 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Helicopter landings prohibited in parks, § 110-74. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; aviation generally, O.C.G.A. § 6-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 12-1006) 
Secs. 22-2—22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF AVIATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-71, § 61, approved Sept. 16, 2002, repealed §§ 22-26—22-33 in their entirety. Subsequently, §§ 62—68 of said ordinance, pertaining to similar subject matter, provided for the inclusion of §§ 22-26—22-32 to read as herein set out. 
Charter reference— Department of aviation, app. IV, §§ 1(b), 13 et seq. 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-301 et seq. 

Sec. 22-26. - Additional qualifications of aviation general manager; duties of aviation general manager. 
(a)  In addition to the general qualifications specified in section 2-221, the aviation general manager shall possess knowledge of the factors affecting airport management and service, including a demonstrated experience in the operation of a large organization or supervision of engineering services. The aviation general manager must also have the capacity to plan for expansion for services and locations. Such experience may be in either previous private employment or previous government employment in the aviation industry. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the aviation general manager to: 
(1)  Direct the general management, operation and administration of Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, which consists of municipal, airline, concessionaire, consulting and contracted employees; 
(2)  Maintain effective working relationships with representatives of the United States Government, including but not limited to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the Transportation Security Administration (TSA), and other agencies that provide guidelines and funding for airport operations; 
(3)  Make recommendations to the mayor, chief operating officer and city council on policy issues and actions related to aviation administration; 
(4)  Oversee the development of marketing, public relations and operational strategies to ensure that the airport will maintain and improve its national and international ranking among airports; 
(5)  Represent the department of aviation in public appearances to promote programs and enhance the city's level of competitiveness in national and international arenas; 
(6)  Direct the overall planning and development on the ongoing expansion of airport facilities; 
(7)  Manage and direct the collection of revenues and capital projects at the airport; 
(8)  Negotiate and administer, in conjunction with the chief procurement officer, all contracts for construction, concession and other facilities or amenities at or in support of the airport; 
(9)  Maintain effective working relationships with other jurisdictions as they relate to general and commercial aviation matters; and 
(10)  Collaborate with other public officials, airlines, concessionaires and representative groups in the negotiation of policies, rules and regulations that will serve to increase the traffic of flights, passengers and cargo transactions at the airport. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 62, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-04) 
Sec. 22-27. - Bureaus within department of aviation. 
The department of aviation shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Bureau of airport maintenance, operations and safety; 
(2)  Bureau of airport planning and development; 
(3)  Bureau of airport business and finance; 
(4)  Bureau of airport administration; and 
(5)  Office of airport information services. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 63, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 22-28. - Function and duties of bureau of airport planning and development; additional qualifications of director. 
(a)  The functions and duties of the bureau of airport planning and development are: 
(1)  Directing the design, award, and completion of engineering and construction projects; 
(2)  Preparing construction budget and management of all construction on airport property; 
(3)  Providing technical support and management of immediate and long-range airport planning programs; 
(4)  Administering an airport noise mitigation program; and 
(5)  Provide continuous reviews of environmental practices to ensure compliance with environmental regulations. 
(b)  In addition to the general qualifications set out in section 2-221 the director of the bureau of airport planning and development shall possess, at a minimum: 
(1)  A baccalaureate degree in engineering, architecture, planning or a related field from an accredited college or university; 
(2)  Eight years experience at a supervisory level, which includes no fewer than five years in aviation-related administration, engineering, architecture, planning or a related field; or 
(3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications in subsections (1) and (2). 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 64, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 22-29. - Functions and duties of bureau of airport business and finance; additional qualifications of director. 
(a)  The functions and duties of the bureau of airport business and finance are to: 
(1)  Provide acquisition, leasing and management services for land and facilities; 
(2)  Coordinate financing to fund capital improvement projects and manage accounts payable and receivable; 
(3)  Implement policies to safeguard airport assets; 
(4)  Manage ground transportation activities related to the airport; 
(5)  Direct, plan and coordinate airport parking operations; 
(6)  Manage marketing and public relations activities to include interacting with local, state and federal officials; and 
(7)  Manage internal audit activities. 
(b)  In addition to the general qualifications set out in section 2-221 the director of the bureau of airport business and finance shall possess: 
(1)  A baccalaureate degree in management, business administration, public administration, aviation administration or a related field from an accredited college or university; 
(2)  Eight years experience at a supervisory level, which includes no fewer than five years in aviation-related administration, accounting management, financial management, marketing or a related field; or 
(3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications in subsections (1) and (2). 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 65, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 22-30. - Functions and duties of bureau of airport maintenance, operations and safety; additional qualifications of the director. 
(a)  The functions and duties of the bureau of airport maintenance, operations and safety shall include: 
(1)  Administering and supervising the airport certification program, as required by federal aviation regulations, which establish operational standards for the airport; 
(2)  Administering and supervising the airport security program required by federal aviation regulations; 
(3)  Ensuring the maintenance and repair of buildings, roadways, runways, taxiways, lighting facilities, landscaping and drainage systems comply with federal, state and city regulations; 
(4)  Providing liaison services between the department, fire, police and federal agencies assigned to the airport; 
(5)  Administering an airport safety program to include continuous analyses and program development to ensure a safe occupational environment of the airport; and 
(6)  Maintaining adequate materials, supplies, and equipment for the continuous operation of all physical facilities; and 
(7)  Ensuring the ongoing and continuous operation of the airport maintaining a constant state of readiness to include managing the coordination of air traffic control and managing the inspection of the airfield, terminal, concourses, parking decks, roadway systems and other facilities. 
(b)  In addition to the general qualifications set out in section 2-221 the director of the bureau of airport maintenance, operations and safety shall possess, at a minimum: 
(1)  A baccalaureate degree and one year of graduate study in management, industrial management, operations management, aviation administration, public administration, business administration, or a related field from an accredited college or university; 
(2)  Eight years experience at a supervisory level, which includes no fewer than five years in the fields listed above; or 
(3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications in subsections (1) and (2). 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 66, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 22-31. - Functions and duties of bureau of airport administration; additional qualifications of director. 
(a)  The functions and duties of the bureau of airport administration are to: 
(1)  Direct and manage the development of annual capital and operating budgets; 
(2)  Assist in the development and implementation of the Strategic Plan and Global Scorecard; 
(3)  Provide continuous reviews of airport operating procedures and performance; and 
(4)  Direct and manage airport employee, customer service and procurement programs. 
(b)  In addition to the general qualifications set out in section 2-221 the director of the bureau of airport administration shall possess: 
(1)  A baccalaureate degree in management, business administration, public administration, aviation administration or a related field from an accredited college or university; 
(2)  Eight years experience at a supervisory level, which includes no fewer than five years in aviation-related administration or a related field; or 
(3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications in subsections (1) and (2). 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 67, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 22-32. - Functions and duties of office of airport information services; additional qualifications of director. 
(a)  The functions of the office of airport information services are to: 
(1)  Coordinate and manage all information technology efforts, requirements, processes and procedures; 
(2)  Develop and implement a Internet/Intranet/Extranet focused IT infrastructure requirements; 
(3)  Manage department of aviation communications infrastructure, inclusive of data, voice and video communications; and 
(4)  Set technological platform standards to guide the priorities of the department in the promotion and use of technology. 
(b)  In addition to the general qualifications set out in section 2-221 the director of the office of airport information services shall possess: 
(1)  A baccalaureate degree in information technology or a related field from an accredited college or university; 
(2)  Five years experience at a supervisory level, which includes no fewer than three years in aviation-related information technology or a related field; or 
(3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications in subsections (1) and (2). 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 68, 9-16-02) 
Secs. 22-33—22-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HARTSFIELD-JACKSON ATLANTA INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 8, 2004 renamed art. III to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article was entitled Hartsfield Atlanta International. 
Cross reference— Naming of public facilities and streets in honor of persons, § 2-2; vending machines on city property and in city facilities, § 2-3. 
Land development code reference— Airport zoning district, § 16-22.001 et seq. 
State Law reference— Acquisition, construction and maintenance of airports by municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-56. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aircraft means any contrivance designed, invented or used for navigation or flight in the air, except a parachute or other contrivance used primarily as safety equipment. 
Airport means Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International and all properties located within the boundaries thereof or any other airport which may be operated by the city. 
Aviation general manager means the designated manager of the airport or that official's representative. 
Bus means the same as defined in section 22-201. 
Central passenger terminal complex or CPTC means the landside terminal buildings and the concourse buildings, the FIS facility, the mechanical building; the aircraft parking and ramp area, the pedestrian mall; the automatic guideway transit systems (AGTS); and all related facilities, certain additions and improvements thereto and certain additional passenger terminal facilities at the airport. 
City airlines or signatory airlines means all of the airlines serving Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International who hold certificates from the United States Department of Transportation or its successor agency to transport passengers, mail and property to and from the airport on a regularly scheduled basis and who have entered into an airport use agreement with the city. 
Commercial operations means all operations of aircraft for commercial purposes and shall include, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Operations by a scheduled air carrier not holding a formal agreement with the city for use of the airport; 
(2)  Operation of nonscheduled air service for transportation of freight, express or passenger or charter service; and 
(3)  Scheduled operations, as further defined in this section. 
Courtesy cars means the same as defined in section 22-201 (courier vehicle and courtesy vehicle). 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration or other such agency created by the federal government for the control of civil aviation. 
Gross weight means the maximum allowable gross landing weight of aircraft, as determined by the FAA or other governmental agency having jurisdiction. 
Host lessee means any person or any other legal entity holding a lease, sublease or any other form of rental or concession agreement on the airport property which has the capability of parking aircraft for passenger, mail or cargo loading and unloading or for the sale, servicing or repair of aircraft. 
Landed weight means the total weight of all aircraft landed at the airport, based on the Federal Aviation Administration's certificated maximum gross landing weight, per type of aircraft, by the city airlines during the 12-month period immediately preceding May 1 of each year. 
Landing area means all aircraft operation areas, including runways, taxiways, ramps and aprons. 
Limousine means the same as defined in section 22-201. 
Nonsignatory landing fee means the charge made by the city for each nonsignatory air carrier, air taxi and general aviation aircraft operation, based upon the rate determined by the procedures set out in section 22-87. 
Public parking facilities means all parking facilities provided by the city for the public at or in conjunction with the airport. 
Scheduled operations means all operations of aircraft by scheduled air carriers holding certificates of convenience and necessity from the United States Department of Transportation designating the city as a service point and holding a formal airport use agreement with the city authorizing use of the airport. 
Security identification display area or (SIDA) means all areas of the airport except those areas open to the public and sterile area, including but not limited to, the landing field, runways, taxiways, non-licensed vehicle roads, aircraft ramps or any air operations areas, hangers, aircraft parking aprons, or any area designated by the aviation general manager or as promulgated from time to time by the TSA pursuant to TSA Part 1542 as an area wherein an airport approved badge must be worn at all times unless under an airport approved escort. 
Solicitation or to solicit means to directly or indirectly, actively or passively, openly or subtly, ask, request, importune, seek or try to obtain. 
Sterile area means a portion of the airport that provides passengers access to boarding aircraft and to which the access generally is controlled by TSA, or by an aircraft operator under TSA Part 1544 or a foreign air carrier under TSA Part 1546 through the screening of persons and property. 
Taxicab or taxi means the same as defined in section 22-201. 
Tenant or lessee means any person engaged in business on the airport under authority granted by the aviation general manager or by virtue of a contract with the city. 
Transient aircraft means an aircraft not using the airport as its permanent base of operations. 
(b)  Words relating to aeronautical practices, processes and equipment shall be construed according to their general usage in the aviation industry. 
(Code 1977, § 12-2002; Ord. No. 1999-77, § 1, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2018-20(18-O-1297), §§ 1, 2, 6-13-18 ) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-57. - Official name of airport. 
The airport owned and operated by the city is named the "William B. Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport" and shall be known as "Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International." 
(Code 1977, § 12-2001; Ord. No. 2004-51, § 1, 8-20-04) 
Sec. 22-58. - Operation in public interest. 
In the exercise and performance of its powers and duties under O.C.G.A. tit. 6, ch. 3, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 6-3-20 et seq.), the uniform airports law, the council recognizes and declares that Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International is being operated in the public interest and declares its intention to encourage and develop air transportation for the citizens of the state and in particular for the citizens of the greater Atlanta area and to that end pledges the use of the airport for public, governmental and municipal purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 12-2003; Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-04) 
Sec. 22-59. - Emergency procedures. 
When an emergency exists at the airport, the aviation general manager shall be empowered to take that action which, within the manager's discretion and judgment, is necessary or desirable to protect the health, welfare and safety of persons and property and to facilitate the operation of the airport. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3007) 
Sec. 22-60. - Compliance required. 
Any permission granted by the city, directly or indirectly, expressly or by implication or otherwise to any person to enter or to use the airport or any part thereof is conditioned upon strict compliance with this Code and the ordinances of the city. It shall be the duty and obligation of all those entering the premises of the airport to be familiar with this article. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3001) 
Sec. 22-61. - Space occupancy permit or contract. 
Occupancy and use of any space or the conduct of any business, commercial enterprise or other form of revenue-producing activity on the airport shall not be permitted unless a written contract or permit for such occupancy, use or conduct of business has first been obtained from the city or, where appropriate, approved by the aviation general manager. 
(Code 1977, § 12-6001) 
Sec. 22-62. - Commercial activity. 
No person shall occupy or rent space and no person shall carry on any business, commercial enterprise or other form of revenue-producing activity on the airport without first obtaining written permission from the city. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3002) 
Sec. 22-63. - Agreement or permit required for use of airport for commercial operations. 
(a)  Any person desiring to conduct commercial operations at the airport, which operations require the use of facilities under a lease with the city or a sublease or other arrangements with a host lessee, shall first enter into an airport use agreement with the city or obtain an airport use permit from the aviation general manager which shall set forth the terms and conditions under which such operations may be conducted and which shall provide for the payment to the city of landing fees and other charges, for indemnification of the city, for the posting of bonds or deposits and for other requirements appropriate to such commercial operation. The landing fee rate to be paid by signatory airlines shall be computed in the manner set forth in the airport use agreement, which shall be the same for all signatory airlines. The landing fee rate to be paid by nonsignatory airlines under an airport use permit shall be computed in the manner set forth in section 22-87(b). 
(b)  The aviation general manager is authorized to issue an airport use permit to any person who holds all necessary certificates from federal or state agencies having jurisdiction to provide air transportation of passengers, mail or cargo at the airport and who elects not to execute an airport use agreement with the city. As a condition for obtaining and holding such permit, such person shall agree to comply with terms and conditions designed to ensure that the fees and charges due the city in connection with such operations and all expenses or costs incurred by the city as a result of such operations shall be paid in a timely manner and to ensure that the city will be indemnified against claims from third parties arising as a result of such operations and to ensure that all obligations and duties assumed by such person, whether express or implied, in connection with such operations shall be carried out fully and faithfully. 
(Code 1977, §§ 12-2006, 12-2007) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30. 
Sec. 22-64. - Commercial advertising and display. 
No person shall post, distribute or display commercial (for profit) advertisements, literature, circulars, pictures, sketches, drawings or other forms of printed or written matter without first obtaining written permission from the aviation general manager. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3003) 
Sec. 22-65. - Damage to airport property. 
Damage, destruction or defacement of airport property is covered by O.C.G.A. § 16-7-24. No person shall alter, make additions to or erect any building or sign on the airport or make any excavations on the airport or willfully abandon any personal property on the airport. Any person causing or being responsible for the injury, destruction, damage or disturbance shall report such damage to the office of the aviation general manager and, upon demand by such office, shall reimburse the city for the full amount of damage. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3004) 
Sec. 22-66. - Restricted area, security identification display area. 
(a)  Restricted areas. No person shall be permitted to walk or drive across or upon the restricted areas of the airport without possessing and displaying a proper photo identification badge, which has been approved by the aviation general manager. Occasional visitors must wear other identification approved by FAA pursuant to an approved airport security plan. All areas of the airport except those areas open to the public are restricted, including but not limited to the landing field, runways, taxiways, nonlicensed vehicle roads, the ramps, any of the air operations areas, and any hangar or the aprons of the airport, as provided in the airport security plan. Further, no person shall be permitted access to the concourses or public aircraft departure areas of the airport terminal without passing through the security screening points established in compliance with federal aviation regulations, unless such access is to be gained in accordance with procedures approved by the aviation general manager. 
(b)  Security identification display area. 
(1)  No person shall enter into or walk or drive across or upon the areas of the airport that have been designated as security identification display areas or SIDA without possessing and continuously displaying a proper and valid SIDA badge issued by the aviation general manager or other identification authorized pursuant to the airport's FAA approved security plan, or unless such person is escorted by a person possessing and displaying an appropriate identification. A SIDA badge will be deemed to be properly displayed only if it is continuously worn on the outermost garment between the waist and neck. 
(2)  No person shall allow others to enter into a security identification display area without swiping each individual SIDA badge for each person entering such area, unless the person is being escorted by a person possessing a SIDA badge. 
(3)  No person shall use or attempt to use or display an expired, suspended, revoked or a counterfeit SIDA badge, nor shall any person use or attempt to use or display a SIDA badge unless such person is the actual authorized holder of such badge. 
(4)  Any person to whom a SIDA badge is issued shall immediately report to his/her supervisor or airport police the presence of any person observed not displaying proper identification in a secured area. Persons must maintain observation of the individual or escort the individual out of the secured area. 
(5)  Persons who are authorized to escort others into a secured area must at all times direct and control the movement of the person or persons being escorted while within the secured area. 
(c)  Sanctions. The aviation general manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke SIDA badges; require security procedures retraining and assess fees arising out of violations of this section. A violator and/or violators company will be responsible for any monetary fees assessed by the aviation general manager and any additional fines imposed by FAA against the airport as a result of the violation. The aviation general manager is also authorized to impose progressive disciplinary measures for violations of this code section, which shall consist of the following: 
(1)  First offense: The aviation general manager will cause the issuance of a written citation notifying the individual of the specific security rule that has been violated, with a copy to the company responsible for the individual's SIDA badge. Within seven days of a final determination that a violation has occurred. Violators will be required to retake the airport's FAA required security awareness training class and may be assessed pay a $50.00 retraining fee. The aviation general manager may also assess a $250.00 fee against the responsible company based upon the severity of the violation and previous violations by employees of the company. 
(2)  Second offense occurring within 12 months of the first offense: The violator and his or her supervisor must meet with the airport security manager or his/her designee, they must together attend the airports FAA required security awareness training class. A fee of $100.00 may be assessed against the violator and a fee of $500.00 may be assessed against the violators responsible company based upon the severity of the violation and previous violations by employees of the company. Unescorted access privileges may be suspended for a period of up to 30 days. 
(3)  Third offense occurring within 24 months of the first offense: The violator's unescorted access privileges may be suspended for 12 months by the airport general manager. The violator may be accessed a $200.00 retraining fee and the violators responsible company may be required to pay a fee of $1,000.00 based upon the severity of the violation and previous violations by employees of the company. 
(4)  Revocation: Any person violating the provisions contained in this section shall be subject to the revocation of their unescorted access privileges and the confiscation of their SIDA badge. 
(d)  Process and appeals. 
(1)  Prior to the imposition of any fee, suspension, or revocation, of unescorted access privileges, the aviation general manager shall notify in writing the violator and the company that he or she works for, so that the violator or the company might present any defense that he or she may have to the proposed fee, suspension or revocation. Such defense shall be presented in writing or the violator or company may request to present the defense orally within three days of receipt of such notices of the proposed action. Notices of proposed actions shall be either delivered personally to the violator and the company or shall be mailed to the last known address of the company as same appears in the files of the airport. Such notices shall set forth the grounds upon which the proposed fee, revocation or suspension is predicated. 
a.  The violator and the responsible company may request that the aviation general manager reconsider a breach of security ruling and/or suspension of unescorted access privilege on behalf of its employee. 
b.  All appeals must be submitted in writing to Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Office of General Manager, Attention: Aviation Security Division, 6000 North Terminal Parkway, Suite 314, Atlanta, Georgia, 30320 or via facsimile at (404) 530-6839. 
c.  The appeal must arrive within 24 hours of the notice of a breach of security ruling or suspension. Failure to comply with this requirement may result in an immediate denial of the appeal. 
d.  The aviation general manager will issue a final ruling on the matter. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3005; Ord. No. 1999-77, § 2, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-04) 
Sec. 22-67. - Applicability of fire code. 
The provisions of the city's fire code are adopted by reference in this article and apply to the airport. Copies of the fire code are available from the municipal clerk and the department of fire. All fueling and defueling operations must comply with all applicable FAA regulations. 
(Code 1977, §§ 12-3051, 12-3052) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and fire safety standards, § 78-56 et seq. 
Sec. 22-68. - Smoking. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other smoking equipment in any manner or form. 
(b)  No person shall smoke or carry lighted cigarettes, cigars, pipes, matches or any open flame in or upon buildings and facilities owned or operated by the city department of aviation, except in designated areas. 
(c)  A smoking area may not be designated in: 
(1)  An elevator; 
(2)  A rest room; 
(3)  A service line, ticket line or over-the-counter sales area; 
(4)  A gate hold area, common traffic area or baggage claim area, unless such area is fully enclosed and ventilated, and there shall not be more than two such areas on any concourse; or 
(5)  A place in which smoking is prohibited by the fire code or other law, ordinance or rule. 
(d)  Each employer who operates a place of employment within the boundaries of Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International shall, subject to the other provisions in this section, maintain a written smoking policy consistent with this section that accommodates the wishes of smoking and nonsmoking employees by designating smoking areas. If a dispute arises, the preferences of nonsmokers shall be accommodated. However, the employer is not required to make structural or physical modifications to accommodate the smoking area, and existing physical barriers and ventilation systems shall be used to minimize the effect of smoke adjacent to nonsmoking areas. 
(e)  The management of a restaurant, bar or other eating establishment that has a seating capacity of more than 25 persons shall designate a smoking area proportionate in size to the number of customers normally requesting a smoking area. This policy does not prohibit a proprietor from designating a restaurant or bar in its entirety as a nonsmoking area. 
(f)  The management of a fully enclosed restaurant or bar with a seating capacity of less than 25 persons or a fully enclosed concession area with less than 4,000 square feet of retail floor space may designate the area in its entirety as a smoking area. If the restaurant, retail space or bar is designated in its entirety, that fact shall be posted conspicuously at all entrances to the premises. 
(g)  All persons responsible for implementing this policy shall post, in a conspicuous place, signs in any areas designated as smoking areas. The aviation general manager shall cause to have posted at all entrances to the terminal buildings and at the entrances of all city employee occupied buildings, signs stating: "Smoking is Prohibited Except in Designated Areas." 
(h)  All persons responsible for implementing this policy shall make a reasonable effort to prevent smoking by posting signs as required in this section and asking smokers to refrain from smoking in all areas not designated as smoking areas. 
(i)  This section does not prohibit an employer or other proprietor with a business located on airport property from adopting a more stringent policy. 
(j)  Each employer required to adopt a written policy under this section shall provide proof of same to the office of the aviation general manager within 120 days from the date the business begins to operate on airport property. 
(k)  The director of airport operations shall be responsible for implementing this section. 
(l)  Fully enclosed offices or rooms occupied exclusively by smokers shall be exempt from this section. 
(m)  Appropriate signage shall be installed throughout the public areas of the airport by the department of aviation, except that employers or tenants whose businesses are located in exclusively leased areas not ordinarily accessible by the general public may utilize their own design or signs so long as the signs are clearly visible and are not inconsistent with other department of aviation regulations or policies. 
(n)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any employer, tenant or other proprietor may delegate to the department of aviation, in writing, the responsibility of designating smoking areas within their respective areas. This provision shall not, however, relieve the employer, tenant or proprietor from the other requirements of this section. 
(o)  No person under the age of 18 shall be allowed to enter the designated smoking rooms provided by this section, and appropriate signage shall be posted to that effect. 
(p)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, §§ 12-3010, 12-3011; Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-04) 
Cross reference— Smoking generally, § 86-31 et seq.; smoking in certain areas within city buildings and facilities, § 106-9. 
Sec. 22-69. - Operation of common-use airport facilities; enforcement. 
The aviation general manager may establish and issue rules, procedures and regulations to govern the operation of passenger terminal building facilities, apron facilities, ramp locations and other airport facilities designated as common-use airport facilities by the aviation general manager and may, from time to time, revise such rules, procedures and regulations. All users of common-use airport facilities shall comply with any such rules, procedures and regulations. The aviation general manager may establish and collect fines and may provide for non-pecuniary penalties for the failure of any user of common-use airport facilities to comply with rules, procedures and regulations issued under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-24(07-O-0674), § 1, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 22-70. - Airside operating permit (AOP). 
(a)  General. Any company desiring to do business at the airport and requiring airside access, but does not have an executed lease or contract with the city, shall first apply for an airside operating permit (AOP). If a company is granted an AOP, the company and its employees shall comply with all City of Atlanta ordinances, including all rules, procedures, and regulations found in the airside operating permit terms and conditions. The aviation general manager or designee may, from time to time, revise such rules, procedures, and regulations. 
The AOP application shall be completed prior to the beginning of the security badging process. 
The AOP shall be valid for a period of 12 consecutive months from the date of department of aviation (DOA) approval. The AOP shall terminate at the end of 12 months. 
The permittee is required to pay the administrative fee only once within 12 calendar months of DOA approval. If the permittee returns to work at the airport within this specified time frame for another project, the permittee is required to reapply and update all application information for each project. 
The permittee shall reapply for the AOP prior to the end of 12 months. At the time of renewal, the permittee shall update all application information for each project and remit the administrative fee for the next 12-month period. 
The aviation general manager or designee reserves the right to review previous offenses and current financial standing with the city. The city reserves the right to deny the AOP renewal. 
The AOP fee shall be assessed by the aviation general manager or designee. A fee schedule shall be approved by the aviation general manager or designee at least 30 days prior to its implementation. 
A permit may be cancelled at any time by either party, upon not less than 15 calendar days notice in writing, to the other party. Cancellation shall not relieve the permittee of any liabilities or obligations incurred and accrued prior to the effective date of such cancellation. 
(b)  Sanctions. The aviation general manager or designee may, in the manager's discretion, suspend or revoke the AOP for a definite or indefinite period, or impose fines arising out of violations to any of the City of Atlanta ordinances or any terms and conditions of the AOP. The company shall be responsible for any monetary fees assessed by the aviation general manager or designee. The aviation general manager or designee is authorized to impose progressive disciplinary measures for violations of any city ordinance, which shall consist of the following: 
(1)  First offense: The company may be assessed a $250.00 fine. 
(2)  Second offense: The company may be assessed a $500.00 fine within 12 months of the first offense. 
(3)  Third offense: The company may be assessed a $1,000.00 fine within 12 months of the first offense. 
(4)  Suspension: The company's AOP may be suspended by the aviation general manager or designee. 
(5)  Revocation: Any company violating any city ordinance shall be subject to revocation of its AOP. 
(c)  Process and appeals. 
(1)  Prior to the imposition of any fine, suspension, or revocation, the aviation general manager or designee shall notify in writing the company so that the company may present any defense that the company may have to the proposed fine, suspension, or revocation. Such defense shall be presented in writing or the company may request to present the defense orally within three business days of receipt of such notice. Notices of proposed actions shall be either delivered personally to the company or shall be mailed to the last known address of the company as same appears in the files of the airport. 
a.  The company responsible may request that the aviation general manager or designee reconsider any fine, suspension, or revocation. 
b.  All appeals must be submitted in writing to Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Attention: Assistant General Manager of Airport Operations, Security, and Maintenance, 6000 North Terminal Parkway, Atlanta, Georgia, 30320 or via facsimile at (404) 209-4154. 
c.  The appeal must arrive within five business days of the imposed fine, suspension, or revocation. 
d.  The aviation general manager or designee will issue a final ruling on the matter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-37(09-O-1047), § 1, 7-13-09) 
Sec. 22-71. - Exterior mural displays on property leased from the city. 
Lessees of the city at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport shall be permitted to incorporate large murals on the exterior of buildings leased from the city or on buildings constructed on land leased from the city when the lease terms so provide and when such displays are, in the judgment of the aviation general manager, consistent with the marketing, public relations and operational strategies of the city and the department of aviation to ensure that the airport will maintain and improve its national and international ranking among airports. 
It is the purpose of this section to permit the large buildings which are unique to the environment of Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport to utilize exterior mural displays to provide a rich and varied visual experience for the general public, visitors and air travelers consistent with the operation of the airport in the public's interest and the city's intention to encourage and develop air transportation for the citizens of the state and in particular for the citizens of the greater Atlanta area. 
To that end, the city limits the use of exterior mural displays to the following leased areas: 
(1)  Airline hangars; 
(2)  Airline office buildings; 
(3)  Technical operation facilities; and 
(4)  Other like facilities as determined by the aviation general manager. 
In the areas listed herein above exterior mural displays may be permitted by lease(s) that meet the following criteria: 
a.  The lease shall contain the general consent of the city to allow exterior mural displays on the exterior of buildings leased from the city or on buildings constructed on land leased from the city; 
b.  The lease shall contain the lessee's agreement that the permission to utilize exterior mural displays is subject to the approval of the aviation general manager as set forth in section 22-64 of this Code; 
c.  The lease shall contain the lessee's agreement that the permission to utilize only the approved and specific exterior mural displays when granted by the lease is for the purpose of ensuring consistency with the marketing, public relations and operational strategies of the city designed to ensure that the airport will maintain and improve its national and international ranking among airports and is not an abridgement of the right of the lessee to express a viewpoint protected by the Constitution of the State of Georgia or the Constitution of the United States; 
d.  The lease shall contain the lessee's agreement that the permission to utilize exterior mural displays is not a right under the lease that may be assigned except with the express permission of the aviation general manager; and 
e.  No freestanding sign shall be permitted to be part of any exterior mural display without regard to whether such freestanding sign is attached to the building on which the exterior mural display is to be created. 
( Ord. No. 2013-58(13-O-1347), § 1, 11-27-13 ) 
Sec. 22-72. - Airport service contractor worker retention program. 
(a)  This section shall be known as the "Airport Service Contractor Worker Retention Program." 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Winning offeror is defined as an actual offeror who has been awarded a contract as defined in Atlanta City Code Section 2-1102. 
Service contract means a city contract of the department of aviation in excess of $100,000.00, or generating any amount of revenue for the city, including but not limited to providing food, beverage, retail or lounge services for airport passengers and with a contract term of at least one year where the services to be performed are substantially similar to the service contract recently terminated or expired (as opposed to the purchase of goods or other property). 
Service employee means any person employed as a service employee of a department of aviation contractor or subcontractor. 
Subcontractor means any business that is not a service employee who enters into a contract with a contractor to assist the contractor in performing a service contract and who employs its own service employees. 
Terminated or expired contract includes but is not limited to: (1) the completion of the service contract at the end of the contract term; (2) early termination of the service contract in whole or in part for any reason; (3) an amendment that reduces services provided under the service contract, in whole or in part, that subsequently requires the city to competitively procure for those reduced services. 
(c)  Service contract transition and retention requirements. Winning offerors who receive a service contract solicited by the city's department of aviation to replace an expired contract will be required to enter into an agreement with the city which will, among other things, require the following: 
(1)  To retain, for a 90-day trial employment period, service employees of the former employer with a service contract with the city that have been employed for at least the immediately preceding six months with that former employer, provided the service employee meets the following requirements: 
a.  passes the selected winning offeror's established requirements for background checks and drug and alcohol testing in addition to any applicable department of aviation security requirements; and 
b.  the employee desires to work for the winning offeror for the 90-day trial employment period. 
(2)  To evaluate each service employee retained from a former employer during the 90-day trial period. 
(3)  To offer the service employee continued employment under terms and conditions established by the selected winning offeror, subject to applicable city requirements, if in the sole discretion of the winning offeror the service employee's performance during the 90-day trial period is satisfactory. 
(4)  To refrain from releasing from employment the service employee during the 90-day trial period unless such release from employment is for cause as determined by the winning offeror. 
(5)  This section will not apply to managerial employees or executives, including those who would be so defined under the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
(6)  If at any time a selected winning offeror determines that fewer employees are required than were required by the former employer, the winning offeror will retain the service employees applicable in this Code Section by seniority, which should be based on original date of hire within the job classification. 
(7)  During the 90-day trial employment period, the winning offeror will be required to maintain a preferential hiring list of eligible service employees not retained by the winning offeror from which the winning offeror will hire additional employees if necessary. 
( Ord. No. 2017-82(17-O-1659), § 1, 12-13-17 ) 
Secs. 22-73—22-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FEES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 22-81. - Purpose of fees and charges. 
It is the purpose of the city in establishing charges, fees and tolls for the use of the airport to provide for the cost of constructing, paying debt service on maintaining and operating the airport, together with the incidental navigation facilities, and maintaining the airport in a reasonably safe condition. No part of such charges, fees and tolls shall be added to the general funds of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 12-2005) 
Sec. 22-82. - Payment of charges. 
Any user of the airport or any part thereof operating under written permission shall pay all charges and fees under the terms thereof. Any user operating without written permission shall pay all reasonable charges upon demand. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3008) 
Sec. 22-83. - Waiver of certain technical code permit fees. 
No contractor, subcontractor, tenant, subtenant or any other person shall be required to pay the fees specified for permits or inspections under the provisions of any plumbing ordinance or code; any electrical ordinance or code; any heating, ventilating or air conditioning ordinance or code; any sanitary or sewer ordinance or code; or any other similar code or ordinance which may be in force and effect in the city when the work requiring such permits and inspections: 
(1)  Is to be performed on the premises of the airport or the approaches thereto; 
(2)  Is directly related to airport facilities or access thereto; and 
(3)  Will be paid for in whole or in part by funds received from grants by the federal government. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3009) 
Sec. 22-84. - Transient aircraft servicing fees. 
All charges and fees due the city for service performed to or for transient aircraft at the airport or for damages caused by such aircraft at the airport shall be paid before such aircraft shall be cleared for departure from the airport, unless prior satisfactory credit arrangements have been made with the aviation general manager. 
(Code 1977, § 12-6002) 
Sec. 22-85. - Aircraft and equipment parking fees. 
(a)  Aircraft and equipment parked on aircraft parking and ramp areas, and equipment stored in equipment storage areas, assigned or leased to fixed base operators, airlines, or other airport tenants, shall be charged parking and storage fees as permitted under the respective lease/permit in effect governing said areas. In such case where the respective lease/permit does not specify the rates permitted to be charged, the rate shall be determined by the fixed base operator or the airline or other airport tenant, provided that in no case shall such rates exceed the rates then in effect for comparable areas under the control of the department of aviation and designated common-use areas. 
(b)  Aircraft and equipment parked on aircraft parking and ramp areas, and equipment stored in equipment storage areas, that are controlled by the department of aviation and designated as common-use areas by the aviation general manager, shall be charged parking and storage fees at the rate established by the aviation general manager. 
(Code 1977, § 12-6003; Ord. No. 2002-8, § 2, 3-5-02) 
Sec. 22-86. - Motor vehicle impound charges. 
If impound action is necessary for any motor vehicle at the airport, the following charges shall be assessed: 
(1)  A service fee of $25.00 for each vehicle impounded; and 
(2)  A storage fee of $2.50 for each day or portion of a day the vehicle remains impounded after the first day. 
(Code 1977, § 12-6004) 
Sec. 22-87. - Landing fees. 
(a)  Landing fees shall be assessed on all aircraft operations at the airport. The landing fees shall be payable to the city or its duly authorized representatives immediately upon landing at the airport, unless other arrangements have previously been made with the city in writing. Aircraft landing weights are gross weights as defined in section 22-56. 
(b)  The amount of the nonsignatory landing fee shall consist of a basic landing fee of $0.19 and an airfield improvements landing fee of $0.63 for a total landing fee of not less than $1.52 per 1,000 pounds based on the maximum certificated gross landing weight of the aircraft. 
(c)  Unless prior credit arrangements are established with the aviation general manager or host lessee, all landing fees and all other charges shall be payable to the city or host lessee prior to the departure of the aircraft concerned. If prior credit arrangements are made only with host lessee without the approval of the aviation general manager, the host lessee may be held responsible for the collection of the landing fee. When prior credit arrangements are established with the host lessee or the aviation general manager, the aircraft owner or operator shall be provided an invoice at a later date based upon the information submitted by the aircraft owner or operator or the host lessee. The aviation general manager shall determine what procedures and forms shall be used for billing purposes. 
(d)  Because the host lessee is performing a service for the city in collecting the landing fees and in so doing is incurring certain expenses, the host lessee shall be entitled to retain 15 percent of the gross landing fees collected in order to defray these expenses. 
(e)  If the operator of any aircraft required by this section to pay landing fees shall fail or refuse to do so, the aviation general manager is authorized to serve such operator or the owner of the aircraft with a notice that the city claims a lien upon the aircraft or any other aircraft of the owner or operator for the landing fees. Following the service of such notice, it shall be an offense against the city for the operator or owner of such aircraft to remove the aircraft from the airport or to move the aircraft to any point on the airport. 
(Code 1977, §§ 12-6011—12-6015; Ord. No. 1995-64, § 1, 10-7-95; Ord. No. 2001-1, § 1, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 2002-48, §§ 1, 2, 6-10-02; Ord. No. 2003-91, §§ 1, 2, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 2006-95, § 1, 12-13-06) 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2003-91, adopted Sept. 23, 2003, states: That the above increase in the non-signatory landing fee [subsection (b)] shall be effective on the 31st day after the date on which the Mayor of the City of Atlanta approves this ordinance, Sept. 23, 2003]. 
Sec. 22-88. - Security services fees. 
The aviation general manager shall be authorized to assess fees for the issuance of security badges, badge renewals and any other security services at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. A fee schedule shall be approved by the aviation general manager at least 30 days prior to its implementation. 
(Ord. No. 06-01, § 1, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 22-89. - Fees and charges for common-use airport facilities. 
The aviation general manager may establish and collect reasonable fees and charges for the use of common-use airport facilities and may, from time to time, revise such fees and charges. All users of common-use airport facilities shall be required to pay such fees and charges as provided in section 22-82. 
(Ord. No. 2007-24(07-O-0674), § 2, 5-14-07) 
Sec. 22-90. - Live fire training center fees. 
The aviation general manager shall be authorized to assess fees for any aircraft rescue and firefighting training or instruction provided at Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport's live fire training facility. A fee schedule shall be approved by the aviation general manager at least 30 days prior to its implementation. 
( Ord. No. 2015-29(15-O-1261), § 1, 6-24-15 ) 
Secs. 22-91—22-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERSONAL CONDUCT 
Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 22-101. - Lost and found articles; disposal of unclaimed articles. 
Any person finding lost articles in any area of the airport shall promptly deposit them at the office of the aviation general manager or with any city police officer on duty. Articles with an estimated value of $500.00 or more which are unclaimed within 60 days shall be disposed of to the highest bidder at public sale. Articles with an estimated value of less than $500.00 which are unclaimed within 60 days shall be disposed of on the open market and without the acceptance of bids. The estimated value of any personal property to be sold shall be in the sole and absolute discretion of the mayor or the designee of the mayor. Nothing in this section will be construed to deny the right of airport tenants to maintain lost and found services for property of passengers. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3031) 
Sec. 22-102. - Accident reports required. 
All persons involved in any accident at the airport, whether personal, aircraft or automotive, shall make a full report to the nearest official of the airport as soon after the accident as possible. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3032) 
Sec. 22-103. - Obedience to signs, fences and barricades. 
The public shall observe and obey all posted signs, fences and barricades prohibiting entry upon aircraft operations areas (AOAs) of the airport or governing the activities and demeanor of the public while on the airport. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3021) 
Sec. 22-104. - Sanitation. 
No person shall keep uncovered trash containers in any area of the airport. No vehicle used for hauling trash, dirt or any other materials shall be operated on the airport unless such vehicle is constructed to prevent the contents thereof from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. Areas to be used for trash or garbage containers shall be designated by the aviation general manager, and no other areas shall be used. Such areas shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3038) 
Sec. 22-105. - Disorderly conduct; intoxication. 
(a)  No person shall commit any disorderly, obscene or indecent act or commit any act of nuisance on the airport. 
(b)  No person shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in the airport, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3023) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 22-106. - Garbage disposal; use of comfort stations; food or beverages in transportation mall; expectorating. 
No person shall dispose of garbage, paper or refuse or other material on the airport property except in receptacles provided for that purpose or use a comfort station other than in a clean and sanitary manner or eat food nor drink beverages in the transportation mall or expectorate on the floors, walls or other surfaces of the CPTC. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3024) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 130. 
State Law reference— Littering generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 
Sec. 22-107. - Model aircraft and similar contrivances. 
No person shall operate or release any model aircraft, rocket, kite, balloon, parachute or other similar contrivance at or upon the airport without the prior written approval of the aviation general manager. This section shall not extend to the airport weather station when such activity is a regular operational function on its part. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3026) 
Sec. 22-108. - Pets. 
No person shall enter the terminal complex at the airport with any pet except the following: 
(1)  Seeing eye or hearing-ear guide or service dogs; and 
(2)  Pets that are to be or have been transported by air, provided that any such pets are in containers or are put in containers as soon as practical or leave the airport as soon as practical after being taken out of the containers. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3027) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 
Sec. 22-109. - Livestock. 
Except as provided in section 22-108 and except for livestock that are to be or have been transported by air and are properly confined for air travel, no person shall permit livestock or any other animal under such person's control or custody to enter the airport. Any such livestock or animal on the airport will be removed or otherwise disposed of by the aviation general manager. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3028) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 
Sec. 22-110 - Dangerous weapons prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall possess a dangerous weapon in any area of the airport. This includes, but is not limited to, all airport buildings, airport terminals, airfields. restricted parking lots, aircraft and vehicles using the airport, and any building that opens onto the airfield. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, dangerous weapon includes, but is not limited to, any explosives, razor, slingshot, spring stick, metal knucks, blackjack, sand club, sandbag, bow and arrow, any flailing, instrument consisting of two or more rigid parts connected in such a manner as to allow them to swing freely, which may be known as a nun chahka, nun chuck, nun cacao shuriken, or fighting chains, any disc of whatever configuration, having at least two points or pointed blades which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart, any mechanism designed to emit an electronic, magnetic, or other type of charge that exceeds the equivalency of a five milliamp 60 hertz shock and used for the purpose of temporarily incapacitating a person, which may be known as a stun gun, any mechanism designed to emit all electronic magnetic, or other type of charge or shock through the use of a projectile and used for the purpose of temporarily incapacitating a person, which may be known as taser. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Persons possessing a dangerous weapon that is properly encased for transshipment by air in accordance with the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) regulations: 
(2)  Federal, state, or local law enforcement officers required to carry dangerous weapons while in the performance of their official law enforcement duties; 
(3)  Persons who need the dangerous weapon while in the performance of their duties for legitimate airport purposes, such as armored security services personnel. 
(d)  The provisions of this ordinance do not apply to firearms or knives, as those terms are defined under state law. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3029; Ord. No. 2008-57(08-O-1256), § 1, 7-16-08; Ord. No. 2010-59(10-O-1719), § 1, 10-27-10) 
Sec. 22-111. - Travel on designated roads and rights-of-way. 
No person shall travel upon the airport other than on roads, walks or other rights-of-way provided for such specific purpose. Persons authorized access to the rampways may cross the rampways only at those points so marked as crosswalks and at no other point. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3030) 
Sec. 22-112. - Tampering or interference with aircraft. 
No person shall tamper or interfere with any aircraft at the airport or put in motion the engine of such aircraft or use any aircraft, aircraft parts, instruments or tools without permission of the owner or by specific instructions of the aviation general manager. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3034) 
Sec. 22-113. - Throwing paper, cigarettes and other refuse. 
No person shall throw paper, cigars or cigarettes, bottles or other material from the windows or roofs of any building or structure on the airport. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3035) 
State Law reference— Littering generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 
Sec. 22-114. - Picketing, marching, demonstrations and handbilling. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aviation general manager means the designated manager of the airport or that official's representative. 
Demonstration includes but is not limited to picketing, sit-ins, protest marches, speeches and acts ordinarily associated with demonstrating, such as parading, singing and display of placards. 
Picket includes any person who induces, informs or attempts to induce or inform anyone not to enter the airport or patronize a tenant therein or to observe the premises in question so as to ascertain who enters or patronizes the premises or who by any means follows employees or patrons of the airport so as either to observe them or attempt to persuade them to cease entering or patronizing the airport or tenants therein. 
Picketing includes the stationing or posting of one's person or of others to induce or inform anyone not to enter the airport or patronize a tenant therein or to observe the premises so as to ascertain who enters or patronizes the premises or to follow employees or patrons of the airport or tenants therein to observe them or attempt to persuade them to cease entering or patronizing the picketed premises. This section also applies to informational picketing conducted inside or outside the terminal buildings and concourses and handbilling conducted outside the terminal buildings and concourses. 
Restricted area includes the following: 
(1)  Any space exclusively leased to a tenant of the airport; 
(2)  Locations within 30 feet of any security checkpoint; or 
(3)  Any space reserved for particular uses, such as restaurants, restroom facilities, parking areas and baggage claim areas. 
(b)  Places where authorized. Picketing, marching and demonstrating at the airport shall be conducted only in the nonsecured public use areas which are authorized in writing by the aviation general manager. No such activity shall be conducted in any restricted areas at the airport. 
(c)  Permit. Any person or group of persons intending to picket or to demonstrate at the airport shall apply to the aviation general manager for a permit no less than 48 hours or more than 30 days in advance of the time picketing is scheduled to begin. The application shall include the dates and hours during which the activities are proposed to be carried out and the expected duration of the proposed activities. The aviation general manager shall respond to the application in a manner timely enough to accommodate the intended purpose of the picketing, but shall not respond later than 24 hours after entry of the application. In the review of the permit application, the aviation general manager shall exercise no judgment regarding the purpose or content of the proposed activities. However, the aviation general manager shall grant permits so as to ensure the proper and orderly functioning of the airport, as well as the safety and welfare of its patrons and employees. Each permit shall be issued for a period of 30 days. 
(d)  Number of persons allowed. 
(1)  The total number of persons engaged in picketing or demonstrating at any given time in each concourse shall not exceed two persons. 
(2)  If the number of persons desiring to picket or demonstrate in any given concourse at any one time exceeds the number specified in subsection (c)(1) of this section, the aviation general manager may impose such reasonable and equitable restrictions as to allowable dates or hours for the conduct of such activities as may reasonably be required to provide as fair and as equal an opportunity as possible for all persons desiring to conduct such activities, while ensuring the safe and efficient operation of the airport. 
(3)  The aviation general manager may move such permitted activities from one concourse to another and among the different concourses upon reasonable written notice to each affected person when, in the judgment of the aviation general manager, such move is necessary to ensure the safe and orderly operation of the airport. 
(e)  Restrictions. No picket line, picketing, demonstration or other assemblage shall be permitted in areas determined by the aviation general manager to be restricted areas nor shall it form any obstacle to the free ingress to or egress from any entrance to the airport or to any restricted area nor shall any portion of such entrance be barricaded, obstructed or interfered with in any manner as will prevent free ingress to or egress from the airport or any restricted area. 
(f)  Conduct of participants. 
(1)  All participants in any picket line, picketing, demonstration or other assemblage shall conduct themselves in an orderly manner. No participant shall indulge in any shouting, screaming or yelling or emit noise loud enough to disturb the patrons and employees in the safe and proper function of the airport. No participant shall engage in any abusive or threatening language or conduct, physical harm, molestation, harassment of persons, breach of peace or other unlawful conduct. Use of sound-amplifying or voice-amplifying apparatus or noise-making devices on the premises of the airport is prohibited. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in concert with others, by the use of insulting, threatening or obscene language, to interfere with, hinder, obstruct or intimidate another in the exercise of the other's lawful right to work or to enter upon the premises for the performance of any lawful vocation or to freely enter or leave any premises. 
(g)  Size of signs. Placards or signs shall not exceed the body width of the person carrying the sign or be no longer than two feet by two feet by four inches, whichever is larger. Placards or signs may be worn or carried but shall not be affixed to any wooden, plastic or other type of support. No signs shall be draped or affixed to any airport property. 
(h)  Storage of materials. Persons shall not store any literature or any other materials in any public use area or in any parking area, restroom facility, terminal door, stairway, vestibule or storage area used by the airport and its lessees where such materials will be an obstruction to persons using the airport facilities, or create a health, safety or security risk. Persons may store literature or other materials in a carry bag which must be carried or harnessed so as not to extend beyond the holder's body width. 
(i)  Conduct. Any activities conducted as prescribed by this section shall be conducted in a peaceful and orderly manner, without hinderance to or interference with the safe, orderly and efficient operation of the airport as set forth and enforced by and pursuant to the authority granted the aviation general manager. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3006) 
Sec. 22-115. - [Loitering prohibited.] 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in any waiting room, hold room, lobby, concourse, terminal or any other portions of the airport. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or remain in the airport for the purpose of lodging. As used in this section lodging means to sleep or remain for a period of time in any public area of the airport for the purpose of sleeping or using the airport for temporary accommodations except in a hotel located on the airport premises or except in the case of severe weather, delays in flights or flight equipment problems or other conditions causing disruption to airport activity which are beyond the control of the airport wherein such person is a ticketed passenger and is caused to remain at the airport. Notwithstanding the prohibition contained in this subsection, the aviation general manager may declare an emergency and suspend the operation of this subsection (b). 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit any persons from occupying such airport for the purpose of meeting or greeting arriving and departing passengers, or otherwise prohibiting persons with legitimate reasons from remaining on said premises. As used herein the term "legitimate reasons" shall mean but is not limited to being on airport premises for the purpose of shopping or dining at the airports shops or restaurants or observing arriving and departing aircraft in areas permitted by airport tenants or any other area designated, or to be designated for such purpose, by the aviation general manager. 
(d)  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impractical, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section a law enforcement officer shall: 
(1)  Afford the person the opportunity to explain their presence or dispel the alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity of such person, and 
(2)  Upon failure of such person to explain their presence in accordance with paragraph (c) above, advise the person that this section prohibits loitering and lodging at the airport as described herein, and afford the person the opportunity to leave the premises. 
(e)  Violations of this offense shall be punishable as set forth in code of ordinance section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 1996-41, § 1, 6-24-96) 
Sec. 22-116. - Rules and regulations governing skycap services. 
(a)  Any skycap employed by any airline or entity contracted with any airline to provide skycap services shall have a photographic identification card identifying the employee. Any skycap employed by, or pursuant to a contract provides service for, an airline who is issued a photographic identification (security badge) which provides access to the restricted areas of the airport, shall be issued a stamp or other identification as determined by the aviation general manager which shall be affixed to the photo ID at no additional cost. All others must obtain a photographic identification from the aviation general manager. The fee for such identification shall not exceed $10.00. 
(b)  Photographic identification cards issued by the aviation general manager are valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance or the last day of the month indicated on the identification card. The photograph identification card shall be worn above the waist and shall be visible at all times during which the person is engaged in skycap activities. 
(c)  Skycaps are prohibited from assisting persons arriving at the airport to take a departing flight by unloading their baggage at curbside locations outside the landside terminal buildings adjacent to baggage claim areas (as such curbside locations are shown in red on the diagram marked exhibit "A", hereby incorporated herein by reference and which is on file in the office of the municipal clerk and the office of the aviation general manager) or transporting their baggage from any of those locations to ticketing or baggage check-in areas of or adjacent to the landside terminal buildings. 
(d)  Skycaps shall not solicit or attempt to solicit, persuade or urge by words, gestures or otherwise, any person for the purpose of soliciting any person to hire any particular ground transportation provider. 
(e)  The aviation general manager shall be authorized to establish rules and regulations governing the conduct of skycaps consistent with other requirements of this section upon 30 days' written notice to the skycap and the companies. These rules and regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the aviation general manager. The aviation general manager may establish and revise such rules and regulations from time to time when necessary in order to protect the health, welfare and safety of persons and property and to facilitate the operation of the airport. 
(Ord. No. 1996-31, § 1, 6-10-96) 
Sec. 22-117. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article the following definitions will apply: 
Airport will mean the William B. Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport which is owned and operated by the City of Atlanta. 
Company will mean any corporation, partnership or other legal entity that employs skycaps to provide skycap services at the airport. 
Skycap will mean any person who is employed by an airline or another company to assist passengers in transporting their baggage: 
(1)  From any curbside location adjacent to the landside terminal buildings to curbside or terminal ticketing or baggage check-in areas; or 
(2)  From baggage claim areas in the landside terminal buildings to curbside or ground transportation service areas outside the landside terminal buildings. 
Skycap services will mean the services described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1996-31, § 2, 6-10-96; Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-04) 
Sec. 22-118. - Revocation or suspension of permits. 
(a)  The aviation general manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke the permission to provide skycap services at the airport of any skycap who violates section 22-116 of this Code or any of the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to section 22-116(c) of this Code, provided that such suspension or revocation by the aviation general manager shall comply with the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section. 
(b)  Prior to any revocation or suspension, the aviation general manager shall notify in writing the skycap and company that he or she works for that the skycap or the company might present any defense that he or she may have to the proposed suspension or revocation. Such defense shall be presented in writing or the skycap or company may request to present the defense orally within three days of receipt of such notice of proposed action. Notices of proposed actions shall be either delivered personally to the skycap and the company or shall be mailed to the last known address of the company as the same appears in the files of the department. Such notices shall set forth the grounds upon which the proposed revocation or suspension is predicated. 
(c)  The aviation general manager or her designee is also authorized to impose progressive disciplinary measures for violation of these rules and regulations which shall consist of: 
(1)  First offense will result in a verbal warning to the skycap along with a copy of the rules; 
(2)  Second offense will result in suspension of permission of the skycap to provide skycap services at the airport for one day; 
(3)  Third or subsequent offenses will result in suspension of permission of the skycap to provide skycap services for a period up to 30 days and/or revocation of such permit, in accordance with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1996-31, § 3, 6-10-96) 
Sec. 22-119. - Personal transportation devices. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Airport property shall include the airport terminals, concourses, air operations area (as defined in section 22-191), ramps and parking areas. 
Authorized employees shall include City of Atlanta/Department of Aviation employees, employees of the Atlanta Police Department, employees of the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department, employees of other local, state or federal law enforcement or public safety agencies or departments, employees of airlines, concessionaires, tenants, contractors and vendors approved by the Department of Aviation. 
Personal transportation devices ("PTDs") shall include, but are not limited to bicycles, tricycles, unicycles, skateboards, roller skates (including retractable roller shoes), rollerblades, recreational scooters, motorized or electric carts, Segways, hoverboards or any similar devices. The definition of PTDs shall not include any mobility aids or mobility devices used by individuals with disabilities as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12102. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any individual with a disability from operating a mobility aid or mobility device. 
(b)  Use and operation. 
(1)  No person shall operate any PTD on airport property except the following: Authorized employees and individuals with disabilities. 
(2)  Authorized employees may only use the following PTDs on airport property: bicycles, motorized or electric carts, Segways or other approved devices for airport business purposes. 
(3)  All PTD operators shall exercise reasonable care in the operation of PTDs at all times. 
(4)  All PTD operators shall operate their PTDs at the pedestrian speed of traffic. 
(c)  Transport and storage. Passengers traveling with PTDs must adhere to all laws and regulations imposed by the Transportation Security Administration ("TSA"), Federal Aviation Administration ("FAA") and the air carriers regarding security screening and storage of PTDs. 
(d)  Policies. The Aviation General Manager, or his designee, is authorized to issue written policies, directives, manuals, memoranda, notices or other documents to implement this section. 
(e)  Violations. Violations of this offense shall be punishable as set forth in City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances section 1-8. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08(16-O-1131), § 1, 4-27-16 ) 
Secs. 22-120—22-125. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Tenants and Lessees 

Sec. 22-126. - Use of equipment and facilities. 
All shops, garages, equipment and facilities at the airport are expressly for the conduct of the tenant's or lessee's business and operations. No person other than employees of the tenant or lessee shall use these facilities or loiter around such premises without individual and specific permission of the tenant or lessee. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3037) 
Sec. 22-127. - Duty of airline and fixed base operators for safety of premises. 
It shall be the sole responsibility of the airline operators and fixed base operators at the airport to see that, on the premises under their control, all gate chains and other public safeguards are continuously and conscientiously used in a manner to protect all persons. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3036) 
Sec. 22-128. - Cleanliness of floors. 
All tenants and lessees on the airport shall keep the floors of the hangars, hangar areas, terminal apron and ramp areas leased by them, respectively, or used in their operations clean and clear of oil, grease and other materials or stains. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3039) 
Sec. 22-129. - Storage of hazardous material and equipment. 
No tenant or lessee on the airport shall store or stack material or equipment in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to personnel or property. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3040) 
Sec. 22-130. - Parking and storing ramp equipment. 
All ramp equipment at the airport shall be parked and kept in a neat and orderly manner. No receptacle, chest, case or housing shall remain on the apron or ramp area which does not fit in with the general architectural and cleanliness standards of the installation. Final approval on these items rests with the aviation general manager. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3041) 
Sec. 22-131. - Maintenance of leased property. 
All tenants and lessees at the airport shall maintain their leased properties in a condition as to repair, cleanliness and general maintenance in a manner agreeable to the aviation general manager or in accordance with their individual lease agreements. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3042) 
Sec. 22-132. - Structural or decorative changes. 
(a)  No tenant or lessee at the airport shall effect structural or decorative changes, including signs, or additions of any type without prior written permission of the aviation general manager or in accordance with the tenant's or lessee's individual lease agreement. 
(b)  Any person desiring to erect or construct any building on the airport shall be required to submit plans and specifications for the building to the aviation general manager. The plans shall include a general layout, drawn to scale, showing the desired amount of ground actually required for the operation of such building, in addition to the portion occupied by the building proper. All buildings erected upon the airport shall conform to the airport building development standards, as well as the building code requirements of the city and shall be approved by the department of fire. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3043) 
Sec. 22-133. - Responsibility for damages. 
Tenants and lessees at the airport shall be fully responsible for all damages to buildings, equipment, real property and appurtenance in ownership or custody of the airport caused by negligence, abuse or carelessness on the part of their employees, agents, customers, visitors, suppliers or persons with whom they may do business. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3044) 
Sec. 22-134. - Delivery of goods or materials. 
No person shall make or cause to be made deliveries of goods, materials or merchandise to any premises within any airport passenger terminal building by way of routes which traverse public circulation areas of such building without specific written authorization from the aviation general manager. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3046) 
Sec. 22-135. - Removal of leasehold improvements and equipment. 
Approval may be granted for a tenant at the airport to remove leasehold improvements or equipment financed by the city only under all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The lease does not prohibit such removal and all conditions imposed by the lease upon such approval will be met; 
(2)  If the improvements to be removed were financed by the tenant, the tenant must agree to restore the premises to their original condition before such improvements were constructed or installed; 
(3)  If the improvements to be removed were financed by the city, the aviation general manager shall first make a determination of whether the improvements to be removed could be desirable for proper and efficient use of the premises in the future and: 
a.  If it is determined that the improvements might be needed in the future, the tenant must agree to pay to the city in cash, prior to removal, the unamortized principal balance of the cost thereof; or 
b.  If it is determined that the improvements will not be needed in the future, the tenant shall have the option to post with the city for the unamortized principal balance a letter of credit, payment bond or other form of rental payment guarantee acceptable to the chief financial officer, in lieu of paying the unamortized principal balance of the cost of such improvements; and 
c.  The tenant must agree to restore the premises to their original condition before the improvement was constructed or installed. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3047) 
Secs. 22-136—22-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DISTRIBUTION OF LITERATURE AND SOLICITATION OF FUNDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30; charitable solicitations, ch. 42. 

Sec. 22-146. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Area means any one of those areas which are numbered and circumscribed in red on the floor plan of the airport terminal building, which appears on a two-page diagram thereof, marked exhibit A, fully incorporated in this section by reference and on file in the office of the municipal clerk and the bureau of airport operations and safety. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3064) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-147. - Scope. 
Any person or organization desiring to distribute literature free of charge at any airport owned by the city or to solicit funds in the exercise of constitutional freedoms shall be permitted to do so in accordance with this article. The sale of literature shall be permitted only through airport newsstands or other appropriate concessions as determined by aviation general manager operating by virtue of a contract with the city or a contract with a city contractor. The city further prohibits the solicitation of funds which calls for the immediate exchange of such funds on the premises of the airport, except in designated locations. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3061) 
Sec. 22-148. - Violations. 
Any violation of this division shall constitute an offense for the purposes of section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3080) 
Sec. 22-149. - Registration required. 
Any person desiring to distribute literature or solicit funds at assigned locations on the premises of the airport shall first register with the aviation general manager by completing a registration form setting forth the following: 
(1)  If for a period longer than a single 24-hour period: 
a.  Full name, mailing address, and telephone number, if any, of: 
1.  The persons who will be distributing the literature or soliciting funds at the airport; 
2.  The persons or organizations sponsoring or promoting distribution of literature or solicitation of funds; 
3.  The contact person who will have supervision of and responsibility for the persons working at the airport; 
b.  The dates on and hours during which the distribution and/or solicitation are proposed to be conducted and the duration of the proposed activities; and 
c.  A description of the proposed activity, e.g., distribution of literature or solicitation of funds. 
(2)  If only for a single 24-hour period: 
a.  The full name of the person who will be distributing the literature at the airport; 
b.  The full name, mailing address and telephone number, if any, of the contact person who will have supervision of and responsibility for the persons working at the airport; and 
c.  A description of the proposed activity, e.g., distribution of literature or solicitation of funds. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3062) 
Sec. 22-150. - Issuance of identification card. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a registration form containing the information required in section 22-149(a), the aviation general manager shall forthwith issue the person an identification card which shall indicate that person's identification number and date of expiration and shall designate to which area of the airport that person has been assigned. The aviation general manager shall exercise no judgment regarding the purpose or content of the proposed activities and shall exercise no discretion over the issuance of an identification card under this section, it being the intent of this division that the issuance of an identification card by the aviation general manager shall be a routine, clerical and mandatory function. The identification card shall be issued for a period of 30 days. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a registration form containing the information required in section 22-149(b), the aviation general manager shall issue an identification card for a single period of 24 hours on a first come, first served basis for any unutilized or unassigned area of the airport that the person has been assigned. Registration forms for the identification cards to be used for Saturday and Sunday will be accepted and cards issued on the preceding Friday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(c)  Any persons distributing literature or soliciting funds shall keep the identification card on their person at all times while conducting the activity regulated hereunder and shall display such card in a conspicuous manner. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3063) 
Sec. 22-151. - Restricted areas. 
(a)  The distribution of literature at the airport shall be conducted only in the nonsecured, public use areas defined in section 22-146. Under no circumstances shall such activity be conducted: 
(1)  In any space exclusively leased to a tenant of the airport; 
(2)  Within 30 feet of any security checkpoint; 
(3)  In any space reserved for particular uses, such as restaurants, restroom facilities, parking areas or baggage claim areas; or 
(4)  At any location on the premises of the airport not designated as an "area" in section 22-146. 
(b)  The solicitation of funds and immediate receipt of such funds shall be conducted only on the sidewalk areas outside the north and south terminal buildings of the airport at locations designated by the aviation general manager. Persons conducting such activities shall not obstruct the ingress and egress of persons entering and exiting the airport terminal and shall not otherwise violate any of the regulations contained in section 22-158. 
(c)  The sale of literature or other printed material other than through airport newsstands, or other appropriate concessions as provided for in section 22-147, and the solicitation of funds which calls for the immediate receipt of such funds, is prohibited in the concourses and terminal buildings of the airport. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3065) 
Sec. 22-152. - Number of persons involved. 
(a)  The total number of persons distributing literature in areas 1 and 4 as defined in section 22-146 shall not exceed four at any one time. In areas 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 10 the total number of persons shall be limited to two at any one time. 
(b)  If two or more persons or organizations seek to use any one location at the same time, the commissioner shall assign the available areas between or among them as equally as possible. 
(c)  If the number of persons desiring to distribute literature at the airport exceeds the number specified in subsection (a) of this section, the aviation general manager may impose such reasonable and equitable restrictions as to allowable dates and hours therefor as may be reasonably required to provide as fair and as equal an opportunity for all such persons, while ensuring the efficient and effective operation of the transportation functions of the airport. 
(d)  The aviation general manager may move the areas for distribution of literature from one location to another and disperse such activity among the various areas upon reasonable notice to each affected person when in the judgment of the aviation general manager such is necessary to the efficient and effective operation of the transportation function of the airport. 
(e)  The total number of persons soliciting funds in the areas defined in section 22-151 as designated by the aviation general manager shall be limited to two persons in each area. If the number of persons desiring to solicit funds exceeds the numbers specified in this section, the aviation general manager may impose reasonable and equitable restrictions as to allowable dates and hours therefor as may be reasonably required to provide as fair and as equal an opportunity for all persons desiring to solicit funds, while ensuring the efficient and effective operation of the transportation functions of the airport. The aviation general manager is further authorized to move the areas for solicitation of funds which seek the immediate receipt of such funds from one location to another and disperse such activity among the various areas upon reasonable notice to each affected person when in the judgment of the aviation general manager such is necessary to ensure the efficient and effective operation of the transportation function of the airport. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3066) 
Sec. 22-153. - Prohibited activities. 
The distribution of literature and solicitation of funds referred to in this division shall be conducted strictly in conformity with the terms and conditions of this division. In conducting such activities, no person shall: 
(1)  In any way intentionally obstruct, delay or interfere with the free movements of any other person or seek to coerce or physically disturb any other person. 
(2)  Use any sound-amplifying or voice-amplifying apparatus or noise-making devices on the premises of the airport. 
(3)  Receive or accept any payment or donation of money from any person except as provided for in sections 22-151 and 22-152. 
(4)  Indicate in any way that such person is a representative of the city, the airport or any airline, or any other airport tenant. 
(5)  Repeatedly attempt to give literature or solicit funds to any person who has indicated that such person does not wish to accept the literature or to make a donation. 
(6)  Set up or use any table, counter or stand; however, chairs or stools may be used if approved by the aviation general manager. 
(7)  Drape or attach any materials to any booth provided by the city for conducting any activities referred to in this division nor drape or attach materials to any property of the city in the area provided by the city for conducting the activities referred to in this division. 
(8)  Wear or carry a sign or placard larger than two feet by two feet four inches in size. 
(9)  Misrepresent such person's identity or misrepresent the organization or purpose for which funds are being solicited. 
(10)  Persons shall not store any literature or any other materials in any public use area, or in any parking area, restroom facilities, terminal doors, stairways, vestibules or storage areas used by the airport and its lessees except in a carry bag which must be carried or harnessed so as not to extend beyond the holder's body width, where such materials will be an obstruction to persons using the airport facilities, or create a health, safety or security risk. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3067) 
Sec. 22-154. - Revocation or suspension of registration. 
(a)  The aviation general manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke the registration of any person who violates any of the terms, conditions or any of the rules and regulations of this division, provided that such suspension or revocation by the aviation general manager shall comply with the requirements of subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Prior to any revocation or suspension, the aviation general manager shall notify in writing the registered person that such person may present any defense that such person may have to the proposed suspension or revocation. Such defense shall be presented within three days for registrants who have been granted permission to distribute literature for periods in excess of five days. For registrants who have been granted permission of periods of less than five days, such defense shall be submitted within 24 hours. Such notices shall either be delivered personally or shall be mailed to the last known address of the registrant as the same appears in the files of the department. Such notices shall set forth the grounds upon which the proposed revocation or suspension is predicated. 
(c)  The aviation general manager shall further be authorized under emergency circumstances to revoke or suspend registration. If done verbally, it shall be followed by written confirmation, within 24 hours of such emergency revocation or suspension. 
(Code 1977, § 12-3068) 
Secs. 22-155—22-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - AERONAUTICAL ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 22-166. - General rules. 
(a)  Conformity to federal guidelines and orders. All aeronautical activities at the airport and all flying aircraft departing from or arriving in the airspace above the airport shall be conducted in conformity with the pertinent provisions of the FAA and United States Department of Transportation and orders issued by the aviation general manager. The FAA regulations for operation of aircraft on or about the airport are adopted by reference and shall have the same effect as if enumerated in this section. Copies are on file in the office of the chief controller, FAA, airport tower. All aircraft operators are requested to follow preferential runway procedures. 
(b)  Release of liability. The aircraft owner, pilot, agent or duly authorized representative agrees to release or discharge the city, its officers and its employees of and from liability for any damage which may be suffered by any aircraft and its equipment and for personal injury or death, except where such damage, injury or death is due solely to the negligence of the city. 
(c)  Liability for property damage. All persons using any part of the airport shall be held liable for any property damage caused by carelessness and negligence on or over the airport, and any aircraft being operated so as to cause such property damage may be retained in the custody of the city, and the city may have a lien on the aircraft until all charges for damages are paid. Any person liable for such damage agrees to indemnify fully and to save and hold harmless the city, its officers and its employees from claims, liabilities and causes of action of every kind, including attorney's fees, connected therewith and from the expenses of the investigation thereof. 
(d)  Accident reports. The pilot or operator of any aircraft involved in an accident causing personal injury or property damage shall, in addition to all other reports required to be made to other agencies, make a prompt and complete report concerning the accident to the aviation general manager. When a written report of an accident is required by the civil air regulations, a copy of the report may be submitted to the aviation general manager in lieu of the report required in this subsection. Persons on the airport who witness any aircraft accident are required to render a prompt detailed report thereof, including the names and addresses of all witnesses, to the aviation general manager. 
(e)  Removal of disabled aircraft. Subject to compliance with appropriate federal regulations, the aircraft owner shall be responsible for the prompt removal of all disabled aircraft and parts of such aircraft at the airport, as reasonably directed by the aviation general manager. If the aircraft owner fails or refuses to comply with such directions, the disabled aircraft or any and all parts thereof may be removed by the aviation general manager at the owner's expense and without liability for damage which may be incurred as a result of such removal. 
(f)  Authority to close airport and delay or restrict operations. The aviation general manager shall have the right at any time to close the airport in its entirety or any portion thereof to air traffic, to delay or restrict any flight or other aircraft operation, to direct refusal of takeoff permission to aircraft and to deny the use of the airport or any portion thereof to any specified class of aircraft or to any individual or group, when the aviation general manager considers any such action to be necessary and desirable to avoid endangering persons or property and to be consistent with the safe and proper operation of the airport. If the aviation general manager believes the condition of the airport to be unsafe for landings and takeoffs, it shall be within the aviation general manager's authority to issue or cause to be issued a NOTAM (notice to airmen) closing the airport or any portion thereof. 
(g)  Two-way radio communication. All aircraft landing and taking off at the airport shall have a properly functioning two-way radio capable of communicating, under normal conditions within ten miles, with the airport FAA control tower. 
(h)  Radio failure. Aircraft suffering radio failure at the airport shall acknowledge reading the tower when on the ground or in flight by blinking the navigation lights or movement of ailerons. 
(i)  Payment of rentals, fees and charges. The payment of rentals, fees and charges relating to the use of airport premises and facilities shall be made before takeoff. In lieu of such payment, satisfactory credit arrangements shall be made by the pilot or owner of the aircraft with the office of the aviation general manager before such pilot leaves the airport. 
(Code 1977, § 12-4001) 
Sec. 22-167. - Air traffic rules. 
(a)  In advance of any flight test, practice instrument flight or practice low approach to be conducted within the airport terminal control area, the pilot shall make the necessary arrangements with the FAA airport traffic controller on duty and shall receive clearance before starting such maneuvers. 
(b)  No experimental flight, stunt flying or ground demonstration shall be conducted on or above the airport without the express approval of the aviation general manager. 
(c)  The aviation general manager may delay or restrict any flight or other operations at the airport and may refuse takeoff clearance to any aircraft for any reason the aviation general manager believes justifiable. 
(d)  No motorless aircraft shall land or take off from the airport. 
(e)  No aircraft shall be operated on the surface of the landing area, public aircraft ramp and apron area, public passenger ramp and apron area, public cargo ramp and apron area or public aircraft parking and storage area: 
(1)  In a careless or negligent manner or in disregard of the rights and safety of others; 
(2)  Without due caution and circumspection; 
(3)  At a speed or in a manner which endangers unreasonably persons or property; 
(4)  While the pilot or other person aboard controlling any part of the operation thereof is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any narcotic or habit-forming drug; or 
(5)  If such aircraft is so constructed, equipped or loaded as to endanger unreasonably or to be likely to endanger persons or property. 
The aviation general manager shall have the right to deny the use of the airport to any aircraft or pilot violating city or federal regulations, whether at the airport or elsewhere. 
(f)  All aircraft operations shall be confined to hard-surfaced runways, taxiways and aprons. 
(g)  Taxiways shall not be used for takeoffs or landing of aircraft. 
(h)  No student pilot training will be permitted at the airport. 
(Code 1977, § 12-4002) 
Sec. 22-168. - Taxiing and ground rules. 
(a)  No aircraft engine shall be started or run at the airport unless a pilot or a certified airframe and powerplant (A & P) mechanic qualified to run the engines of that particular type of aircraft is attending the controls. Blocks shall always be placed in front of the wheels before starting the engine unless the aircraft is provided with adequate parking brakes. 
(b)  Aircraft on the airport shall perform warm-up or prolonged engine test operations only in approved areas. 
(c)  No person shall run the engine of any aircraft at any location on the airport in such manner as to cause damage to other aircraft or property or in such manner as to blow paper, dirt or other materials across taxiways or runways as to endanger the safety or operations on the airport. Starting engines shall be prohibited until proper clearance has been given by ground personnel and until all standard safety procedures have been met. Propeller and exhaust noises shall be kept to a minimum at all times. Operation of aircraft engines shall be restricted to qualified personnel. 
(d)  Aircraft shall be taxied in accordance with the prescribed taxiing patterns when any particular runway is in use. 
(e)  No person shall taxi an aircraft on the airport until such person has ascertained that there will be no danger of collision with any persons or objects. 
(f)  All aircraft shall be taxied at a safe and reasonable speed. 
(g)  Aircraft shall not be taxied, towed or pushed on any part of the field, runway or taxiway exits until specifically cleared to do so by ground control. 
(h)  No aircraft shall be operated on the airport in a careless or reckless manner. 
(i)  Any person damaging any light or fixture because of contact with aircraft shall report such damage to the aviation general manager immediately and shall be fully responsible for any costs required to repair or replace the damaged facility. 
(j)  No aircraft shall taxi between the airline passenger terminal gates and aircraft parked on the terminal ramp. 
(k)  Where taxiing aircraft are converging, the aircraft involved shall pass each other bearing to the righthand side of the taxiway, unless otherwise instructed by ground control. 
(l)  No aircraft shall be taxied into or out of any hangar under its own power. 
(m)  All aircraft being taxied, towed or otherwise moved at the airport shall proceed with navigation lights on during the hours between sunset and sunrise. 
(n)  Aircraft engines shall be started or operated only in the places designated for such purposes by the aviation general manager. Engine run-ups for test or maintenance purposes between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall be permitted only in specific locations approved by the aviation general manager for such purposes during such period. 
(o)  All repairs to aircraft or engines shall be made in the areas designated for this purpose. Minor adjustments and repairs may be performed on air carrier aircraft at gate positions on the terminal ramp when such repairs can be accomplished without inconvenience to other persons. Any aircraft being repaired at a gate position shall be removed immediately upon the request of the aviation general manager. No aircraft engine shall be run up for test purposes at any gate position. 
(p)  Aircraft and related equipment shall not be parked or stored on the airport except in areas and in the manner designated by the aviation general manager, or on premises leased for such purposes, and shall pay the parking fees established for the privilege of parking therein. Aircraft and equipment operators parking and storing aircraft and/or equipment at the airport shall do so at their own risk. 
(q)  Aircraft shall not be washed except in areas and in the manner designated by the aviation general manager. 
(r)  Any parts of the landing areas or runways temporarily unsafe or unavailable shall be clearly marked, both day and night, with standard instruction markers and when so marked are not to be used. 
(s)  General aviation and military aircraft shall not use any passenger gate of the central passenger terminal complex for boarding or discharging any passengers or crew nor shall any commercial aircraft arriving from an unsecured airport be allowed to discharge passengers into the concourse unless prior arrangements for security screening have been accomplished by the requesting carrier. 
(t)  No person or individual shall push back or power back any aircraft from gate areas or guide any arriving aircraft into gate areas unless at least two wing walkers are deployed. The wing walkers shall position themselves on each side of the aircraft to exercise pedestrian and vehicle control. No person or individual shall put into motion or cause to be put into motion any aircraft in such a manner that the movement of such aircraft presents an endangerment to persons or property. 
(Code 1977, § 12-4003; Ord. No. 1996-20, § 1, 5-13-96; Ord. No. 1999-70, § 1, 9-29-99; Ord. No. 2002-8, § 3, 3-5-02; Ord. No. 2015-21(15-O-1185), § 1, 5-27-15 ) 
Sec. 22-169. - Helicopter operations. 
(a)  Helicopter aircraft arriving and departing the airport shall operate under the direction of the FAA control tower at all times while in the airport terminal control area. 
(b)  Helicopter aircraft shall avoid fixed-wing aircraft traffic patterns and altitudes to the maximum extent possible. 
(c)  Helicopters shall not be taxied, towed or otherwise moved with rotors turning unless there is a clear area of at least 50 feet in all directions from the outer tips of the rotors. 
(d)  Helicopter aircraft shall not be operated within 200 feet of any areas on the airport where unsecured light aircraft are parked. 
(e)  During landings and takeoffs, helicopter aircraft shall not pass over any airport buildings, structures, their adjacent auto parking areas or passenger concourses. 
(Code 1977, § 12-4004) 
Secs. 22-170—22-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MOTOR VEHICLE TRAFFIC[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 150. 

Sec. 22-181. - Operator's license required; operation under influence of alcohol or drugs; access to restricted areas; markings of vehicles used for servicing aircraft. 
(a)  No person shall operate motorized equipment of any kind on the airport unless possessed of a current and valid motor vehicle operator's license nor shall any person operate any vehicle on the airport under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(b)  No vehicle shall have access to restricted areas of the airport without written authorization from the aviation general manager. No vehicle shall be given authorization to enter restricted areas of the airport without filing and maintaining with the aviation general manager a valid certificate of automobile liability insurance coverage for such vehicle from an insurer licensed to do business in the State of Georgia, in the minimum amount of $10,000,000.00 combined single limit for personal injury and property damage, naming the City of Atlanta, its elected officials, officers, agents, and employees as additional named insureds thereunder, and bearing an endorsement by the insurer that such coverage will not be modified or canceled without at least 15 days' prior written notice to the aviation general manager. 
(c)  Vehicles being operated by tenants on the ramp which are specifically designed for performing functions associated with aircraft servicing or related work and not designed for ordinary public roadway use shall be conspicuously and permanently painted or marked with the operator's company name, logo or colors or any combination thereof. These markings must be acceptable to the aviation general manager. 
(d)  Vehicles which require access to restricted areas on an occasional or nonrecurring basis may be granted such access when escorted by a vehicle which meets the requirements for such access including the requirements for automobile insurance coverage as set forth in paragraph (b) above, covering both vehicles. Any operator of such escort vehicle shall remain with the vehicle being escorted at all times and must assume all responsibility and liability for the actions of such vehicle and its operator. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5001; Ord. No. 1998-73, §§ 1, 2, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 1999-31, § 1, 3-5-99) 
State Law reference— Driving under influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 
Sec. 22-182. - General traffic rules. 
(a)  The traffic regulations in chapter 150 of this Code, insofar as applicable, shall apply to the airport as modified by this division. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, the aviation general manager shall establish regulations relating to traffic and traffic control and shall install official traffic control devices and signs pursuant thereto. These shall include but not necessarily be limited to regulations for parking, standing, stopping, one-way traffic, speed restrictions, crosswalks, safety zones, bus stops, matters pertaining to all forms of commercial ground transportation including but not limited to delivery vehicles of all kinds, traffic lanes, signal devices, limitations on roadway use and restricted areas. These regulations shall be filed in the office of the aviation general manager as well as with the municipal clerk. 
(c)  The aviation general manager shall cause to be erected all signs, markers and devices pertaining to traffic control within the boundaries of the airport. Failure to comply with the directions indicated on the signs, markers or devices erected or placed in accordance with this subsection shall be a violation of this section and of the applicable provisions of the traffic rules and regulations as contained in this Code. 
(d)  No person shall operate upon the airport premises any motor vehicle which: 
(1)  Is so constructed, equipped or loaded or is in such physical or mechanical condition as to endanger persons or property; or 
(2)  Has attached thereto any object or equipment, including that which is being towed, which drags, swings or projects so as to be hazardous to persons or property. 
(e)  Unless prior written approval is obtained from the aviation general manager, only motor vehicles licensed to travel on the public highways of the state shall be permitted on the airport streets, roads or aprons. 
(f)  No motor vehicle shall be parked on any portion of the AOA or landing area except those trucks and other vehicles necessary for the servicing of aircraft and the maintenance of the airport, all of which vehicles shall have complied with section 22-181. 
(g)  No vehicle shall be parked in a manner so as to block: 
(1)  The gates or emergency entrances to an AOA; 
(2)  Fire hydrants; or 
(3)  Building entrances and exits on the airport. 
(h)  No person shall park a motor vehicle in any place marked for parking of vehicles in such manner as to occupy a part of another marked space. No person shall park a motor vehicle in any area requiring payment for parking thereon without paying the required parking fee. 
(i)  All motor vehicles not licensed by the state shall be equipped with two headlights and one or more red taillights, and all lights shall be kept lighted between sunset and sunrise unless the vehicle is in a designated vehicular parking area. Operators of such vehicles shall dim or lower the beams of headlights or other lights on such vehicles when meeting an oncoming vehicle. All vehicles operated on the airport will be maintained in safe operating condition, especially with respect to brakes, steering gear and electrical systems. 
(j)  No person shall clean or make any repairs to motor vehicles anywhere on the airport other than in areas designated for this purpose, except for minor repairs necessary for a temporarily disabled vehicle, nor shall any person move or interfere or tamper with any motor vehicle or put in motion the engine or take or use any motor vehicle part, instrument or tool thereof without the permission of the owner or satisfactory evidence of the right to do so duly presented to the aviation general manager. 
(k)  Driving of motor vehicles across any passenger loading lane on the terminal apron is prohibited while aircraft are positioned at the gate, except in areas approved by the aviation general manager for multiple aircraft loading at each gate. 
(l)  All vehicles operating on or across taxiways or runways shall be equipped with a two-way radio and must be in continuous communication with the control tower, except when under escort by a vehicle properly authorized and equipped. 
(m)  Aircraft shall at all times have the right-of-way over other vehicular traffic. All vehicles shall pass to the rear of taxiing aircraft. 
(n)  Vehicles with permits to operate on the restricted areas of the airport shall not proceed closer than 225 feet to the edge of the runway or cross the runways prior to being cleared by the control tower. It is the responsibility of all vehicle operators to be conversant with the standard air traffic control light signals, whether or not the vehicle is radio equipped. 
(o)  No person operating a motor vehicle on the airport shall fail to give proper signals or fail to observe the directions of posted traffic signs. 
(p)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle at the airport overloaded or carrying more than that for which the vehicle was designed. No person shall ride the running board, stand up in the body of a moving vehicle or ride on the outside of the body of a moving vehicle or ride with arms or legs protruding from the body of a motor vehicle. 
(q)  Luggage trains shall not exceed a number of trailers to be prescribed from time to time by the aviation general manager. 
(r)  No vehicle shall be operated on the airport if it is so constructed or equipped or loaded as to endanger persons or property. 
(s)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle without having the exhausts protected by screens or baffles to prevent the escape of sparks or the propagation of flame in any hangar on the airport. 
(t)  Vehicles on AOA, when parking adjacent to the runway, must park parallel to the runway and at least 225 feet to the outside of the runway lights, except emergency equipment. 
(u)  When backing fuel tenders, a signal person must be available to guide the driver. The driver must remain in the vehicle cab and is forbidden to stand on the running board or fender while backing. Fuel tenders will at no time be blocked or so positioned as to prevent rapid removal of such tender. 
(v)  Only authorized city department of aviation, airport fire and airport police personnel in city or city-authorized vehicles shall be permitted to operate such vehicles within 150 feet of an active taxiway or upon or within 225 feet of an active runway. All other persons are prohibited from operating vehicles upon active runways and taxiways or within the boundaries described in this subsection without prior written authorization from the aviation general manager or unless escorted by authorized department of aviation, airport fire or airport police personnel. Operation of vehicles on or near active taxiways or runways shall at all times be in accordance with applicable rules and regulations promulgated by the aviation general manager or the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(w)  Authorized law enforcement officers shall when enforcing traffic regulations prescribed in this Code of Ordinances for violations of laws regulating applicable rules of the road such as stopping and parking in the restricted airfield operations area ("AOA") issue uniform traffic citations; as prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 and such citations shall be referred to the municipal court for adjudication. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5002; Ord. No. 1997-05, § 1, 1-27-97; Ord. No. 1999-70, § 2, 9-29-99; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 22-183. - Accident procedure. 
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident on the airport which results in injury or death to any person or damage to any property shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident, render such assistance as may be needed and give name, address, operator's license, registration number and the name and address of such driver's insurance company to any person or party to the accident or any police officer requesting such information. Any damage to city property shall be reported immediately to the city police. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5003) 
Sec. 22-184. - Speed limits. 
The speed at which motor vehicles may be driven on the streets and other vehicular traffic areas on the airport, including parking areas, shall be 25 miles per hour, unless otherwise indicated on signs posted and maintained by authority of the aviation general manager. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5004) 
Sec. 22-185. - Designated one-way drives. 
Vehicular traffic on the entrance and exit drives serving the airport terminal complex shall be one-way and shall be so designated by signs posted and maintained by authority of the aviation general manager. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5005) 
Sec. 22-186. - Public parking. 
(a)  No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, on the airport, except within areas designated therefor and then only in accordance with the regulations governing the use of the areas. 
(b)  Operators of motor vehicles using the public parking facilities at the airport shall observe and comply with regulatory and directional traffic signs for entering and departing the facilities and shall pay the posted parking charges for the right and privilege of parking therein. 
(c)  No person shall stop a motor vehicle for loading, unloading or any other purpose on the airport other than in areas specifically designated for such use and only in the manner prescribed by signs, lines and other means provided and only for the length of time posted. 
(d)  No person shall park any vehicle in any reserved parking area without a valid permit issued by the aviation general manager permitting parking in the reserved area. Each vehicle parking in the reserved area shall prominently display the identifying insignia provided by the aviation general manager or shall bear other markings acceptable to the aviation general manager, and every vehicle shall be parked only in the space or area specifically assigned to it. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5006) 
Sec. 22-187. - Impound procedures generally. 
(a)  The aviation general manager is authorized to create a vehicle pound to which automobiles and other vehicles may be removed from the airport by the police in the manner provided in this section. Such pound shall be located at such place as shall be designated by the aviation general manager. 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any place at the airport where parking is not permitted at that time or whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of the rules and regulations prescribed for the parking of vehicles at the airport, such vehicles may be removed and conveyed by any member of the police by means of towing the vehicle or other means to a vehicle pound. 
(c)  The officer impounding a vehicle shall enter such action on a log provided for such purpose at the police office at the airport. 
(d)  A fee in the amount established by the city to cover the cost of removal and storage for each day or fraction of a day the impounded vehicle is stored in excess of the first 24 hours such vehicle is impounded shall be assessed against the owner or other person having a right to possession of an impounded vehicle. 
(e)  Any person claiming a vehicle impounded under this section shall produce evidence of such person's identity and ownership or right of possession to the sergeant on duty in the police office at the airport. Upon payment of fees for removal and storage to the officer, such person shall obtain a release in the form of a receipt from a duplicate receipt book and shall in turn give a receipt for such impounded vehicle to the officer. Such receipt shall definitely identify the vehicle impounded and shall become a permanent record of the department of aviation. The police shall turn in to the department of aviation each day all monies collected from such fees. 
(f)  Impounded automobiles uncalled for as long as 30 days shall be disposed of in accordance with procedures set out in section 150-88. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5007) 
Sec. 22-188. - Impound procedures for parking lots. 
(a)  Whenever any motor vehicle has remained unclaimed for a period of 30 days, as determined by a regularly conducted parking lot inventory, in any of the public parking lots at the airport, the aviation general manager shall report such vehicle as unclaimed to the state revenue commissioner and shall be authorized to cause such vehicle to be removed to a vehicle storage pound where the vehicle shall be stored, subject to claim, for an additional period of 80 days. 
(b)  After the expiration of the 80-day storage period, the aviation general manager shall be authorized to cause the vehicle to be sold at public auction. For such purposes the aviation general manager shall put an advertisement in the newspaper in which the city's advertisements are published, describing the vehicle and giving such information about it as will put the owner or other persons having knowledge thereof in possession of the facts, stating that the auto is in the possession or control of the aviation general manager and that, at the expiration of ten days, it will be exposed for sale, at the place where the vehicle is kept or stored, and the proceeds shall be applied against the parking fees and storage and towing charges which have accrued and any excess will be deposited in the airport revenue fund. 
(c)  Any person claiming a vehicle impounded under this section shall produce evidence of such person's identity and ownership or right of possession and shall pay to the aviation general manager all parking fees and storage and towing charges which shall have accrued with respect to the vehicle, for which a receipt shall be given and an order issued to the person in charge of the pound to discharge the vehicle and to deliver the vehicle to such person. Thereupon, the impounded vehicle shall be surrendered by the person in charge thereof, who shall take a receipt for the vehicle. Such receipt shall identify the vehicle and shall become a permanent record in the office of the aviation general manager. 
(d)  Following the sale of such vehicle, the aviation general manager shall apply and dispose of any funds realized therefrom in the manner set out in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5008) 
Sec. 22-189. - Authorization to move vehicles. 
City police officers may remove or cause to be removed from any restricted or reserved areas, any roadway or right-of-way or any other area on the airport any vehicle which is disabled, abandoned or illegally or improperly parked or which creates an operational problem. Any such vehicle may be removed or caused to be removed by the police to the official vehicle impound area designated by the aviation general manager. Any such vehicle may be released or disposed of in accordance with sections 22-187 and 22-188. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5009) 
Sec. 22-190. - Delivery vehicles using curbsides of terminal. 
Use of the curbsides of the passenger terminal buildings on the airport by delivery vehicles of all kinds is prohibited without special authorization from the aviation general manager. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5010) 
Sec. 22-191. - Issuance of notices of violation ("NOVs") for the unsafe or improper operation of motor vehicles and for the implementation of safety regulations in the ramp areas. 
(a)  [ Generally. ] Section 22-191 of the Atlanta City Code be and hereby is amended. Designated supervisory and managerial personnel of the department of aviation may issue an NOV for the unsafe or improper actions of airport employees and other individuals present in the air operations area. NOVs may be issued for unsafe or improper acts that occur within the AOA, which will include the ramps, NLVR, and perimeter roadways. The specific offenses for which NOVs may be issued and the point values associated with each offense shall be promulgated by the aviation general manager. The offenses are described in the Ramp Safety Standards Manual, as it may be revised from time-to-time. The aviation general manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke driving or SIDA badge access privileges and require corrective training for such offenses. NOVs may be issued in addition to any uniform traffic citation that may be issued by the Atlanta Police Department. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Air operations area ("AOA") consists of all restricted ground areas of the airport, including taxiways, runways, loading ramps, vehicle roadways and parking areas. 
(2)  Movement area means the aircraft movement area that is under the control of the air traffic control tower, i.e. runways / taxiways. 
(3)  Non-licensed vehicle roadway ("NLVR") consists of the designated roadways available for vehicular traffic within the AOA. 
(4)  Non-movement area means the area, other than that described as the movement area, used for the loading, unloading, parking and movement of aircraft on the airside of the airport (including ramps, ramp areas and on-airport fuel farms). 
(5)  Safety management systems ("SMS") means the formal, top-down, organization-wide approach to managing safety risk and assuring the effectiveness of safety risk controls. It includes systematic procedures, practices, and policies for the management of safety risk. 
(6)  Security identification display area ("SIDA") means- the term "SIDA" has the same meaning given to that term in section 22-56. 
(c)  Violation sanction system. For the purposes of the sanction system, violations of Airport rules and regulations fall into four categories: Warning, Class I, Class II and Class III. The following point values are assigned to each category: 
• Warning — No points. 
• Class I — 1 point. 
• Class II — 2 points. 
• Class III — 3 points. 
(d)  Violations, sanctions and sanction points. The accumulation of sanction points will be tracked by the department of aviation and the following sanctions will be imposed: 
(e)  Warning notices: 
(1)  To companies. Warnings may be issued to companies for violations in accordance with the guidelines set forth in the Ramp Safety Standards Manual. 
(2)  To individuals. Warnings may be issued to individuals at the sole discretion of the person issuing the NOV for a Class I violation. Two or more warnings given to the same individual within a 365 consecutive calendar day period may result in the issuance of an NOV for a Class I violation to such individual. For the NOV to constitute a warning, the issuer must, at the time of issuance, provide in the violation details the notation "WARNING ONLY." 
(f)  Violations: 
(1)  Class I: For a Class I violation, the violator must view and pass the tests on the SMS module and the non-movement area driving module and/or such other prerequisites for driving on the AOA as may then be currently in force and effect. A Class I violation carries one sanction point. 
(2)  Class II: For a Class II violation, the violator must view and pass the tests on the SMS module and the non-movement area driving module and/or such other prerequisites for driving on the AOA as may then be currently in force and effect. In addition, all of the violator's driving privileges shall be suspended for two days. A Class II violation carries two sanction points. 
(3)  Class III: For a Class III violation, the violator must view and pass the tests on the SMS module and the non-movement area driving module and/or such other prerequisites for driving on the AOA as may then be currently in force and effect. In addition, all of the violator's driving privileges shall be suspended for seven days. A Class III violation carries three sanction points. 
A violator seeking a SIDA badge without driving privileges during a suspension must submit a completed badge application signed by the authorized signatory to the department of aviation's security division badge office and meet any and all eligibility requirements for badge issuance as established by the security division. 
(g)  Violation points accumulation; revocation of privileges. All SIDA badges are the property of the City of Atlanta. The aviation general manager may permanently revoke all of the violator's driving or SIDA badge access privileges under the following circumstances: (i) after the accrual of seven sanction points within any 12-month period; (ii) for a violator's failure to complete any required corrective training; or (iii) at any time deemed necessary due to the severity of the offense. 
(h)  NOV record. Each SIDA badge holder's NOV record will be maintained and tracked by the department of aviation for one year (12 months) after the most recent offense. 
(i)  Appeals process. 
(1)  NOV letters. After an NOV is issued, the aviation general manager, or his or her designee, shall issue a letter ("NOV letter") to the violator and his or her employer. NOV letters shall be mailed to the last known address of the company as same appears in the files of the airport security office. NOV letters may also be e-mailed if the company has an e-mail address on file with the airport security office. 
(2)  SMS review. If the violator or the employer seek to challenge the NOV, any defenses or challenges to the NOV must be presented in writing ("Request for Review") within three business days of receipt of the NOV letter by any of the following methods: 
a.  Mail: SMS Manager, P.O. Box 20509, Dept. of Aviation, Atlanta, GA 30320; or 
b.  E-mail: rampsafety@atlanta-airport.com or any e-mail address that the Department of Aviation subsequently designates; or 
c.  Hand delivery: SMS Manager, 6000 N. Terminal Parkway, Suite 4000, Atlanta, GA 30320. 
The SMS manager, or his or her designee, shall review the defenses and/or challenges presented by the violator or the employer and uphold, dismiss, or modify the NOV. A written notification ("SMS decision") shall be delivered to the company's last known address or last known e-mail address on file with the airport security office. 
(3)  Appeals. After the NOV has been reviewed by the SMS manager or his or her designee, the violator or the employer may request that the aviation general manager reconsider the ruling set forth in the SMS decision or the assessment of points issued for any Class I, Class II, or Class III violation ("appeal"). 
(3.1)  All appeals must be submitted to the aviation general manager or his or her designee in writing within 24 hours of receipt of the SMS decision by one of the following methods: 
a.  Mail: Aviation General Manager, P.O. Box 20509, Dept. of Aviation, Atlanta, GA 30320; 
b.  E-mail: rampsafety@atlanta-airport.com or any e-mail address that the department of aviation subsequently designates; or 
c.  Hand delivery: Aviation General Manager, 6000 N. Terminal Parkway, Suite 4000, Atlanta, GA 30320. 
(3.2)  The aviation general manager or his or her designee will issue a final ruling on the matter and will notify the violator and the violator's employer of the ruling. Such notices shall be delivered to the company's last known address or last known e-mail address on file with the airport security office. 
(4)  Additional procedures. In the event the due date for a request for review or appeal falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the violator or the employer may submit the request for review or appeal on the next business day. Failure to comply with this requirement may result in an immediate denial of the request for review or appeal. Depending on the severity of the offense, the aviation general manager may suspend or revoke driving or SIDA badge access privileges prior to the resolution of a request for review or appeal. 
( Ord. No. 2014-08(14-O-1087), § 2, 3-12-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-22(15-O-1186), § 1, 5-27-15 ) 
Sec. 22-192. - Reflective safety wear standards. 
All employees, contractors, vendors, tenants, and visitors must wear reflective safety wear at all times in the performance of their assigned duties. This provision applies to the air operations area, movement area, non-movement area and security identification display area of the airport as referenced in section 22-191. 
Definition . Reflective safety wear: Any clothing accepted as appropriate warning vests or other suitable garments marked with or made of reflectorized or high-visibility material that meets the requirement of American National Standards Institute 107. 
Violation and sanction system. 
(1)  For the purposes of the violation and sanction system, violations of 22-192 shall be a warning or Class I category. 
(2)  The accumulation of violation points will be tracked by the Department of Aviation and sanctions will be imposed as referenced in Section 22-191. 
( Ord. No. 2018-19(18-O-1296), § 1, 6-13-18 ) 
Secs. 22-193—22-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - GROUND TRANSPORTATION SERVICES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Vehicles for hire, ch. 162. 

Subdivision I. - General Provisions 

Sec. 22-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bus means any vehicle with a designed seating capacity of not less than 23 passengers. 
Car rental means any transaction in which a vehicle is made available to a person for any length of time from a fleet of vehicles maintained for such purpose and for which title to such vehicle remains in the rental or leasing company and in which no particular vehicle is reserved for the use of the renter. 
Contracted taxi service means prior arrangements for taxi service from a particular taxicab company or driver by or on behalf of a business, firm or other organization for its officers, employees, agents or customers. 
Consolidated rental car facility (CONRAC) means the facility to be designed and operated as a single, consolidated facility for the operation of all off-airport rental car companies and on-airport rental car companies at the airport. All customers utilizing the services of a car rental company shall be transported between the central passenger terminal complex and the CONRAC Facility by the use of a common transportation system. 
Courier vehicle means any motorized vehicle used to transport small packages, luggage or similar items to and from the airport, provided that such vehicle shall not have an overall length greater than 20 feet and shall be clearly marked in permanent lettering as to the name of the firm holding the permit to operate the vehicle. 
Courtesy vehicle means any motorized vehicle used to transport persons to and from the airport without a direct fee being paid by the persons transported for the service so rendered. The overall length of a courtesy vehicle shall not be greater than 20 feet, and each vehicle shall clearly display in permanent lettering the name of the hotel, parking lot, car rental firm or other establishment for which the service is being rendered, except that limousines as defined in this section shall not be required to display permanent lettering. 
Cruising means driving around the airport terminal roadways with the apparent purpose of soliciting patrons. 
Customer facility charge (CFC) means a charge imposed on each airport car rental transaction, which shall be a fixed uniform amount applied to each car rental transaction day of each customer's car rental contract and shall be added to the amount collected from the customer by every off-airport rental car company and on-airport rental car company. 
Driver means any driver for any permit holder as provided in this division. The definition of driver includes taxicab drivers, limousine drivers, sedan drivers and rideshare drivers. 
Ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit means the permit of a person, association, corporation or other organization to engage in the business of operating taxicab services, limousine services, or rideshare services at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. 
Limousine means any motor vehicle that meets the manufacturer's specifications for a luxury limousine with a designed seating capacity for no more than nine passengers with a minimum of five seats located behind the operator of the vehicle and which does not have a door at the rear of the vehicle designed to allow passenger entry or exit. No vehicle shall be permitted to be operated both as a taxicab and a limousine. 
Local airport taxicab means a taxicab which is authorized by permit to pick up passengers by prior arrangement at a location designated by the aviation general manager and to carry passengers to local destinations not more than five miles from the airport terminal complex, which destinations are within the corporate limits of College Park, Hapeville, East Point, Forest Park, Riverdale or within Unincorporated South Fulton County and North Clayton County. 
Metro area means the area within the counties of Fulton, Clayton, DeKalb, Gwinnett and Cobb. 
Minibus means any vehicle with a designed seating capacity of not less than 16 and not more than 22 passengers. 
Non-metro area means all areas outside the area of the five counties named in the definition of the term "metro area." 
On-airport rental car company means a commercial business entity that is engaged in the rental of passenger motor vehicles to customers at the airport, having rental transaction facilities at the airport, including, but not limited to, rental counters, vehicle storage areas and kiosks and having a concession contract, or lease with the city for the use of facilities on the airport. 
Off-airport rental car company means a commercial business entity that is engaged in the rental of passenger motor vehicles to customers at the airport but does not have transaction facilities at the airport and does not have a concession contract or lease with the city for the use of facilities on the Airport. 
Prearranged taxi service means prior arrangements for taxi service from a particular taxicab company or driver by or on behalf of an individual. 
Rideshare driver means an individual who uses his or her personal passenger car, to provide transportation for passengers arranged through a rideshare service. This includes transportation network company drivers, or individuals who use or permit to be used their personal vehicle to provide transportation network company services. Such drivers need not be employees of a transportation network company. 
Rideshare service means any person or entity that uses a digital network or Internet network to connect passengers to ride share drivers for the purpose of prearranged transportation for hire or for donation. This includes transportation network companies, or corporations, partnerships, sole proprietorships, or other entities that use a digital network or other means to connect customers to transportation network company drivers for the purposes of providing transportation for compensation including, but not limited to, payment, donation, or other item of value. The term shall not include emergency or nonemergency medical transports, and shall not include any corporate sponsored vanpool, which means a rideshare program sponsored by an employer in which the employer pays all or some of the costs associated with the transportation of its employees to a single work reporting location and all the vehicles used in the program have a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of not more than 10,000 pounds and are designed to carry not more than 15 passengers including the driver; or exempt rideshare which means: 
(1)  Government endorsed rideshare programs; 
(2)  Rideshare programs in which a rideshare driver seeks reimbursement for, or the rideshare participants pool or otherwise share, rideshare costs such as fuel; or 
(3)  The leasing or rental of a vehicle, in the ordinary course of the lessor's or renter's business, for rideshare purposes as part of a government endorsed rideshare program, or for rideshare under a contract requiring compliance with subparagraph (2) of this paragraph provided that such corporate sponsored vanpool or exempt rideshare is not operated for the purpose of generating a profit. 
Sedan means any sedan-type vehicle which has a seating capacity of not more than five passengers and the driver and which is classified as a luxury sedan by the IRS for tax and depreciation purposes and which renders service to the public not over fixed route on basis of telephone or written contract. 
Shuttle service vehicle means any bus, van or minibus used to transport persons to and from the airport under the provisions of a contract or permit between the company providing the shuttle service and the city. 
Taxi starter means the person authorized by the aviation general manager to assist taxi patrons in securing a taxicab in the taxi loading zone at the airport. 
Taxicab or taxi means any automobile that transports passengers; uses a taximeter; and is authorized to provide taxicab services pursuant to chapter 162, article II of this Code. 
Taxicab company means a person, association, corporation or other organization operating or intending to engage in the business of operating a taxicab or taxi. 
Taximeter means an instrument or device attached to a vehicle and designed to measure mechanically or electronically the distance traveled by such vehicle, to record the times the vehicle travels or is in waiting and to indicate the fare to be charged. 
Van means any vehicle with a designed seating capacity of not less than seven and not more than 15 passengers. 
Vehicle leasing means any transaction in which a vehicle is made available to a person for a period of at least one year under a lease agreement which gives title to such person or to such person's employer for the duration of such lease agreement and in which a particular vehicle is reserved at all times during the term of such lease agreement for the use of the lessee and no others. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5021; Ord. No. 1995-38, § 8, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2004-92, § 1, 12-10-04; Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 1, 9-28-16; Ord. No. 2017-27(17-O-1221), § 1, 5-15-17 ) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-202. - Fees. 
(a)  Established; permit application fee. Fees for the permits authorized under this division are established as set forth in this division. All applications for permits under this division shall be accompanied by a payment of $20.00 as an application fee. Additional fees shall be computed for each type permit in the manner set forth in this section. 
(b)  Vehicles for hire. To secure a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit, taxicab, commercial limousine, and rideshare companies shall be required to pay an annual permit fee which shall be $50.00 per vehicle to be operated at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, such fee not to exceed $100,000.00 per year. During the permit year, a ground transportation vehicle for-hire permit holder may increase the number of vehicles to be operated under its permit upon payment of the $50.00 fee, except that the total fee charged in one permit year shall not exceed $100,000.00 per year. 
(c)  Security fee. At the time a taxicab, commercial limousine, or rideshare company applies for, or renews, their ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit, such company shall be required to declare whether any of its vehicles to be operated in accordance with this division shall be operated by drivers that have secured or intend to secure aprivate background check certification authorized by state law in lieu of a for-hire license endorsement issued by the Georgia Department of Driver Services during the permit year. If at the time of the application or renewal, the ground transportation for-hire company indicates that any of such drivers shall have secured or intend to secure a private background check certification in lieu of a for-hire license endorsement, the company shall be required to pay an airport terminal security fee which shall be $2.35 per trip originating at the airport. 
(d)  Charter services. Fees for charter services shall be as follows: 
(1)  Charge for each available seat in a vehicle transporting passengers away from the airport, per seat shall be $0.10. 
(2)  Minimum charge based on the rate in subsection (d)(1) of this section shall be $2.00. 
(e)  Courtesy vehicles. Fees for courtesy vehicles shall be as follows: 
(1)  Rental car companies. A rental car company without a contract with the city, whose patrons are picked up at or from the airport and transported to such company's off-airport facilities, shall pay to the city a fee computed on the basis of a percentage of gross receipts derived from the patrons picked up at or from the airport, at the percentage rate of eight percent for each calendar year. 
a.  The term "gross receipts," as used in this subsection, means and includes all moneys paid or payable to such company by patrons picked up at the airport by or for such company for the following, regardless of when or where paid or whether or not paid and regardless of the manner in which or the place at which the orders for the vehicles are received: 
1.  The aggregate amount of time, mileage and service charges made for cash, credit, exchange or otherwise of every kind, name and nature. 
2.  All amounts paid or payable to such company for rental of vehicles supplied by such company to patrons picked up at the airport. 
3.  All amounts paid or payable to such company on any vehicles exchanged downtown or at any point where exchange for vehicles originally rented to patrons picked up at the airport is permitted. 
4.  All amounts paid or payable to such company for rental of vehicles supplied to patrons at any off-airport location. 
5.  All amounts paid or payable to such company for personal accident insurance policies sold by such company to patrons picked up at the airport and for other personal services approved by the aviation general manager. 
6.  All amounts paid or payable to such company for collision damage waiver or other charges that serve the same purpose, purchased by or for patrons picked up at the airport. 
7.  Credits given to patrons for such things as deposits and out-of-pocket purchases of gas, oil or emergency services, regardless of where made. 
b.  The term "gross receipts," as used in this subsection, shall not include the following: 
1.  Gas charges for vehicles rented at dry rates. 
2.  Charges to patrons for repairs to vehicles or property of such company damaged by such patrons. 
3.  Amounts collected from such patrons for federal, state, county or municipal taxes. 
4.  Amounts received for loss, conversion or abandonment of vehicles of such company. 
(2)  Hotel and motel courtesy vehicles. Fees for hotel and motel courtesy vehicles shall be as follows: 
a.  The charge for each vehicle used to transport patrons to and from the airport, per vehicle per year shall be $360.00. 
b.  The charge based on number of rooms in each hotel or motel, per room per year shall be $10.00. 
c.  The maximum annual charge based on the rates stated in subsections (e)(2)a and (e)(2)b of this section shall be $3,600.00 for hotels and motels located within a radius of two miles or less from the west curbside of the terminal or $2,400.00 for those hotels and motels located within a radius of more than two miles but less than five miles from the west curbside or $600.00 for those hotels and motels located a radius of five miles or more from the west curbside. 
(3)  Parking lot courtesy vehicles. Fees for parking lot courtesy vehicles shall be as follows: 
a.  The charge for each vehicle used to transport patrons to and from the airport, per year, shall be $360.00. 
b.  The charge based on number of available parking spaces in the lot, per space per year, shall be $10.00. 
(4)  Vehicle leasing company courtesy vehicles. The fees for vehicle leasing company courtesy vehicles shall be as follows: 
a.  The charge for each vehicle used to transport patrons to and from the airport, per year, shall be $360.00. 
b.  The charge based on number of trips through the courtesy vehicle loading area, per trip, shall be $5.00. 
(5)  Other courtesy vehicles. The fees for other courtesy vehicles, including apartment complexes, restaurants and organizations transporting their own personnel, shall be as follows: 
a.  The charge for use of a designated loading area, per year, shall be $120.00. 
b.  The charge for each vehicle used to transport residents, per vehicle per year, shall be $60.00. 
c.  The maximum charge based on the rates stated in subsections (e)(5)a and (e)(5)b of this section, per year, shall be $240.00. 
(f)  Metro area scheduled service. Metro area scheduled service permit holders shall pay a monthly fee to the city in the amount of five percent of the monthly gross receipts not in excess of $400,000.00 of gross receipts and seven percent of all monthly gross receipts in excess of $400,000.00 of gross receipts derived by the permit holder from transporting people to and from the airport. 
(1)  Maximum trip fees. Permit holders transporting people from the airport under this section may not charge per trip fees from the airport ("maximum trip fees") that exceed the following amounts: 
Downtown: ..... $16.50. 
Midtown: ..... $18.50. 
Buckhead: ..... $30.00. 
The aviation general manager may revise the maximum trip fees by issuing a written notice to permit holders at least 30 days prior to implementation. The geographical boundaries of Downtown, Midtown, and Buckhead shall be set forth in the permits issued pursuant to this section. 
(g)  Non-metro area scheduled service. Non-metro area scheduled service permit holders shall pay fees as follows: 
(1)  The charge for use of a designated loading area, per year, shall be $600.00. 
(2)  The charge for each vehicle in the company's fleet, per year, shall be $100.00. 
(h)  Courier vehicles. The fees for courier vehicles shall be as follows: 
(1)  The permit fee, based on the number of vehicles registered under the permit for airport service per year, per vehicle, shall be $100.00. 
(2)  The parking fee, in the amount of the applicable parking charge for the public parking lot where the loading area is located, shall be paid by the driver upon exiting the lot each trip. 
(i)  Commercial vans/minibus service. Fees for commercial vans/minibus services shall be as follows: 
(1)  The permit fee, based on the number of vehicles registered under the permit for airport service per year, per vehicle, shall be $100.00. 
(2)  The parking fee, in the amount of the applicable parking charge for the public parking lot where the loading area is located, shall be paid by the driver upon exiting the lot each trip. 
(Code 1977, §§ 12-5091—12-5099; Ord. No. 2009-16(09-O-0545), § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 2, 9-28-16; Ord. No. 2017-27(17-O-1221), § 2, 5-15-17 ) 
Sec. 22-202.1. - Vehicle for hire fees; ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits required. 
(a)  Taxicabs. 
(1)  All taxicabs entering the Airport's Taxi Assembly Area for the purpose of originating a trip from the Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport shall pay $1.50 as an access fee each time they enter the taxi assembly area. 
(2)  All taxicab operators must affix an airport issued AVI Tag to each vehicle operating at the airport in order to record the number of trips taken by taxicab operators at the airport. 
(3)  The AVI Tag shall be provided to taxicab operators at no cost. Any replacement AVI Tag shall be $25.00. 
(4)  Only taxicabs affiliated with a taxicab company holding a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit, and displaying an airport issued monthly or annual decal, shall be allowed to utilize the airport's taxi assembly area. 
(b)  Rideshare. 
(1)  All rideshare vehicles originating a trip from Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport shall pay $1.50 per trip as a loading and curbside access fee. 
(2)  All rideshare companies holding a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit must transmit the number of trips taken by their rideshare vehicle operators at the airport pursuant to an aviation general manager approved method. 
(3)  Only rideshare vehicles affiliated with a rideshare company holding a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit, and displaying an airport issued monthly or annual decal, shall be allowed to originate trips from Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, which shall include any utilization of the rideshare assembly area. 
(c)  Limousines. 
(1)  All limousine vehicles originating a trip from Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport shall pay $1.50 per trip as a limousine loading area and curbside access fee. 
(2)  All limousine companies holding a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit must transmit the number of trips taken by their limo operators at the airport pursuant to an aviation general manager approved method. 
(3)  Only limo vehicles affiliated with a limousine company holding a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit, and displaying an airport issued monthly or annual decal, shall be allowed to originate trips from Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. 
(d)  At no time shall a vehicle operate while displaying more than one airport issued monthly or annual decal. 
(e)  All ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holders shall comply with city Ordinances, state, and federal laws which are reasonably related to the operation of vehicles for hire. 
(Ord. No. 2009-16(09-O-0545), § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 3, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-203. - Permits required; administrative penalties, revocation, suspension or non-renewal of permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab, limousine, or rideshare vehicle, or other vehicle for hire, to transport or attempt to transport persons from the premises of the airport without obtaining a ground transportation vehicle for-hire permit in accordance with this division, and without paying the fees established therefor. 
(1)  Upon conviction by the municipal court, a violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a mandatory fine of no less than $300.00 and no more than $1000.00. 
(2)  The language in this code section shall not prohibit the municipal court from imposing a term of imprisonment in the city jail, and or a sentence of probation for a violation of this section in addition to the imposition of the mandatory fine set forth herein. 
(b)  (1)  The aviation general manager is authorized to prescribe specific administrative penalties to be assessed against ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holders for violations of this chapter. Such administrative penalties shall not exceed $1000.00 per violation. A table of such administrative penalties shall be made available for public notice by the aviation general manager on the Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport website and shall be on file with the municipal clerk's office. 
(2)  Administrative penalties assessed against ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holders for violations of this chapter may include fines, suspension, revocation, or the refusal to renew a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit. 
(3)  The procedures set forth in chapter 162 of the city of Code of Ordinances, section 162-29, 162-30, and 162-40 regarding the process for appeals of administrative penalties assessed against ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holders in accordance with this chapter shall be utilized. Any fines payable in accordance therewith, shall be payable by money order, certified check or cashier's check in the same manner as the fees set forth in section 22-202.1 of this article. 
(c)  (1)  Assessment of administrative penalties imposed as a result of a violation of this article may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal within 14 days of the date of notification of the assessment of such administrative penalty. 
(2)  The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of penalties or other enforcement decisions. 
(3)  In any appeal filed in accordance with this section, the ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holder shall be afforded an opportunity for an evidentiary hearing under judicial forms of procedure, after notice of the assessment of such penalties is served in person or by mail. 
(4)  The notice of assessment of administrative penalty shall include: 
a.  A statement regarding the time, place, and nature of the hearing; 
b.  A statement of the legal authority under which, and venue wherein the hearing is to be held; 
c.  A reference to the particular provision of this division allegedly violated. 
d.  A short and plain statement of the matters asserted including civil penalties assessed. 
(d)  In the case of all other permits issued in accordance with this article, the aviation general manager may revoke or suspend temporarily the airport ground transportation service permit granted under this division whenever it shall be determined that the holder of such permit has violated any section of this article, has made any false statement in the application for such permit, has been convicted of a crime affecting the permit holder's capability to provide service, is in default in payment of fees prescribed in section 22-202 or is otherwise in violation of any of the conditions of the permit. However, prior to any revocation or suspension, the aviation general manager shall notify in writing such permit holder that there appear to be grounds for the revocation or suspension of such permit and shall further notify such permit holder that the permit holder may, within five days, present any defense that the permit holder may have to the proposed suspension or revocation of such permit. The notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the permit holder as the address appears in the files of the department of aviation. Such notice shall set forth the grounds upon which the proposed revocation or suspension is predicated. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5082; Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 4, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-204. - Unlawful conduct; impoundment of vehicle for violation of permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for operator of any airport ground transportation service vehicle authorized under this division to: 
(1)  Cruise the premises of the airport for the purpose of soliciting business or fares. 
(2)  Park to load or unload passengers in any areas other than those designated by the aviation general manager. 
(3)  Fail to obey promptly any lawful command by any city police officer, airport operations representative or other duly authorized representative of the city. 
(4)  Fail to provide identification, logs and other documents that might be requested by any duly authorized representative of the city. 
(5)  Solicit or attempt to solicit, persuade or urge, by words, gestures or otherwise, including parking in any location, whether authorized by permit or not, for the apparent purpose of soliciting any person to use or hire a vehicle or accept transportation in a vehicle operated by a permit holder or any other person. 
(6)  Park in any area controlled by parking meters. 
(7)  Stop, stand or park on the upper level public curbsides of the terminal buildings, except while unloading passengers, unless the driver has in possession a valid written permit authorizing patrons to board the vehicle. 
(8)  Allow any personnel, other than the driver operating a vehicle, to enter the loading area designated by the aviation general manager for use by such operator at the airport, without separate, specific written permission from the aviation general manager. 
(9)  Allow a driver to leave the vehicle while in the designated loading area at the airport, except when assisting patrons in boarding the vehicle or loading luggage for patrons. 
(10)  Fail to instruct personnel to obey all terms and conditions and rules and regulations of the permit at all times. 
(11)  Fail to observe the schedule of arrival and departure times approved by the aviation general manager or changing a schedule without prior approval of the aviation general manager. 
(12)  Place any sign on airport premises without separate, specific prior written permission from the aviation general manager. 
(13)  Leave a vehicle unattended while in the designated loading area at the airport. 
(b)  The aviation general manager is authorized to impound any ground transportation vehicle which is operated upon the premises of the airport without the requisite permit provided for under this division or which is operated in violation of the conditions of a permit. If impound action is necessary, the action shall be carried out pursuant to section 22-187. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5081) 
Sec. 22-205. - Car rentals. 
Every person engaged in a car rental business who desires to serve passengers or other patrons at or from the airport shall comply with the following, in addition to any other applicable sections of this Code: 
(1)  No person shall carry on, conduct or engage in the business of renting motor vehicles to passengers at or from the airport in any manner, including but not limited to picking up patrons at or from the airport, without first either entering into a written contract with the city or obtaining a rental car courtesy vehicle permit from the aviation general manager. 
(2)  Except as provided otherwise by contract with the city or permit from the aviation general manager, no person shall solicit the rental of vehicles at the airport. 
Consolidated rental car facility (CONRAC). The aviation general manager shall designate a consolidated rental car facility at the airport. The CONRAC facility shall be designed and operated as a single, consolidated location for all off-airport and on-airport rental car company operations. All customers using the services of all on-airport and off-airport rental car companies will be transported between the central passenger terminal complex and the CONRAC facility by the use of a common transportation system. This designation becomes effective when the CONRAC facility begins operations, as determined by the aviation general manager. The aviation general manager shall likewise designate successor and substitute facilities. After a designation becomes effective: 
(1)  The designated CONRAC facility becomes part of the terminal complex at the airport; and 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing, controlling, or operating a commercial passenger vehicle to cause or allow any passenger to board the vehicle, or to alight from the vehicle, anywhere at the central passenger terminal complex or the airport's public parking facilities by use of an off-airport or on-airport rental car company courtesy bus, shuttle or other vehicle. All off-airport rental car companies shall pick up and drop off their customers at the CONRAC facility and all off-airport and on-airport rental car companies shall utilize the APM system to transport their customers. 
Customer facility charge. A resolution by the city council shall establish, and periodically adjust as needed, a daily customer facility charge to be added to each off-airport and on-airport rental car company's customer's car rental contract. 
(1)  The customer facility charges collected by the off-airport and on-airport rental car companies shall be held in trust by the off-airport and on-airport rental car companies for the benefit of the airport and shall be remitted to the city in accordance with procedures established by the aviation general manager. 
(2)  Off-airport and on-airport rental car companies and their agents hold only a possessory interest in the customer facility charge, and no legal or equitable interest. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5041; Ord. No. 2004-92, § 2, 12-10-04) 
Secs. 22-206—22-220. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Courtesy Vehicles 

Sec. 22-221. - Conditions for use of vehicles with permits. 
The aviation general manager is authorized to designate an area at the airport for the exclusive use of courtesy vehicles. Use of the area shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The company operating courtesy vehicles who desires to use such designated area shall, for each such vehicle: 
a.  Obtain from the aviation general manager a written permit authorizing use of such designated area at the airport; and 
b.  Pay the fee required for the permit. 
(2)  Courtesy vehicles shall be operated at the airport in accordance with procedures designated from time to time by the aviation general manager. 
(3)  Operators of courtesy vehicles or company personnel who may accompany them are prohibited from soliciting business in any manner at the airport. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5031) 
Sec. 22-222. - Conditions for use of vehicles without permits. 
With respect to the operation of courtesy vehicles at the airport without permits issued in accordance with section 22-221, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Courtesy vehicles without permits shall not cruise on the airport premises and shall enter upon the airport premises only to load or unload passengers or luggage for passengers who shall have previously requested the service. 
(2)  Drivers of courtesy vehicles without permits or company personnel who may accompany them are prohibited from soliciting business in any manner at the airport. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5032) 
Secs. 22-223—22-235. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Taxicabs Generally 

Sec. 22-236. - Conditions for use at airport. 
All ground transportation vehicle for hire permit holders operating taxicabs at the airport shall comply with the following, in addition to other applicable sections of this Code: 
(1)  Before being permitted to load passengers at the terminal complex, a taxicab must be operated under a Certificate of Public Necessity and Convenience (CPNC) in accordance with chapter 162, article II of this Code, the taxicab company with which such CPNC is affiliated must secure a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit in accordance with this article, and shall pay to the department of aviation, in the manner prescribed by the aviation general manager, the fees required for permission to load passengers, and each taxicab approved for operation at the airport shall receive a distinctive decal. There shall be no fee imposed for the issuance of this decal. 
(2)  Taxicab operators shall conduct their business at the Airport at places to be designated from time to time by the aviation general manager and in accordance with all laws and regulations applicable thereto. 
(3)  All taxicabs shall be stopped or parked only in such manner and in such areas as may be designated by the aviation general manager. 
(4)  Operators of all taxicabs, except contracted taxi service, local airport taxicab service or prearranged taxi service, as defined in section 22-201, shall not load passengers on the north or south curbsides of the terminal complex, but shall load passengers only in the designated loading zone on the west curbside in such manner as may be prescribed by the aviation general manager. 
(5)  Taxicab starters at the airport shall at all times be subject to approval by the aviation general manager. 
(6)  No person shall solicit taxicab fares at the airport. Upon request, taxicab drivers shall courteously inform any person of alternative means of ground transportation. 
(7)  Taxicab drivers shall refrain from cruising in taxicabs at the airport and shall pass through the taxi assembly area before entering the designated loading zone. 
(8)  Beginning on January 1, 2017, no taxicab having a vehicle age greater than seven years may be operated by a taxicab company holding a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit. For purposes of this article, the term "vehicle age" shall be determined based on the vehicle's model year, and a "year" shall be measured through the last day of that respective calendar year (for example, a vehicle with a model year of 2016 shall have a vehicle age of one year as of January 1, 2017). 
(Code 1977, § 12-5022; Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 5, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-237. - Contracted and prearranged service. 
(a)  At the airport, taxicabs providing contracted taxi service, for which a letter giving the name and address of such company or driver has been filed with the aviation general manager, shall be allowed to pick up arriving international passengers on the east end of the lower level curbside of the north terminal building, provided that: 
(1)  The letter has been filed with the aviation general manager; 
(2)  The driver shall have in possession while at the airport a completed log or other documentation showing the patron's name, destination, arriving flight number, arrival time and the relationship of the patron to the firm or organization who contracted for the service; and 
(3)  The driver shall remain with the vehicle at all times. 
(b)  Taxicabs providing prearranged taxi service shall be allowed to pick up arriving international passengers on the east end of the lower level curbside of the north terminal building in such manner and in such area as is designated by the aviation general manager, provided that: 
(1)  The driver of such taxicab shall have in possession while at the airport a completed log or other documentation showing the patron's name, destination, arriving flight number, arrival time and the date and time that the arrangements for the service were made and shall make the log available for inspection immediately upon request by any city personnel. 
(2)  The driver shall remain with the vehicle at all times. 
(3)  When prior arrangements are made by a taxi starter for a patron, the driver shall use the designated area only for loading patrons and not for parking and waiting. 
(c)  Taxicabs providing contracted taxi service, for which a letter giving the name and address of such company or driver has been filed with the aviation general manager, shall be allowed to pick up patrons in the inner lane of the west curbside south of the taxi starter's booth in an area designated by the aviation general manager, provided that: 
(1)  A letter from the contracting organization for whom the service is being provided, giving the name and address of the company or driver with whom the service has been contracted, has been filed with the aviation general manager; 
(2)  The driver shall first advise the taxi starter that the driver is present to make a contract service pickup and shall present proper evidence of such contract for inspection if requested prior to parking in the designated area; 
(3)  The driver shall have in possession a completed log or other documentation showing the patron's name, destination, arrival flight number and arrival time and shall make the information available for inspection immediately upon request from the taxi starter or any city personnel; and 
(4)  The driver shall remain with the vehicle at all times. 
(d)  Taxicabs providing prearranged taxi service shall be allowed to pick up arriving domestic passengers in the inner lane of the west curbside south of the taxi starter's booth in an area designated by the aviation general manager, provided that: 
(1)  The driver shall first advise the taxi starter that the driver is present to make a prearranged pickup and show the proper evidence of such arrangement if requested; 
(2)  The driver shall have in possession while at the airport a completed log or other documentation showing the patron's name, destination, arrival flight number and date and time that the arrangements for the service were made and shall make the information available for inspection upon request by the taxi starter or any city personnel; and 
(3)  The driver shall remain with the vehicle at all times. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5023) 
Sec. 22-238. - Unlawful conduct of driver. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a taxicab driver operating at the airport to do any of the following: 
(1)  Enter the taxicab assembly area with a passenger or an animal; 
(2)  Enter the taxicab assembly area without having first paid the requisite fee; 
(3)  Fail to pull up the taxicab while waiting in the taxicab assembly area to be notified of a fare; 
(4)  Make repairs to a vehicle, unless such repairs are for an emergency, i.e., a flat tire or dead battery or any other repairs that would be necessary in order to drive the vehicle; 
(5)  Litter; or 
(6)  Violate any laws of the state or any section of this Code. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the driver's permission to operate a taxicab from the airport. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5024) 
Sec. 22-239. - Inspections, generally. 
(a)  Taxicabs operated by taxicab companies holding ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits shall be subject to random inspection of taximeter and otherwise for compliance with this article while within the taxicab assembly area. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the inspection of a vehicle for hire based upon the reasonable suspicion of violations under this article by a code enforcement agent or police officer. 
(d)  There shall be no fees imposed for inspections performed under this article. 
( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-240. - Taximeters. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Basic distance rate means the maximum charge for distance for all intervals except the initial interval. 
Basic time rate means the maximum charge for time for all intervals except the initial interval. 
Cleared means a taximeter is inoperative with respect to all fare indication, when no indication of fare or extras is shown and when all parts are in those positions in which they are designed to be when the vehicle on which the taximeter is installed is not engaged by a passenger. 
Extras means charges to be paid by a passenger in addition to the fare, including any charge for the transportation of baggage. 
Face means that side of a taximeter upon which passenger charges are indicated. 
Fare means that portion of the charge for the hire of a taxicab that is automatically calculated by a taximeter through the operation of the distance or time mechanism. Any fares shall be the maximum fare which may be charged, but which shall not prohibit lower amounts being charged. 
Fifth wheel test means a distance test similar to a road test except that the distance traveled by the vehicle under test is determined by a mechanism known as a "fifth wheel" that is attached to the vehicle and that independently measures and indicates the distance. 
Flag means a plate at the end of the lever arm or similar part by which the operating condition of a taximeter is controlled. 
Hired means a taximeter that is operative with respect to all applicable indications of fare or extras. The indications of fare include time and distance where applicable unless qualified by another indication of the term "time not recording" or an equivalent expression. 
Initial distance of time interval means the interval corresponding to the initial money drop. 
Money drop means an increment of fare indication. The initial money drop is the first increment of fare indication following activation of the taximeter. 
Multiple-tariff taximeter means one that may be set to calculate fares at any one of two or more rates. 
Road test means a distance test, over a measured course, of a complete taximeter assembly when installed on a vehicle, the mechanism being actuated as a result of vehicle travel. 
Rolling circumference means the straight line distance traveled per revolution of the wheel that actuates the taximeter. If more than one wheel actuates the taximeter, the rolling circumference is the average distance traveled per revolution of the wheels. 
Simulated road test means a distance test during which the taximeter may be actuated by some means other than road travel. The distance traveled is either measured by a properly calibrated roller device or computed from rolling circumference and wheel-turn data. 
Single-tariff taximeter means one that calculates fares at a single rate only. 
Subsequent distance or time intervals means the intervals corresponding to money drops following the initial money drop. 
Taximeter means a device that automatically calculates, at a predetermined rate, and indicates the fares based upon distance, time and mileage. 
(b)  Criteria. All taxicabs shall comply with the following at all times, and all random inspections shall be conducted by the department at designated inspection stations and shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Taximeters. 
a.  Design of indicating elements. 
1.  Generally. A taximeter shall be equipped with a primary indicating element. 
2.  Advancement of indicating elements. Except when a taximeter is being cleared, the primary indicating elements shall be susceptible of advancement only by the rotation of the vehicle wheels or by the time mechanism. 
3.  Visibility of indications. Except when a taximeter is being cleared, indications of fare and extras shall be clearly visible at all times and at least ten mm high for the fare and four mm high for all other indications. 
4.  Actuation of fare-indicating mechanism. When a taximeter designed to calculate fares upon the basis of a combination of distance traveled and time elapsed is operative with respect to fare indication, the fare-indicating mechanism shall be actuated by the distance mechanism whenever the vehicle is in motion at such a speed that the rate of distance revenue equals or exceeds the time rate and may be actuated by the time mechanism whenever the vehicle speed is less than this and when the vehicle is not in motion. Means shall be provided for the vehicle operator to render the time mechanism either operative or inoperative with respect to the fare-indicating mechanism. 
b.  Operating condition. 
1.  Generally. Whenever the indicating elements of a taximeter are set to indicate a charge for the hire of the vehicle, the character of the fare indication shall be clearly shown on the taximeter face. When a taximeter is cleared, the indication "not registering," "vacant" or an equivalent expression shall be shown. 
2.  Single-tariff taximeter. Whenever a single-tariff taximeter is set so as to register charges, the indication "registering," "hired" or an equivalent expression shall be shown. 
3.  Multiple-tariff taximeter. Whenever a multiple-tariff taximeter is set so as to register charges, the basis for the particular tariff for which it is set shall be shown. 
c.  Extra charges. Extra charges shall be indicated as a separate item and shall not be included in the fare indication. They shall be identified by the term "extras" or by an equivalent expression. Values shall be defined by suitable words or monetary signs. 
d.  Protection of indications. Indications of fare and extras shall be displayed through and entirely protected by glass or other suitable transparent material securely attached to the housing of the taximeter. 
e.  Basis of fare calculations. A taximeter shall calculate fares only upon the basis of distance traveled, time elapsed or a combination of distance traveled and time elapsed. 
f.  Design of operating control. 
g.  Means of control. A control lever-arm knob, handle or other convenient and effective means shall be provided to set the taximeter mechanism for the desired operating condition and to clear the taximeter. 
1.  Positions of control. The several positions of the control lever shall be mechanically defined, and displacement from any of these positions shall be sufficiently obstructed that the accidental or inadvertent changing of the operating condition of the taximeter is improbable. Possible movement of this control to an operating position immediately following its movement to the cleared position shall automatically be delayed enough to permit the taximeter mechanism to come to complete rest in the cleared condition. 
h.  Provision for security seals. Adequate provision shall be made for affixing lead-and-wire seals to a taximeter and to other parts required for service operation of a complete installation on a vehicle so that no adjustments, alterations or replacements affecting in any way the accuracy or indications of the device or the assembly can be made without mutilating the seals. The sealing means shall be such that it is not necessary to disassemble or remove any part of the device or of the vehicle to apply or inspect the seals. 
i.  Distance test methods. To determine compliance with distance tolerances, a distance test of a taximeter shall be conducted utilizing one or more of the following test methods: 
j.  Road test. A road test consists of driving the vehicle over a precisely measured road course. 
1.  Fifth wheel test. A fifth wheel test consists of driving the vehicle in a simulated road test; 150 pounds or 70 kilograms of test weights may be substituted in lieu of the second person. 
2.  Tolerance values. 
3.  Distance tests. Maintenance and acceptance tolerances for taximeters shall be as follows: 
i.  On overregistration, one percent of the interval under test. 
ii.  On under registration, four percent of the interval under test, with an added tolerance of 100 feet or 30 miles whenever the initial interval is included in the interval under test. 
4.  Time tests on individual time intervals. Maintenance and acceptance tolerances on individual time intervals shall be as follows: 
i.  On overregistration, three seconds per minute (five percent). 
ii.  On underregistration, nine seconds per minute (15 percent) on the initial interval and six seconds per minute (ten percent) on subsequent intervals. 
k.  Time mechanism tests. The time mechanism shall be tested at least through the first five time intervals. 
l.  User requirements. 
1.  Position and illumination of taximeter. When mounted upon a vehicle, a taximeter shall be so located that its face can be seen by a passenger from the rear compartment of the vehicle. Adequate lighting facilities shall be provided for so illuminating the face of the taximeter that the indications thereof may be conveniently read by the passenger, and the face of the taximeter shall be so illuminated whenever the taximeter is in operation and artificial illumination is necessary for the convenient reading of its indications. 
2.  Statement of rates. The distance and time rates for which a taximeter is adjusted shall be given. 
(c)  Correction slip. If a vehicle for hire fails to pass the requirements of the department's inspection, a correction slip, issued to the company shall be given to the driver, listing the items that need correction and showing the status of the inspection. The vehicle shall not be operated as a vehicle for hire until it successfully passes inspection; provided that the police chief or the chief's designee, in the chief's discretion, for two periods not to exceed 15 days each, may allow the continued use of a vehicle for hire which substantially complies with the inspection requirements. The police chief shall forward to the company holder a copy of the correction slip. A re-inspection shall occur within one working day of a request by a holder of a correction slip. 
(d)  Responsibility for compliance. As a condition of their ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits, taxicab companies holding ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits shall be responsible for their and their drivers' compliance with this section, and may be cited in accordance with this division for any violations thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-241. - Taxicab comfort. 
(a)  Criteria. All taxicabs shall comply with the following at all times, and all random inspections shall be conducted by the department at designated inspection stations and shall consist of the following: 
(b)  Interior. 
(1)  The air conditioning and heating systems shall be inspected to ascertain that each is functioning properly. 
(2)  The upholstery, floor mats, headlining, door panels and the trunk compartment shall be inspected to determine whether they are clean, free of tears and that the trunk has sufficient space for passengers' luggage. 
(3)  Carpet remnants cannot be used to cover holes. Dirty carpet must be cleaned; if cleaning does not remove spots, carpet must be replaced. No staples or thumb tacks will be allowed to repair and/or replace headliners. 
(4)  No tape is allowed on any interior part of vehicle to repair damages (i.e., seats, arm rests, dash board or headliners). Any holes in carpet will require carpet to be repaired or replaced. 
(5)  The interior of each vehicle shall be in a clean condition and free of foreign matter and offensive odors. 
(6)  There shall be no litter in the vehicle or trunk and the seats shall be kept clean and without holes or large wear spots. 
(c)  Exterior. 
(1)  Grills of all vehicles must be in place and complete. 
(2)  Paint must be well-blended with the natural configuration and color of the vehicle. 
(3)  Paint and body repairs should have a smooth surface. 
(d)  Miscellaneous. 
(1)  A taxicab must be of a size and have a seating and cargo capacity approved by the airport general manager. 
(2)  No taxicab may be equipped with shades, curtains or any other vision obstructing devices. 
(3)  No taxicab shall have less than three doors for loading passengers, and each taxicab must be a station wagon, a sedan, a minivan or a sports utility vehicle. 
(e)  Correction slip. If a vehicle for hire fails to pass the requirements of the department's inspection, a correction slip, issued to the company, shall be given to the driver, listing the items that need correction and showing the status of the inspection. The vehicle shall not be operated as a vehicle for hire until it successfully passes inspection; provided that the police chief or the chiefs designee, in the chiefs discretion, for two periods not to exceed 15 days each, may allow the continued use of a vehicle for hire which substantially complies with the inspection requirements. The police chief shall forward to the company holder a copy of the correction slip. 
(f)  Responsibility for compliance. As a condition of their ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits, taxicab companies holding ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits shall be responsible for their and their drivers' compliance with this section, and may be cited in accordance with this division for any violations thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-242. - Taxicab minimum customer service requirements. 
(a)  Within 24 hours of the discovery of any personal property left by a passenger in a vehicle for hire, comply with a lost and found policy approved by the airport general manager. 
(b)  A driver shall take the most direct route to a passenger's destination unless otherwise authorized or directed by the passenger. The route taken must be visible to the passenger pursuant to a GPS based electronic route guidance system, which the passenger may follow in real-time. 
(c)  A taxicab driver must accept a credit card via an electronic payment method as a mode of payment in addition to cash; no credit card surcharges may be imposed. 
(d)  A taxicab driver shall not refuse to accept a passenger unless the passenger has demonstrated that they may be dangerous. 
(e)  No taxicab driver shall refuse to accept a passenger solely on the basis of that passenger's or perception of that passenger's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. No taxicab driver shall refuse to accept a passenger on the basis of the passenger's possession of a service animal, to include comfort animals. 
(f)  No taxicab shall be permitted to carry nonpaying passengers while transporting a paying passenger except for the purpose of driver training. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to operate the vehicle in a manner which threatens a passenger or anyone else or to threaten or otherwise abuse a passenger or for any passenger to abuse a driver, and it shall also be unlawful to discharge any passenger before reaching the passenger's destination unless the driver has a reasonable belief that the passenger is dangerous or unless street conditions do not permit a safe discharge. 
(h)  No television sets may be operated on the front seat on which the driver sits inside of a moving taxicab. 
(i)  Companies and CPNC holders shall be prohibited from refusing to display to department inspectors or law enforcement officers any information required by this Article, and shall be prohibited from failing to cooperate with department inspectors in performing their duties. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful to drive, or for taxi companies to allow to be driven, any vehicle for hire which does not have and display either a valid decal issued pursuant to this article or a correction slip; or any unsealed or improperly working taxi fare meter, as applicable. 
(k)  Completed electronically produced receipts must be offered to passengers showing the amount of fare paid, name of taxicab company and contact information, CPNC number, location of trip origination and location of trip termination, and duration of trip. The taxicab company must be able to electronically transmit the information contained in such receipts to the city upon request, and may not be hand written. Under no circumstances shall a customer's credit card number appear in full on any receipt. 
(l)  It shall be unlawful to carry a number of passengers that exceeds the seating capacity of the vehicle for hire according to the vehicle manufacturer's specifications. 
(m)  As a condition of their ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits, taxicab companies holding ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits shall be responsible for their and their drivers' compliance with this section, and may be cited in accordance with this division for any violations thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-243. - Ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit requirements for taxicab companies; application. 
(a)  No ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit shall be granted to a company owning or leasing less than 20 CPNCs to be operated at the airport (the airport operational fleet) except for any company which was authorized to operate pursuant to Chapter 162 of the city Code of Ordinances as of January 1, 2015. 
(b)  In order to secure a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit under this division, the taxicab company applicant must provide information showing its qualifications on a form provided by the city. The applicant must be: 
(1)  At least 18 years of age. 
(2)  A citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or otherwise granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  A resident, for at least one year immediately preceding the date of application, of the state. 
( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-244. - Criteria for maintaining permit. 
In order to maintain a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit issued under this division, the taxicab company must: 
(1)  Maintain an office within Metropolitan Atlanta, which is defined as including Fulton, DeKalb, Cobb, Clayton, Gwinnett, Paulding, Henry, Cherokee, Douglas, Rockdale, Fayette, Coweta and Forsyth counties staffed by company agents or employees, including a dispatcher, 24 hours a day. Companies may agree to have other companies perform this function to satisfy this requirement by providing name of company to city. Such companies shall inform the city when they have another company perform this function. 
(2)  Submit to the city a copy of a current lease, if applicable, for the company premises or an affidavit as to ownership and occupancy. 
(3)  Maintain a publicly listed telephone number and email address and ensure both have been provided to the city. 
(4)  Maintain the name and home address of each driver affiliated with the company, along with the name of the CPNC holder who owns or leases the vehicle operated by the driver. 
(5)  Maintain a log listing the year, make, license plate number and CPNC number of each vehicle for hire operating in the airport operational fleet. 
(6)  Maintain sufficient employees or answering devices at the office to answer the telephone after hours of company operation. 
(7)  Taxicab companies must notify the city of the number of taxicabs to operate at the airport under their ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit. 
(8)  Not provide the city with any false or misleading information. 
(9)  Either maintain vehicles capable of providing services to customers protected by all applicable federal, state, and local laws, including the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. §§. 12101 et seq., and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, or, alternatively, maintain a contractual agreement with another entity approved by the aviation general manager for the provision of services to such customers. Approval by the aviation general manager shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-245. - Report of changes, renewal, transferability. 
(a)  Under this subdivision any change of taxi company location must comply with section 22-244. The company shall provide notice in writing to the city, including the names of the persons involved, when applicable, within five working days of any of the following: 
(1)  Change in the chief executive officer, if a corporation. 
(2)  Change in the holder of 50 percent or more of the proprietary interest, if a partnership, corporation, firm or association. 
(3)  Change in company phone number and/or email address. 
(4)  Change of company name. 
(5)  Change of company location. 
(b)  After its initial issuance, a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit under this division shall be renewed no later than December 31 of the year the permit was issued, upon payment of all permit fees and the taxi company's providing proof that it continues to possess the requirements necessary to obtain and maintain such permit. 
(c)  All ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits issued in accordance with this subdivision shall expire on December 31. 
(d)  All ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits issued in accordance with this subdivision shall be non-transferable. 
( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-246. - Administrative penalties. 
(a)  In accordance with section 22-203(b), administrative penalties for the violation of this division may be issued. 
(b)  In addition to the violation of provisions of this article, administrative penalties may be issued for offenses which include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The failure of the taxicab company to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of the permit. 
(2)  Obtaining a permit by providing false information. 
(3)  Conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of any shareholder, partner or member of any corporation, partnership, firm or association holding a 51 percent interest or more in the entity of any violation of this article. 
(4)  Conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of any shareholder, partner or member of any corporation, partnership, firm or association holding a 51 percent interest or more in the entity of any of the following: Criminal homicide, rape, aggravated battery, mayhem, burglary, aggravated assault, kidnapping, robbery, child molestation, criminal solicitation to commit any of such, criminal attempt to commit any of such or possession, sale or distribution of narcotic drugs, barbituric acid derivatives or central nervous system stimulants if such violation is related to operation of the company or violation of any section of this Code or other ordinances of the city governing the conduct of holders of permits. 
(5)  Violation of any of the sections of this chapter or other ordinances regulating vehicles for hire or excessive violations of regulations governing vehicles for hire by drivers or CPNC holders affiliated with the taxicab company. 
( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 6, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-247—22-250. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Local Airport Taxicabs 

Sec. 22-251. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a local airport taxicab to pick up a passenger for hire upon the premises of the airport without first having obtained a permit authorizing such from the aviation general manager. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5042) 
Sec. 22-252. - Issuance of permit. 
The aviation general manager is authorized to issue a local airport taxicab driver's permit upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Any person desiring a local airport taxicab permit shall make a written application to the aviation general manager upon the forms to be furnished by the aviation general manager. Such application shall give the age and home address of the applicant and shall contain a statement whether the applicant has ever been convicted of the violation of any city ordinance or state or federal criminal law. If the applicant has been so convicted, a complete and detailed statement of such convictions must be furnished. 
(2)  Fingerprints of all applicants shall be taken. An applicant for a local airport taxicab permit shall file with the aviation general manager two photographs, size 2½ inches. 
(3)  No local airport taxicab permit shall be granted unless the applicant is at least 18 years of age and has been granted the appropriate state driver's license. 
(4)  A fee of $25.00 shall be paid to the city by each applicant at the time the original application is filed, and a fee of $15.00 shall be paid at the time of each renewal of the permit. 
(5)  Duplicate local airport taxicab permits may be obtained by the payment of a fee of $5.00. 
(6)  All funds received under this section shall be paid into the airport revenue fund, to be used for airport purposes. 
(7)  Each local airport taxicab permit authorized by this subdivision shall be renewed on an annual basis during the month of September of each calendar year. 
(8)  Such permit shall not be issued to any applicant who has been convicted, within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, of any of the offenses enumerated in section chapter 162, article II, division 3 of this Code. 
(9)  The aviation general manager may, in the manager's discretion, revoke or suspend for a definite or an indefinite period any local airport taxicab permit granted under this subdivision whenever it shall be made to appear that the holder of such permit has violated this subdivision, has made any false statement upon any application for a permit under this subdivision, or shall have been convicted for the commission of any of the acts or offenses set forth in section 162-77(9). 
(10)  Prior to any suspension or revocation as set forth in subsection (9) of this section, it shall be the duty of the aviation general manager to notify in writing any person holding a local airport taxicab permit that there appear to be grounds for the revocation or suspension of such permit and further notifying such permit holder that the permit holder may, within a period of five days, appear to present a defense against the proposed revocation of such permit. Such notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the holder of such permit as the address appears from the files of the department of aviation. Such notice shall set forth the grounds upon which the proposed revocation or suspension is predicated. 
(11)  All taxicab drivers operating under authority of the local airport taxicab permit shall be subject to the rules and regulations governing the conduct of such drivers contained in chapter 162 of this Code. 
(12)  All of sections 162-41 and 162-42 shall be applicable to taxicabs operated under authority of the local airport taxicab permit. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5043) 
Sec. 22-253. - Area of operation authorized by permit. 
Notwithstanding any other section of this Code, a local airport taxicab permit shall authorize a taxicab driver only to respond to calls from passengers located on the premises of the airport by coming onto the premises to pick up such passengers and by carrying them to their respective destinations; provided, however, that such local airport taxicab permit shall not authorize any taxicab driver to pick up any passenger on the airport premises whose ultimate destination is located: 
(1)  Within the corporate limits of the city; or 
(2)  More than five miles from the airport terminal complex. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5044) 
Sec. 22-254. - Airport pickup location. 
The aviation general manager shall provide at least one pickup point, to be located at a place to be determined in the aviation general manager's discretion at the airport terminal complex, which pickup point shall be used for picking up passengers by taxicab drivers operating under authority of the local airport taxicab permit. It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver holding a local airport taxicab permit to pick up passengers at any location at the airport terminal complex other than the pickup point designated for such purpose by the aviation general manager. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5045) 
Secs. 22-255—22-265. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Charter Services 

Sec. 22-266. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating vehicles available for charter to pick up a passenger or upon the premises of the airport without first obtaining a permit from the aviation general manager and without paying the fees established for such permit. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5051) 
Sec. 22-267. - Conditions for issuance of permits. 
A permit may be issued by the aviation general manager to a firm operating vans, minibuses or buses for charter at the airport upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Any person desiring such charter service permit must file an application with the aviation general manager on forms furnished by the aviation general manager. Such application will require all pertinent information the aviation general manager reasonably needs in order to ascertain whether the applicant is capable of providing safe, efficient and reliable charter service. 
(2)  Charter service is to be permitted only for organized groups with an affinity of interest, and it shall be unlawful for a permit holder or the permit holder's representative to receive a fee directly from an individual passenger. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5052) 
Secs. 22-268—22-280. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Buses, Minibuses and Vans 

Sec. 22-281. - Metro area scheduled services. 
(a)  Contract or permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a scheduled service using buses, minibuses or vans to transport persons from the premises of the airport to any point within the metro area, as defined in this division, without entering into a contract with the city or obtaining a permit authorizing such operation from the aviation general manager and paying the fees established for the permit. 
(b)  Issuance of permit. The aviation general manager shall be authorized to issue a permit to the operator of scheduled bus, minibus or van services between the airport and points within or outside of the corporate limits of the city who meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Furnish documentary evidence satisfactory to the aviation general manager that a demand for the service exists in a vehicle market in the locale to be served by the scheduled service. Such evidence shall include but shall not be limited to original records generated in the normal operations of an existing business, contracts with hotels or others for the service, letters from hotels or others requesting that the service be provided and published schedules. 
(2)  Own or control a sufficient number of buses, minibuses or vans which will make possible not less than hourly service from the airport to each locale served during 16 hours each day seven days per week. 
(3)  Own, control or otherwise provide for adequate vehicle maintenance in properly equipped facilities located no less than five miles from the airport or one of the locales to be served, which facilities are designed and staffed to properly maintain the operator's fleet of vehicles. 
(4)  Possess all certificates or permits required by the state, county or municipality having jurisdiction. 
(5)  Have demonstrated and continue to demonstrate fitness, willingness and ability to conduct the operations, including but not limited to compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(6)  Obtain and keep in force, during the term of the permit, liability insurance coverage for the vehicles and company's operations under the permit in the minimum amounts of $500,000.00 per person, $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, and $100,000.00 property damage. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation of permit. The aviation general manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke the permit of any permit holder who violates this section or section 22-204, provided that such suspension or revocation by the aviation general manager shall comply with section 22-203. 
(Code 1977, §§ 12-5061, 12-5062; Ord. No. 2017-27(17-O-1221), § 3, 5-15-17 ) 
Sec. 22-282. - Non-metro area scheduled service. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate vans, minibuses or buses for the purpose of transporting passengers between the premises of the airport and points outside the metro area, in such a way that any passenger pays a direct fee for the service so rendered, without first obtaining a permit from the aviation general manager and paying the fees established for the permit. 
(b)  Issuance of permit. Any person desiring a non-metro area scheduled service permit must make written application to the aviation general manager who may issue a permit to the person operating vans, minibuses or buses for providing ground transportation services between the premises of the airport and points outside the metro area. Application for such permit must be made on forms supplied by the aviation general manager, which application forms will provide for all pertinent information reasonably necessary for the aviation general manager to determine if the applicant is capable of providing safe, efficient and reliable non-metro area scheduled service. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation of permit. The aviation general manager shall be authorized to suspend or revoke the permit of any permit holder who violates this section or section 22-204, provided that such suspension or revocation by the aviation general manager shall comply with section 22-203. 
(Code 1977, §§ 12-5063, 12-5064) 
Sec. 22-283. - Airport shuttle service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate vans, minibuses or buses in such a way as to transport a passenger to and from the premises of the airport to points within the corporate limits of the city and the metro area in such a way as to charge the passenger a direct fee for the service so rendered without first having a written contract or permit with the city. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5065; Ord. No. 2017-27(17-O-1221), § 4, 5-15-17 ) 
Sec. 22-284. - Metro area commercial van/minibus services. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial service includes operation as a common or contract carrier transporting passengers. 
Commercial van service, commercial van/minibus service, metro area van/minibus service and commercial van/minibus operators include without limitation all common or contract carriers of passengers, other than charter service operators holding permits under section 22-267 and scheduled service operators holding permits under section 22-281(b), but shall not include any person providing service to and from points within the corporate limits of the city pursuant to a contract with the city. 
(b)  Permit or contract required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commercial service using vans or minibuses to transport persons from the premises of the airport to any point within the metro area without entering into a contract with the city or obtaining a permit authorizing such operation from the aviation general manager and paying the fees established for the permit. 
(c)  Conditions for issuance of permit. The aviation general manager shall be authorized to issue a permit to an operator of commercial van or minibus services who desires to pick up the operator's patrons from the airport, upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Any person desiring a metro area commercial van/minibus service permit shall file an application with the aviation general manager on forms to be furnished by the aviation general manager and provide all information reasonably required for the aviation general manager to determine whether the applicant is qualified to receive a permit; whether the applicant is fit, willing and able to conduct the operations, including but not limited to compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations; and whether the applicant is capable of providing safe and reliable service. 
(2)  Vehicles operated under a metro area van/minibus service permit shall not have an overall length greater than 20 feet and shall be clearly marked in permanent lettering as to the name of the firm holding the permit and operating the vehicles and the destinations served by such vehicles. 
(3)  The operator shall possess all certificates or permits required by the state, county or municipality having jurisdiction. 
(4)  The operator shall obtain and keep in force, during the term of the permit, liability insurance coverage for the vehicles and company's operations under the permit in the minimum amounts of $500,000.00 per person, $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, and $100,000.00 property damage. 
(Code 1977, §§ 12-5066, 12-5067) 
Sec. 22-285. - Operation procedures. 
(a)  When picking up patrons at the airport, commercial van/minibus operators shall park in the designated loading area or in a public parking facility and shall pay the applicable parking fee each time they depart from the parking facility. Commercial vans/minibuses shall be prohibited from using the area controlled by parking meters on the terminal curbsides. Failure to comply with this subsection shall subject the drivers to fines or other penalties established by law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a commercial van/minibus operation to have more than the maximum number of vehicles or to remain longer than the maximum length of time allowable, in a designated loading area, stated in the permit and posted in the designated loading area. 
(c)  Metro area van/minibus service operators shall not engage in any form of solicitation at the airport. 
(d)  Failure by any operator to comply with this section and with the special conditions set forth in section 22-284(c) for issuance of permits may result in either the suspension or revocation of the permit by the aviation general manager. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5068; Ord. No. 2017-27(17-O-1221), § 5, 5-15-17 ) 
Secs. 22-286—22-300. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VII. - Limousine Service 

Sec. 22-301. - Permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commercial limousine service to transport persons from the premises of the airport without obtaining a ground transportation vehicle for hire company permit pursuant to this division. It shall be unlawful to drive, or for limousine companies to allow to be driven, any vehicle for hire which does not have and display a valid decal issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  The aviation general manager may issue a ground transportation vehicle for hire company permit to an operator of commercial limousines, who desires to pick up patrons from the airport, upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Any person desiring an airport limousine permit shall file an application with the aviation general manager on forms to be furnished by the aviation general manager and provide all information reasonably required for the aviation general manager to determine whether the applicant is qualified to receive an airport limousine permit and is capable of providing safe and reliable limousine service. 
(2)  In addition to other conditions that might be imposed by the aviation general manager from time to time, limousine permits shall not be issued unless the applicant meets the following conditions, as a minimum: 
a.  The owner of the commercial limousine service and limousine drivers must comply with all requirements of the governmental jurisdiction where the limousine service is based and from which it is operated. 
b.  Public liability insurance coverage in the minimum amounts of $100,000.00 per person, $250,000.00 per occurrence, and $50,000.00 property damage shall be maintained in force and shall not be reduced, canceled or terminated for any reason without at least ten days' prior notice in writing by the insurer to the aviation general manager for each limousine to be operated under the permit. 
c.  All limousine service vehicles shall bear all valid inspection decals as required by state law and a permit decal issued by the aviation general manager pursuant to this division. 
(c)  After its initial issuance, a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit under this division shall be renewed no later than December 31 of the year the permit was issued, upon payment of all permit fees and the limousine company's providing proof that it continues to possess the requirements necessary to obtain and maintain such permit. 
(d)  All ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits issued in accordance with this subdivision shall expire on December 31. 
(e)  All ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits issued in accordance with this subdivision shall be non-transferable. 
(Code 1977, §§ 12-5071, 12-5072; Ord. No. 2010-48(10-O-1276), § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 7, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-302. - Operating conditions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any limousine service ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holder to transport any passenger from the premises of the airport unless prior arrangements have been made for and in the name of such passenger for such service. The prior arrangements must be made not less than one hour prior to the time the service is rendered. Drivers or other limousine personnel shall keep a log or other documentation with them while they are on airport premises, showing the patron's name, local destination, arriving flight number, arrival time, date and time the arrangement for the service was made, and shall make the information available upon request by any department of aviation personnel. 
(b)  Representatives, including drivers, of limousine services shall be permitted to meet arriving patrons in the public areas of the airport terminal and shall be permitted to assist patrons through baggage claim. 
(c)  Representatives, including drivers, of limousine services shall be permitted to meet patrons arriving on international flights at the lower level exit area of the international arrivals facility only in a location designated in writing by the aviation general manager. It shall be unlawful for any airport limousine ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holder or representative, including a driver, to meet patrons arriving on international flights in any other location in the terminal complex. 
(d)  No owner or driver of a limousine or any person connected in any way with a limousine ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holder shall at any time, by words, gestures or otherwise, attempt to solicit, persuade or urge any person to use or hire a limousine. 
(e)  When picking up patrons at the airport, the limousine operator shall park in the designated limousine loading area or in a public parking facility, shall pay the applicable parking fee each time and may load patrons at the terminal curbsides only when patrons are physically present and ready to board the limousine at the time the limousine arrives at the curbside. When loading patrons on the terminal curbside, drivers shall obey the posted parking regulations. Commercial limousines shall be prohibited from using the area controlled by parking meters on the terminal curbsides. Failure to comply with this subsection shall subject limousine drivers to fines or other penalties established by law. 
(f)  Limos operated by limousine companies holding ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits shall be subject to random inspection for compliance with this article while parked in the designated limousine loading area or in a public parking facility on airport property. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the inspection of a vehicle for hire based upon the reasonable suspicion of violations under this article by a code enforcement agent or police officer. There shall be no fees imposed for inspections pursuant to this article. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for a limousine operator to have more than the maximum number of limousines, or to remain longer than the maximum length of time allowable, in a designated limousine loading area, stated in the limousine permit and posted in the designated loading area. 
(h)  This section also applies to sedan drivers and operators. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5073; Ord. No. 1995-38, § 9, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2010-48(10-O-1276), § 2, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 7, 9-28-16) 
Secs. 22-303—22-315. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VIII. - Courier Vehicles 

Sec. 22-316. - Operating conditions for vehicles with permits. 
The aviation general manager is authorized to designate an area of the airport for the use of courier vehicles. Use of the area shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A company operating courier vehicles that desires to use such designated areas shall, for each such vehicle: 
a.  Obtain from the aviation general manager a written permit authorizing use of such designated area at the airport; and 
b.  Pay the fee required for the permit. 
(2)  Courier vehicles with permits shall be operated at the airport in accordance with procedures designated from time to time by the aviation general manager. 
(3)  Operators of courier vehicles with permits are prohibited from soliciting business in any manner at the airport. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5074) 
Sec. 22-317. - Operating procedures for vehicles without permits. 
With respect to the operation of courier vehicles without permits issued in accordance with section 22-316, the following will apply: 
(1)  Courier vehicles without permits shall use either the reserved parking spaces provided by the various airlines at the airport for use by couriers and small package express customers or shall use the public parking facilities and, if public parking facilities are used, shall pay the parking meter or other fee established therefor. 
(2)  Operators of courier vehicles without permits are prohibited from soliciting business in any manner at the airport. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5075) 
Secs. 22-318—22-329. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IX. - Rideshare Services 

Sec. 22-330. - Conditions for use at airport. 
All ground transportation vehicle for hire permit holders operating rideshare vehicles at the airport shall comply with the following, in addition to other applicable sections of this Code: 
(1)  Before being permitted to load passengers at the terminal complex, a rideshare service company must obtain a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit in accordance with this article, and shall pay to the department of aviation, in the manner prescribed by the aviation general manager, the fees required therefor. There shall be a distinctive decal issued for each vehicle approved for operation at the airport. There shall be no fee imposed for the issuance of this decal. 
(2)  Rideshare service operators shall conduct their business at the airport at places to be designated from time to time by the aviation general manager and in accordance with all laws and regulations applicable thereto. 
(3)  All rideshare vehicles shall be stopped or parked only in such manner and in such areas as may be designated by the aviation general manager. 
(4)  Operators of all rideshare service vehicles shall load passengers curbside in such manner and location as may be prescribed by the aviation general manager. 
(5)  While operating as a rideshare service driver, rideshare service drivers shall refrain from cruising in their vehicles at the airport and should pass through the rideshare assembly area before entering the designated loading zone. 
(6)  No vehicle operated pursuant to a rideshare ground transportation vehicle for hire company permit having a vehicle age greater than seven years may be operated. For purposes of this article, the term "vehicle age" shall be determined based on the vehicle's model year, and a "year" shall be measured through the last day of that respective calendar year (for example, a vehicle with a model year of 2016 shall have a vehicle age of one year as of January 1, 2017). 
( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 8, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-331. - Inspections, generally. 
(a)  Vehicles operated by rideshare service companies holding ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits shall be subject to random inspections for compliance with this article while within the rideshare assembly area. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the inspection of a vehicle for hire based upon the reasonable suspicion of violations under this article by a code enforcement agent or police officer. 
(d)  There shall be no fees imposed for inspections performed under this article. 
( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 8, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-332. - Rideshare minimum customer service requirements. 
(a)  Within 24 hours of the discovery of any personal property left by a passenger in a vehicle for hire, comply with a lost and found policy approved by the airport general manager. 
(b)  A driver shall take the most direct route to a passenger's destination unless otherwise authorized or directed by the passenger. The route taken must be visible to the passenger pursuant to a GPS based electronic route guidance system, which the passenger may follow in real-time. 
(c)  A rideshare driver must accept a credit card via an electronic payment method as a mode of payment, and may accept cash; no credit card surcharges may be imposed. 
(d)  A rideshare driver shall not refuse to accept a passenger unless the passenger has demonstrated that they may be dangerous. 
(e)  No rideshare driver shall refuse to accept a passenger solely on the basis of that passenger's or perception of that passenger's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. No rideshare driver shall refuse to accept a passenger on the basis of the passenger's possession of a service animal, to include comfort animals. 
(f)  No rideshare vehicle shall be permitted to carry nonpaying passengers while transporting a paying passenger except for the purpose of driver training. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to operate the vehicle in a manner which threatens a passenger or anyone else or to threaten or otherwise abuse a passenger or for any passenger to abuse a driver, and it shall also be unlawful to discharge any passenger before reaching the passenger's destination unless the driver has a reasonable belief that the passenger is dangerous or unless street conditions do not permit a safe discharge. 
(h)  No television sets may be operated on the front seat on which the driver sits inside of a moving rideshare vehicle. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful to drive, or for rideshare companies to allow to be driven, any vehicle for hire which does not have and display a valid decal issued pursuant to this article. 
(j)  Completed electronically produced receipts must be offered to passengers showing the amount of fare paid, name of rideshare company and contact information, location of trip origination and location of trip termination, and duration of trip. The rideshare company must be able to electronically transmit the information contained in such receipts to the city upon request, and may not be hand written. Under no circumstances shall a customer's credit card number appear in full on any receipt. 
(k)  It shall be unlawful to carry a number of passengers that exceeds the seating capacity of the vehicle for hire according to the vehicle manufacturer's specifications. 
(l)  A rideshare vehicle must be of a size and have a seating and cargo capacity approved by the airport general manager. 
(m)  As a condition of their ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits, rideshare companies holding ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits shall be responsible for their and their drivers' compliance with this division, and may be cited in accordance with this division for any violations thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 8, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-333. - Ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit requirements for rideshare companies; application. 
(a)  No ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit shall be granted to a rideshare company requesting less than 20 vehicle decals. 
(b)  Insurance Required. The permit applicant shall provide proof of liability insurance coverage, in accordance with OCGA Section 33-1-24, in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per incident covering all permitted ride share network service or ride share driver activity and which shall include an endorsement whereby the city, its elected officials, officers, agents, and employees are covered as additional insured. The permit applicant shall also provide proof of any other insurance coverage that may be required by law. 
(c)  Technology required. All rideshare ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit holders must possess the technological capability to connect its digital network or internet network to the airport's vehicle tracking software. Such connection shall enable the airport to track permit holder's ride share driver activity while on airport property and shall include technology solutions to prohibit rideshare drivers from appearing on a permit holder's digital network as available for hire while inside an airport perimeter to be designated by the aviation general manager, with the exception of the rideshare assembly area. The aviation general manager may establish a maximum number of ride share driver vehicles that may be within the airport perimeter designated by the aviation general manager at any given time. 
(d)  In order to secure a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit under this division, the rideshare company applicant must provide information showing its qualifications on a form provided by the city. The applicant must be: 
(1)  At least 18 years of age. 
(2)  A citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or otherwise granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  A resident, for at least one year immediately preceding the date of application, of the state. 
( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 8, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-334. - Criteria for maintaining permit. 
In order to maintain a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit issued under this division, the rideshare company must: 
(1)  Maintain the name and home address of each driver affiliated with the company. 
(2)  Maintain a log listing the year, make, and license plate number of each vehicle for hire operating at the airport. 
(3)  Rideshare companies must notify the city of the number of vehicles to operate at the airport under their ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit. 
(4)  Not provide the city with any false or misleading information. 
(5)  Either maintain vehicles capable of providing services to customers protected by all applicable federal, state, and local laws, including the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. §§. 12101 et seq., and section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, or, alternatively, maintain a contractual agreement with another entity approved by the aviation general manager for the provision of services to such customers. Approval by the aviation general manager shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 8, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-335. - Report of changes, renewal, transferability. 
(a)  The rideshare company shall provide notice in writing to the city, including the names of the persons involved, when applicable, within five working days of a change of company name. 
(b)  After its initial issuance, a ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permit under this division shall be renewed no later than December 31 of the year the permit was issued, upon payment of all permit fees and the rideshare company's providing proof that it continues to possess the requirements necessary to obtain and maintain such permit. 
(c)  All ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits issued in accordance with this subdivision shall expire on December 31. 
(d)  All ground transportation vehicle for-hire company permits issued in accordance with this subdivision shall be non-transferable. 
( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 8, 9-28-16) 
Sec. 22-336. - Administrative penalties. 
(a)  In accordance with section 22-203(b), administrative penalties for the violation of this division may be issued. 
(b)  In addition to the violation of provisions of this article, administrative penalties may be issued for offenses which include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The failure of the rideshare company to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of the permit. 
(2)  Obtaining a permit by providing false information. 
(3)  Violation of any of the sections of this Code or other ordinances regulating vehicles for hire or excessive violations of regulations governing vehicles for hire by drivers affiliated with the rideshare company. 
( Ord. No. 2016-32(16-O-1468) , § 8, 9-28-16) 
Chapter 30 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Vending machines on city property and in city facilities, § 2-3; advertising, ch. 6; dealers and manufacturers of alcoholic beverages, § 10-31 et seq.; amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; use of Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport for commercial operations generally, § 22-63; distribution of literature and solicitation of funds at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, § 22-146 et seq.; cable communications, ch. 34; consumer protection, ch. 58; motor vehicle repairs, § 58-36 et seq.; close out and similar sales, § 58-61 et seq.; burglar or robbery alarm systems, § 70-26 et seq.; indoor air, § 86-31 et seq.; sale of goods, articles or services in parks, § 110-62; secondhand goods, ch. 122; obstructing sidewalks by display or sale of goods, § 138-45; taxation, ch. 146; urban enterprise zones, § 146-51 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 162. 
Land development code reference— Commercial, institutional and industrial building maintenance code, § 8-2079 et seq. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; professions and businesses, O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Identification of coin-operated vending machines or amusement devices. 
(a)  Each coin-operated vending machine or amusement device situated, operated, maintained or used within the city shall have conspicuously stamped upon it or affixed thereon for identification purposes the name, address and telephone number, if any, of the owner thereof. The identification shall be provided by the owner of the machine at the owner's expense. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner and operator of any public premises to permit any coin-operated vending machine or amusement device on the premises unless the coin-operated vending machine or amusement device shall have conspicuously stamped upon it or affixed thereon for identification purposes the name, address and telephone number, if any, of the owner thereof, as required in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5192) 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; vending on public property, § 30-1401 et seq.; newspaper vending devices, § 138-156 et seq. 
Sec. 30-2. - Endless chain business. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on in the city an endless chain retail merchandising store or business of any kind. 
(b)  Scope of section. Such a business is defined as: 
(1)  One where the dealer sells to a customer for a certain sum a contract with coupons or contracts attached, for a stated value, but authorizing the customer to sell these coupons or contracts at the stated value and giving each purchaser thereof, in turn, the right to apply to the dealer and buy a similar contract and pay a similar sum and receive similar coupons or contracts and, in turn, to conduct the sale of the contracts as an endless chain; provided, that when any customer has bought a contract and has sold the coupons or contracts to different individuals, as stated in this subsection, such customer is entitled to a receipt for the full amount of those coupons or contracts upon the merchandise handled by the dealer. 
(2)  As including a business where the purchaser makes an initial payment and is thereafter allowed commissions on a stated number of resulting sales subsequently made on leaflets instead of coupons, as described in this section, these leaflets being marked with a serial number and the commissions being calculated on orders obtained on these leaflets, or credited to the serial number, the plan being that where one has made an initial purchase and received one's serial number on one's order form such person is given a number of leaflets, with the same serial number thereon, and subsequent sales, following a stated number, are thereafter credited to this serial number, and such person is given a commission on orders obtained which are credited to this serial number, by which the purchaser is supposed to secure a credit in this series to other parties who continue to duplicate the plan, and thus carry it on in an endless chain. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3008) 
Secs. 30-3—30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE POWER LICENSES AND PERMITS GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-26. - License review board. 
(a)  There is created a license review board of the city to be composed of seven members who shall be residents of the city appointed by the mayor and approved by the council. One of the members of the board shall be an attorney-at-law. One of the members of the board shall be the president of the planning advisory board (APAB) or the president's designee. No employee or elected official of the city shall be appointed to the board nor shall any person be appointed who holds any interest in any license issued under the police powers of the city. The members of the board shall serve for two-year terms. 
(b)  The board shall hold a minimum of two meetings in any calendar month and the meetings shall be held in any municipal building and shall be open to the public. Each member of the board shall be paid $100.00 per meeting or $100.00 per day of any adjourned meeting. In addition to the regular compensation, the member who writes the board's findings and recommendations shall be paid $100.00. Administrative and legal services as may be required by the board shall be furnished by departments and agencies of the city. 
(c)  The functions of the board shall be to: 
(1)  Review all applications for permits, other than work permits and taxicab permits, issued under the police power of the city which are referred to the board by the mayor or the commissioner of public safety or a designated agent with a statement thereon indicating whether or not such application meets the legal requirements for the issuance of such permit. The board shall make a favorable or unfavorable recommendation thereon to the mayor in accordance with the applicable sections of this Code or other ordinances and state statutes regulating the issuance of such permits and licenses; 
(2)  Hear all appeals that may be filed from the denial, suspension or revocation of any work permits by the police chief or that may be filed under chapter 138, article VI, pertaining to outdoor festivals, from the denial or classification of any application for an outdoor festival permit by the commissioner of parks and recreation and make recommendations on those appeals to the mayor in accordance with the applicable sections of this Code or other ordinances and statutes of the state; and 
(3)  Unless otherwise provided, conduct hearings on any charges which may be brought against any licensee under the police powers of the city where those charges may be the basis for suspension or revocation of the license and to report its findings and recommendations to the mayor. 
(d)  During all hearings before the board, formal legal rules of evidence shall not be strictly applied. Evidence may be admitted if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. The board shall follow the Georgia rules of evidence regarding privileges. 
(e)  All votes of the board shall be announced in public. 
(f)  All recommendations of the board made in accordance with this section, shall be delivered to the mayor within three business days of the public announcement of the vote of the board on such recommendations. 
(g)  Final decisions of the mayor to deny an application for a new license or permit, to deny a transfer of location or transfer of ownership, or to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew a license or permit, or to impose a fine upon any license or permit under this chapter may be appealed via Certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6004; Ord. No. 2001-16, § 1, 2-24-01; Ord. No. 2008-80(08-O-1676), § 4, 11-6-08; Ord. No. 2012-43(12-O-1072), § 3, 9-26-12) 
Cross reference— Boards, councils, commissions and authorities, § 2-1851 et seq. 
Charter reference— Boards and commissions, § 3-401. 
Sec. 30-27. - Subpoena; authority of license review board. 
(a)  Issuance, contents, service. Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the license review board to establish any fact in connection with any hearing or any investigation which may be lawfully conducted by the license review board, the mayor or the mayor's designee is authorized to issue a subpoena, directed to the witness, requiring the witness to personally be and appear at the time and place of the meeting of the board and to produce at that time and place any documentary evidence which, in the judgment of the board, may be required. Such witness shall remain in attendance upon the meeting until excused therefrom. The subpoena shall bear teste in the name of the city, shall be signed by the mayor or the mayor's designee and shall be served by any member of the department of police. Such service shall be had at least 24 hours before the time such witness is required to attend and to continue the attendance of the witness. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. If any person so summoned as set out in subsection (a) of this section as a witness shall fail, neglect or refuse to attend the hearing or shall fail, neglect or refuse to produce any relevant documentary evidence or shall fail or refuse to take and subscribe to the required oath or affirmation or shall fail to answer any question lawfully propounded or shall fail to continue in attendance until excused by the board, the person shall be cited to appear before the municipal court and, upon conviction by that court shall be subject to the general penalties provided in section 1-8, except the fine shall be limited to $50.00 and the sentence to work on the streets or public works of the city shall not exceed 25 days. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6006) 
Sec. 30-28. - Fees. 
(a)  Amount. Every person filing an initial application for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall pay at the time of the filing of the application a fee in accordance with schedule 1 of this section to be applied to the cost of processing the application. Every person filing an application for the renewal of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall pay at the time of the filing of the application a fee in accordance with schedule 2 of this section to be applied to the cost of processing the application. Every person filing an application for a license other than for the sale of alcoholic beverages which requires approval by the license review board shall pay at the time of filing of the application a fee in accordance with schedule 3 of this section. Every person filing for a permit not covered in these schedules shall be charged a minimum fee of $30.00. 
Schedule 1 
Initial Application Fee for License for 
Sale of Alcoholic Beverages 
Description      Fee  
Malt beverages/wine consumed ..... $300.00 
Malt beverages/wine packaged ..... 300.00 
Create a package store area ..... 300.00 
Distilled spirits package ..... 300.00 
Distilled spirits consumed ..... 300.00 
Schedule 2 
Application Fee for Renewal of License for Sale of Alcoholic Beverages 
Description     Fee  
Malt beverages/wine consumed ..... $150.00 
Malt beverages/wine packaged ..... 150.00 
Create a package store area ..... 150.00 
Distilled spirits package ..... 150.00 
Distilled spirits consumed ..... 150.00 
Schedule 3 
Application Fees for Licenses Other Than Sale of Alcoholic Beverages 
Description     Fee  
Employees/independent contractors working at adult entertainment establishments which sell alcohol: 
 Application fee ..... $   50.00 
 Permit fee ..... 200.00 
Aerobics/slimnastics ..... 500.00 
Alarms commercial permits ..... 50.00 
Alarms residential permits ..... 50.00 
Billiard/pool room ..... 150.00 
Bonding company ..... 500.00 
Bondsperson ..... 250.00 
Boxing promoter ..... 2,000.00 
Burglar alarm company ..... 500.00 
Burglar alarm installer ..... 75.00 
Door-to-door sales (company) ..... 500.00 
Door-to-door sales (employee) ..... 170.00 
Escort service (company) ..... 2,000.00 
Escort service (employee) ..... 300.00 
Firearm application ..... 120.00 
Fortuneteller or handwriting analysis annual fee ..... 500.00 
Fund solicitation annual fee ..... 200.00 
Game room ..... 150.00 
Gym/health spa ..... 500.00 
Hypnotherapy ..... 500.00 
Lingerie modeling studios (company) ..... 3,000.00 
Lingerie modeling studio (employees) ..... 300.00 
Massage salon annual fee ..... 2,000.00 
Massage technician annual fee ..... 200.00 
Motel/hotel ..... 120.00 
Moving ..... 60.00 
Parking lots/garages - per lot ..... 250.00 
Parking lots/garages - per space ..... 3.00 
Pawnshop annual fee ..... 750.00 
Precious metal dealer annual fee ..... 750.00 
Roominghouse/lodge ..... 150.00 
Scrap processor ..... 500.00 
Sightseeing company ..... 200.00 
Social/private club ..... 200.00 
Tattoo parlor ..... 150.00 
Teenage dancehall ..... 180.00 
Telephone solicitations ..... 150.00 
Theater annual fee ..... 500.00 
Vendor assistant permit ..... 30.00 
Vendor replacement permit ..... 30.00 
Wrecker company (each truck) ..... 300.00 
Wrecker company employees ..... 150.00 
Wrestling promoter license fee ..... 2,000.00 
Wrestling permit application fee ..... 100.00 
Wrestling referees, judges, timekeepers, managers, trainers, and seconds ..... 100.00 
(b)  Refunds; fee to accompany application. No refunds of fees so paid shall be made even though the application may be subsequently dismissed prior to investigation being made. Each application shall be accompanied by the fee, even though the applicant may have previously filed other applications. 
(Code 1977, § 19-14.022; Ord. No. 1998-95, § 1, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 1999-12, §§ 6, 7, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-14, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-35, §§ 6, 7, 3-9-99; Ord. No. 2000-7, § 6, 2-15-00; Ord. No. 2016-11(16-O-1150), § 2, 5-11-16 ) 
Sec. 30-29. - Issuance contingent upon applicant's criminal record. 
(a)  Rules for consideration of applications. In considering an initial application for a license or permit issued under the police power of the city, the following rules shall apply with respect to an applicant's criminal record: 
(1)  All applications for a license or permit issued under the police powers of the city shall be reviewed for criminal history. Only convictions, pleas of nolo contendere, or violations of law, including city ordinances, reasonably related to the application, shall ever be considered. A nolo contendere plea shall not be taken into consideration and shall not be cause for or used as justification for denial of the application, except as otherwise provided by law or city ordinance. 
(2)  Any conviction or plea of nolo contendere for which the applicant has received either a pardon or restoration of civil and political rights from the state board of pardons and paroles shall not be taken into consideration and shall not in any way be cause for or used as justification for denial of the application. 
(3)  A plea of nolo contendere or plea of guilty under O.C.G.A. tit. 42, ch. 8, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq.), the First Offender's Act, shall not be taken into consideration and shall not be cause for the denial of the application for a license or permit, provided that the person has not more than one plea of guilty or plea of nolo contendere under that act for the commission of any act or offense in violation of the laws of the United States, the state or the city at the time of filing the application. 
(4)  No conviction or plea of nolo contendere, the sentence for which shall have been successfully completed, including parole or probation, if any, more than five years preceding the filing of the application for the permit or license shall be taken into consideration or be cause for or a justification for denial of the application. 
(5)  Subject to subsections (a)(1), (2), (3) and (4) of this section, the person or body approving or denying an application for a license or permit under the police power of the city may take into consideration the criminal record of the applicant in determining whether to approve or deny the application; provided, however, that only those offenses that are reasonably related to the job duties involved in the job for which a permit or license is sought may be taken into consideration or used as cause to deny the application. For purposes of this section, an offense is reasonably related to the job duties involved in the job if the job involved offers a greater than normal opportunity to commit the same crime or a similar crime to that of which the person was previously convicted, provided further that the convictions shall never operate as an automatic disqualification, but shall be considered along with all other relevant information by the person or body approving or denying the application for a permit or license. Subject to subsections (a)(1), (2), (3) and (4) of this section, the only purpose of using an applicant's prior criminal history in determining whether to approve or deny an application for a license or permit shall be to determine the applicant's ability to perform the job for which the license or permit is sought in a safe and lawful manner. 
(b)  Renewals, suspensions and revocations. All renewal applications for a license or permit issued under the police powers of the city shall be reviewed for criminal history. In considering a person's criminal record or history for determining whether or not to renew, suspend or revoke a license or permit issued under the police powers of the city, the same standards shall be used as are set out in subsection (a) of this section relating to initial license or permit applications. 
(c)  Factors other than criminal history. Nothing in this section shall in any way be interpreted to affect the ability of the person or body charged with the responsibility to issue, renew, suspend or revoke a license or permit to apply any proper criterion or standard, other than prior criminal history, in determining whether to issue, renew, suspend or revoke the license or permit. 
(d)  Application of section. This section is intended to apply to every license to do business or permit to engage in a particular job or occupation which is regulated under the police power of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6002; Ord. No. 2001-10, §§ 1, 2, 2-13-01) 
Sec. 30-30. - Effect of denial or revocation. 
(a)  When any application for a license or permit to transact any business within the control of the police powers of the city is denied for cause or revoked for cause by the mayor, it shall be unlawful for the department of police to accept or consider any application for a license to operate at that location the same type of business within 12 months from the time of denial or revocation by the mayor. For purposes of this subsection the 12-month period as stated in this subsection shall be tolled during any period of time that an appeal is pending of said denial or revocation, or any period of time that by operation of law the city cannot enforce said denial or revocation, or any period of time during which there is in place a valid, voluntary agreement between the city and the entity denied a license or permit or whose license or permit has been revoked to not enforce the mayor's decision pending the outcome of litigation in any way involving said denial or revocation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the license review board to consider any application mentioned in subsection (a) of this section or a motion for rehearing of that application within 12 months without specific authority from the mayor. For purposes of this subsection the 12 month period as stated in this subsection shall be tolled during any period of time that an appeal is pending of the denial or revocation mentioned in subsection (a) of this section, or any period of time that by operation of law the city cannot enforce said denial or revocation, or any period of time during which there is in place a valid, voluntary agreement between the city and the entity denied a license or whose license or permit has been revoked as mentioned in subsection (a) of this section to not enforce the mayor's decision pending the outcome of litigation in any way involving said denial or revocation. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6001; Ord. No. 2003-106, § 1, 11-24-03) 
Sec. 30-31. - Notice to police of security measures and emergency contacts. 
(a)  All persons owning, operating or managing any business located in the city shall furnish to the department of police information necessary to indicate the security measures located at the business and the persons to be notified if an emergency occurs at the business. This information shall be kept current by the owner of the business. 
(b)  Every person applying for a new license to operate or manage a business shall be required, at the time of the application, to furnish the information required in subsection (a) of this section and to keep the information current. 
(c)  Every person owning, operating or managing a business shall be furnished by the department of police an emergency decal containing a coded number, and the owner, operator or manager of the business shall place the decal at least five feet above the ground level in the most conspicuous location as close as possible to the main entrance of the business. 
(d)  The department of police shall enforce compliance with this section. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6003) 
Sec. 30-32. - Material misrepresentations regarding ownership or use of business enterprises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any material misrepresentation of the composition of the ownership or work force of a business entity doing or seeking to do business with the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to make any knowing misrepresentation to the city of the use which a contractor intends to make of a minority, female or developing business enterprise, as a subcontractor or a joint venture partner in performing work under contract with the city. 
(c)  These offenses shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-8. 
(d)  These offenses are not intended, nor shall they be construed to supersede, supplant or nullify any ordinances pertaining to the authority of the city to debar or suspend a person from consideration for award of city contracts for the offenses enumerated in this section. 
(Code 1977, § 17-11012) 
Sec. 30-33. - Renewal contingent on compliance with Article III of this chapter. 
At the time of the renewal of a license or permit issued under the police powers of the city, the licensee must show that the licensed business is compliant with the provisions contained in Article III of this chapter, including that they are registered with the business tax division and have been issued a certificate therefrom, where applicable. A finding of the failure by the licensee to maintain such compliance shall be due cause for refusal to renew the license or permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-53(10-O-1536), § 1, 9-29-10) 
Secs. 30-34—30-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exhibit B), approved Oct. 20, 2004, amended ch. 30, art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. For those businesses required to register with the city, the payment of the administrative fee shall also satisfy any requirement to pay the registration fee 
Business shall maintain its ordinary and customary usage according to context but also may be used to generally identify a person or entity carrying on a trade, occupation, profession, or other commercial or non-commercial enterprise. Business tax means the same as occupation tax. 
Business tax division means that part of the department of finance made responsible for assisting the chief financial officer with the administration of the occupation tax and according to context may also mean the location where the operations of the business tax division are carried out. 
Certificate means a document issued to the person after registration of a business and the full payment of any required occupation tax. 
Chief financial officer includes the chief financial officer's designee. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not an I.R.S. 1009. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)  Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including, without limitation, the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
(2)  Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use or excise tax; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2); 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts. 
f.  Proceeds from sales of goods which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside of the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
Location or office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Nonprofit organization shall mean a bona fide nonprofit civic, educational or charitable organization. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person means and includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who is by state law required to obtain a state license pursuant to the law regulating such profession or occupation. Such term shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Registration means the application form with information about a business or the act of completing the form. As a matter of administrative convenience, registration forms may also be used for the purpose of compiling such information as deemed necessary to confirm that the type of business to be operated is permitted by the zoning code at the location where the business is to be conducted and to sufficiently identify the location of the business for the purposes of enforcement of this division. 
Regulatory fees mean payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
Return means all documents or forms filed with the payment of an occupation tax and/or those documents or forms, which are used to determine any underpayment or overpayment on taxes paid in any previous year. 
Taxpayer means the person from whom the occupation tax, imposed under this article, is due or was collected. 
Within the jurisdiction of the city shall mean and include any area within the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta as the same currently exist or as they may be changed from time to time, and any area within the boundaries of the William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport as the same currently exist or as they may be changed from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-52. - Levy. 
As provided in this article and in accordance with state law, an occupation tax is hereby levied and assessed on each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation located within the jurisdiction of the city and on each person whose business, trade, profession or occupation, is carried on, operated or performed within the jurisdiction of city; except that no occupation tax, regulatory fee or administrative fee is levied on any state or local authority or nonprofit organization. In the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia, which exerts substantial efforts within the state and city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, an occupation tax shall be levied and assessed on such business, trade, profession or occupation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-53. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupant tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations that are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-54. - Administration. 
The chief financial officer shall administer and enforce this article for the levy, assessment and collection of license fees, occupation taxes, and any fees, interest and penalties imposed in this article except for those fines or court costs that are judicially imposed. 
Sec. 30-55. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article may be cited and required to appear before the court with jurisdiction over violations of city ordinances. The imposition of any judicially imposed fines or court costs or other punishment shall not relieve the taxpayer from liability for the payment of all taxes, penalties and interest which are past due. This section shall not authorize the issuance of citations where another section of this article excuses compliance from a particular requirement. 
(b)  Any person required to pay a business tax or to register with the business tax division, and who fails to do so in the manner provided by this article, shall also be liable to have the tax or any fees, penalties and interest collected by the issuance of execution by the revenue collection administrator, ex officio marshal or deputy pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26. For the purpose of administering this section and for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, a person who is an employee in apparent authority at the location where the business is registered or who is an agent acting in a capacity of apparent authority may be served with any notices and/or citations directed to the taxpayer. This section further authorizes collection of the tax and any fees, penalties and interest by the issuance of execution by the revenue collection administrator, ex officio marshal or deputy pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26 against those delinquent taxpayers without any requirement that citations be issued. 
(c)  Any person who registers with the business tax division as a nonprofit organization, and is exempted from payment of business taxes, regulatory fees, and administrative fees pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13(5), and who is determined by the chief financial officer not to qualify for the exemption provided for nonprofit organizations by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13(5), may be cited for violation of this ordinance and shall be responsible for the payment of all taxes, penalties and interest which are past due. For the purpose of administering this section and for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, a person who is an employee in apparent authority at the location where the business is registered or who is an agent acting in a capacity of apparent authority may be served with any notices and/or citations directed to the taxpayer. 
(d)  Compliance with this article shall not be a precondition to the practice of any profession licensed by the state. The sole purpose for the imposition of all fines, penalties and interest provided by this article is to support and enhance the collection of the taxes levied by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-56. - Effect of article upon previous ordinance. 
The outstanding liabilities under prior ordinances shall continue and remain in force until such tax, fee, assessment, penalty or interest shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-57. - Duties of chief financial officer. 
The chief financial officer shall, among other duties: 
(1)  Prepare and provide the necessary forms for the registration of a business, and for the submission of required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce this article; 
(2)  Issue to each person, for whom it is required, a registration certificate within a reasonable time after the payment of the business tax assessed and levied in this article; provided, however, where under other ordinances of the city, permits, certifications and compliance with the enumerated conditions are required for the operation of the business, the chief financial officer shall not issue the business registration certificate until the applicant exhibits to the chief financial officer those obtained permits, certifications and compliances. In those cases where an applicant has applied for necessary permits, certifications and compliances with enumerated conditions, and such applicant is permitted to operate a business while the application is pending, the chief financial officer may consider that provisional approval has been granted and issue a registration certificate; provided, however, that at least sixty (60) days have elapsed since the applicant has made application for the required permits, certifications and compliances; 
(3)  Issue executions for the collection of all outstanding taxes and fees levied and assessed under the terms of this article, together with penalties and interest; the executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes and fees due the city; 
(4)  Determine if the accounting method used by a business for which a tax certificate if required under this article accurately reflects the taxable gross receipts of the business for the applicable calendar year, and to make whatever adjustments may be necessary to arrive at the accurate amount of taxable gross receipts for the period applicable; 
(5)  Audit periodically the books and records of the businesses subject to the provisions of this article, and to require the submission of such additional information as may be necessary to correctly determine the amount of the tax due and to ensure its collection; and 
(6)  Issue in any year without charge a certificate when an applicant exhibits to the chief financial officer such permits, certifications and compliances which, under the law of the state or the United States, would entitle the applicant to it. 
(7)  Determine if the person who has declared for an exemption from the business tax, administrative fee and registration fee is entitled to such an exemption. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-58. - Authority of chief financial officer to make rules and regulations. 
The chief financial officer shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state, or the constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of this article and the collection of the registration fees under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-59. - Compliance investigators. 
Compliance investigators are authorized, when so designated by the chief financial officer, to conduct investigations in the manner provided elsewhere in this article. Compliance investigators are eligible to apply for status as code enforcement agents under section 98-1. In order to enforce code provisions and issue citations, compliance investigators must apply for and receive status as a code enforcement agent. Compliance investigators may cite individuals or persons for violation of this article but are not empowered to arrest any individual for any violation of this article, and, notwithstanding any authority to the contrary elsewhere in the Atlanta City Code of Ordinances, shall not arrest any individual for any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2006-75, § 1, 10-11-06) 
Sec. 30-60. - Exceptions to article. 
(a)  Generally. The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article, but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.). 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355: Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meals, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal and hulls. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(11)  Sales of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Exemption for state and local authorities and nonprofit organizations. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13(5), no occupation tax, regulatory fee or administrative fee is levied on any state or local authority or nonprofit organization as defined in this article. 
(c)  Performance. The fee per performance held in a theater, stadium, room, open space or any other place shall be as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-61. - Determination of amount. 
The occupation tax amount shall be determined by the sum of three components: 
(1)  A nonrefundable annual administrative fee of $75.00. 
(2)  An appropriate tax amount determined by tax rates in classes that are associated with standard industrial classifications and profitability ratios. These tax rates are in section 30-62. The tax classes are in Appendix I to the ordinance from which this section is derived. The practitioners of professions listed in section 30-63 shall determine their tax as set forth in said section. 
(3)  A per employee component which shall be imposed and shall become effective as provided in section 30-62. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-62. - Administrative fee amounts; tax rate structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $75.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts except for the businesses of those persons who are not required to pay the business or occupation tax for the initial startup, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. The administrative fee can only approximate the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax, return or application. 
(b)  Gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. 
(c)  The tax rate for all parts of 1999 after the effective date of this ordinance, and or each year thereafter, for each business, trade, profession or occupation shall be as follows: 

 
(1)  The tax on gross receipts shall be calculated by the application of the flat rate to the first $10,000.00 of gross receipts and the application of the tax rate to all additional receipts above $10,000.00. 
(2)  No business is required to pay taxes on any gross receipts in excess of $200,000,000.00. 
(3)  Each business, not otherwise exempt from the payment of business or occupation taxes, and that has more than one employee shall pay an additional component as a part of its business or occupation tax in the amount of $25.00 for each and every additional employee in excess of one. The per employee component specified above for those employees who work less than a full year may be prorated under rules and regulations promulgated by the chief financial officer or his or her designee. 
(d)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(e)  No occupation tax will be required upon more than 100 percent of a business's gross receipts. 
(f)  No occupation tax will be required on gross receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states when proof of payment is provided to the city. 
(g)  An occupation tax shall be required from real estate brokers, agents or companies based upon gross receipts of real estate transactions on property located within the city, regardless of the location of their business office. 
(h)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner, on those affected businesses or practitioners except as described in this article. 
(i)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in Georgia shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business as defined in O.C.G.A. § 14-13-7 which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the state. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-33(10-O-0875), § 1, 6-30-10) 
Sec. 30-63. - Professional occupation tax. 
(a)  Classification. Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c) are as follows: 
(1)  Lawyers; 
(2)  Physicians; 
(3)  Osteopaths; 
(4)  Chiropractors; 
(5)  Podiatrists; 
(6)  Dentists; 
(7)  Optometrists; 
(8)  Psychologists; 
(9)  Veterinarians; 
(10)  Landscape architects; 
(11)  Land surveyors; 
(12)  Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
(13)  Public accountants; 
(14)  Embalmers; 
(15)  Funeral directors; 
(16)  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic or electrical engineers; 
(17)  Architects; 
(18)  Marriage and family therapists, social workers and professional counselors; 
(19)  Dealers of motor vehicles, as defined in paragraph (1) of O.C.G.A. 10-1-622; 
(20)  Owners or operators of bona fide coin operated amusement machines, as defined in O.C.G.A. 48-17-1 and owners or operators of businesses where bona fide coin operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, provided that such amusement machines have affixed current stickers showing payment of annual permit fees, in accordance with O.C.G.A. 48-17-9; 
(21)  Merchants or dealers as defined in O.C.G.A. 48-5-354 as to their deliveries to businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations in areas zoned for commercial use; and 
(22)  Any business, profession, or occupation, not specifically listed herein, for which state licensure or registration is required by state law shall not be charged a regulatory fee, unless the state law regulating such business, profession, or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments but such businesses shall be required to pay the occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios and classes as set forth in section 30-62. 
(b)  Determination of rate or amount of payment: At the time of the payment of the tax, the professional practitioners listed in subsection (a) subpart (1) through (21) of this section shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios and classes as set forth in section 30-62. If the practitioner of the profession elects to calculate the occupation tax due based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios and classes as set forth in section 30-62, a fee of $75.00 is imposed to pay the cost to process the payment. 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner. Practitioners paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(c)  Compliance with this article shall not be a precondition to the practice of any profession, listed herein, or licensed by the state. The sole purpose for the imposition of all fines, penalties and interest provided in this article is to support and enhance the collection of the taxes levied by this article. No administrative fee shall be charged to the practitioner of any profession listed in this section in the event that the practitioner requests to file any documents with the city prior to the time of payment of the tax. It shall be the responsibility of the taxpayer to inform the business tax division of their claim of entitlement to be treated as a practitioner of a profession under state law where the interpretation of this article in such a manner would entitle such taxpayer to a different application of the business tax ordinance or any rules and regulations promulgated by the chief financial officer. 
(d)  Practitioners of professions may be asked to provide information as to the location where they may be served with notices or citations issued in support of the enforcement of this article and upon the failure or refusal to do so, the city shall direct the notices or citations to the address listed with the appropriate state licensing agency. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2008-01(07-O-2540), § 1(Exh. B), 1-15-08) 
Sec. 30-64. - Separate businesses. 
Where a business is operated at more than one location or where the business includes more than one line, such business will pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-65. - Registration required; renewal; transacting business when registration delinquent. 
(a)  All businesses operating within the jurisdiction of the city shall be registered with the business tax division unless exempted by this article or by state law. Any business which anticipates commencing operation on or after January 1 of each year shall within 30 days of commencing such business and, if not exempt from the levy of a registration fee, shall pay said fee in accordance with a city-prescribed schedule. Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. Renewal application for a business registered in the previous year should be completed on or before February 15 of each year and payment of the occupation tax should be made by April 1 or by a city-prescribed schedule. 
(b)  Practitioners of professions or others who are required to obtain a state license or registration are not required to register with the city prior to beginning the practice of the profession for which they have been licensed or registered by the state. Practitioners of professions may be required to submit certain information in order to show compliance with zoning ordinances but such requirement shall only apply where a certificate of occupancy would otherwise be required of any other business and shall not prevent the practice of the profession at any other location already having a valid certificate of occupancy. Practitioners of professions are requested to provide certain information at the time of the initial payment of the tax for the purpose of the orderly administration of the business tax ordinance and the collection of the taxes levied by this article. Where the practitioner of the profession fails or refuses to provide information as to the location where they may be served with notices or citations issued in support of the enforcement of this article, or fails or refuses to keep such information current, the city shall direct the notices or citations to the address listed with the appropriate state licensing agency. 
(c)  As set forth in section 30-69, there is (imposed a penalty upon each person or other entity which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all required taxes and fees as provided in this article. Any person or other entity transacting or offering to transact business within the jurisdiction of the city without first having obtained such registration within the time required shall be subject to the payment of those fines, interest and penalties provided in section 30-69 in addition to the payment of all taxes, penalties and interest. This section shall not apply to the practitioners of professions listed in section 30-63 or in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 as it may be from time to time amended. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-66. - Duration of registration. 
(a)  The registration referred to in this article shall automatically expire on December 31 of the year of its issuance. 
(b)  Renewal applications for all business required to register shall be completed on or before February 15 of each year. The failure to renew registration by the date required shall be a violation of this article, but such violation shall not prevent any business from being allowed to continue its operation. 
(c)  Practitioners of professions shall not be required to comply with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-67. - Fee for registration of business. 
The fee for the registration of each business on which a registration fee is levied, as required under section 30-65, shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00), to be paid at the time of registering the business. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-68. - Dominant line of business. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts, and subordinate lines when appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-69. - Penalties for failure to register, failure to make timely payment; interest upon unpaid taxes. 
(a)  Any person failing to renew their registration on or before April 1, in any year, or in the case of a new business at the time of commencing operations, may be cited for violation of this article and upon conviction by the municipal court shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the estimated business tax or portion thereof then due or $100.00, whichever is greater, for failure to so register. 
(b)  Any business registered with the business tax division in a previous year and which fails to register by the date specified in this article shall pay a late fee of $500.00 in addition to the tax due. 
(c)  Any occupation tax not paid by the due date shall be considered delinquent and bear interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month. Any person who fails to pay the occupation tax for 90 days from the due date shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax due in addition to the tax due and the accrued interest. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 2, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 30-70. - Reserved. 
Sec. 30-71. - Payment of tax; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(b)  Any business that commences operations in the city is required to pay the occupation tax within thirty (30) days of commencing operations and if such tax is not paid within ninety (90) days of commencing operations, the business will be subject to penalties for delinquency on the unpaid tax as prescribed in this article. Thereafter, the occupation tax shall be due and payable January 1 of each year following and shall, if not paid by April 1 of that year, the business will be subject to penalties for delinquency on the unpaid tax as prescribed in this article. 
(c)  Any person transacting or offering to transact business in the city shall be liable for the payment of the occupation tax, and for all penalties and interest as provided in section 30-69. 
(d)  For the purpose of administering this section and for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, a person who is an employee or in apparent authority at the location where the business is registered or who is an agent acting in a capacity of apparent authority may be served with any notices and/or citations directed to the taxpayer. 
(e)  Practitioners of professions are requested to provide certain information at the time of the initial payment of the tax for the purpose of the orderly administration of the business tax ordinance and the collection of the taxes levied by this article. Where the practitioner of the profession fails or refuses to provide information as to the location where they may be served with notices or citations issued in support of the enforcement of this article, or fails or refuses to keep such information current, the city shall direct the notices or citations to the address listed with the appropriate state licensing agency and shall consider the refusal of the practitioner to be consent to this method of service. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-72. - Casual and isolated activity. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be interpreted as to require any person who may engage in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions involving personal assets and not the principal occupation of the individual to obtain a business tax registration and pay a tax therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-73. - Refunds. 
(a)  If a business ceases operation within a year for which an occupation tax has been paid or credited, the tax shall be refundable, upon request, if, after a final return is filed and after the actual tax liability is calculated, the business tax credited exceeds that liability. 
(b)  Taxes are also refundable upon written request after a valid amendment is accepted and the business tax credited exceeds the tax liability. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-74. - Change of address. 
Any person required to register with the business tax division and who changes the place of operation shall notify the chief financial officer of the new address in writing on a form provided by the chief financial officer no later than the day of moving. The same business certificate will be valid at the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-75. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax levied in this article, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the city or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of the return pertaining to the determination of the amount of business tax shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerks of the city using such returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as employees. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof, the inspection of the records or returns and items thereof or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United States and other local governments. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-76. - Certificate to be available for inspection. 
The certificate issued for any business location shall be available for inspection at the address listed on the certificate and shall be displayed to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. This requirement may also be satisfied by posting the certificate in some conspicuous place at the address listed on the certificate. This section does not apply to practitioners of professions listed in section 30-63. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-77. - Paying tax of business with no location in state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city, and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-78. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the business tax. When a practitioner of a profession operates a business at a separate location which is different than the practice of one of the professions listed in Section 30-63, such business shall be considered a separate business. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-79. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state or instrumentalities thereof shall not be required to pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-80. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
(a)  For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the business tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
(b)  Where the business has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied in accordance with a criteria other than gross receipts by the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the location within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-81. - Tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-82. - Taxes levied on business to be transacted during current calendar year. 
(a)  For convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, each business subject to the occupation tax levied in section 30-52 shall, on or before the dates set forth in this section, file with the business tax division the return specifically provided in this section for the calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for making estimated payments on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in the current calendar year shall be paid in accordance with a renewal or return to be made after the end of the year, in accordance with the procedure set forth in this section. The owner, proprietor, manager or secretary officer of the business subject to such occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, or before February 15 of the current calendar year, file with the business tax division of the city, on a form furnished by such officer, a signed return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year. This return, with its depicted gross receipts, will be used to determine the final tax for the calendar year just completed and to estimate the gross receipts, and therefore the occupation tax, for the current year. 
(b)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be reported in such return. Such figure shall be appropriately prorated and used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the business tax liability. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-83. - Overpayment or underpayment of tax. 
(a)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of such tax provided for in this article is less than the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by such business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 30-82, the difference in such amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the city on April 1 or a city-prescribed date of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before such date. 
(b)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of such tax provided for in this article exceeds the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by such business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 30-82, the difference in such amount shall be refundable, upon written request, by the city to the taxpayer; or, if such business continues to be conducted in the city during the current year, such difference in amount may be credited by the city on the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the city by such business for the calendar year. This election is to be taken by the city. 
(c)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of such tax provided for in this article exceeds the amount of occupation tax paid by such business as a part of the estimated tax paid in accordance with section 30-82 in an amount which exceeds $300,000.00 and the taxpayer has discontinued operations in the city such that the city cannot elect to credit the overpayment for a future tax liability, the city may elect to refund any amount in excess of $300,000.00 in the next fiscal year after the request for refund of the overpayment has been made. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-33(10-O-0875), § 2, 6-30-10) 
Sec. 30-84. - Public hearing before tax increase. 
After January 1, 1996, the city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-85. - Copy of latest state tax return or other appropriate documentation of gross receipts required for tax certificate; locations and records open to inspection; record retention requirements. 
(a)  Each business, trade, profession, or occupation required to pay a tax based upon gross receipts shall be required to provide the business tax division with a copy of the entity's latest state tax return, or other appropriate documentation of statewide gross receipts that is acceptable to the chief financial officer, upon the renewal, adjustment or final application for a tax certificate. 
(b)  Upon demand by the chief financial officer or his or her designee, it shall be the duty of any person who is required to obtain a business license from the city to open all portions of any location, where business is conducted inside the city, for the purpose of enabling the chief financial officer or his or her designee to ascertain and gain information necessary for the determination of the proper classification of any business for business or occupation tax purposes. 
(c)  Upon demand by the chief financial officer or his or her designee, it shall be the duty of any person, who is required to obtain a business license from the city, to produce, furnish or make available, during regular business hours at a location inside the city, all books of account, invoices, papers, reports and memoranda containing entries showing amount of purchases, sales receipts, inventory and other information, from which the determination of the proper classification of any business for the previous three calendar years may be determined for business or occupation tax purposes or from which the amount of business or occupation tax for the previous three calendar years may be determined or verified, regardless of whether such records are maintained outside of the city. Such records may include but are not limited to bank deposit books, bank statements, copies of sales tax reports made to the state of Georgia, and copies of state and federal income tax returns. 
(d)  Any person who is required to obtain a business license from the city and who is required to produce, furnish or make available, during regular business hours at a location inside the city, any documents or records described in this article shall keep and preserve all such documents or records for a period which includes the three previous calendar years. 
(e)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to fail or refuse to perform any duty herein imposed or to obstruct or interfere with the chief financial officer or his or her designee in the performance of their duties or to refuse to produce, furnish or make available any documents or records described in this article. Any person violating this section may be cited by the compliance investigators and upon conviction by the municipal court shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the estimated business tax or portion thereof then due or $500.00, whichever is greater. For the purpose of administering this section and for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, a person who is an employee or agent acting in a capacity of apparent authority shall be joint and severally liable for the payment of all fines, taxes, penalties and interest which are past due. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 3, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 30-86. - Appeal of decisions of the chief financial officer; claims for refunds. 
(a)  Any decision of the chief financial officer under this article, including without limitation, such decisions as to entitlement to exemptions, profitability classifications, methods of accounting, the imposition of penalties and interest, and the amount of tax due, may be appealed, in writing by any taxpayer Such appeal shall be filed in writing with the business tax division and no special form is required except that the taxpayer set forth sufficient information for the determination of the appeal. The taxpayer shall be responsible to set forth the information, which the taxpayer considers pertinent to the appeal and the chief financial officer may consider the appeal based only on the information submitted by the taxpayer. The chief financial officer shall act on such appeals only when submitted by the taxpayer, an attorney acting directly on the behalf of a taxpayer or from a person who presents a signed and notarized power of attorney that they are authorized to represent the taxpayer. 
(i)  The filing of an appeal with the city, the Superior Court of Fulton County or any appellate court, as to the amount of tax due under Chapter 30, Article III of the Atlanta City Code of Ordinances shall not prevent the accrual of penalties and interest during the time that the amount is under appeal. If the appeal is granted in favor of the appellant, any such penalties or interest on the appealed tax amount shall be waived. However, if the appeal is denied by the city, or, the Superior Court of Fulton County or any appellate court with jurisdiction, any penalties and interest that have accrued during the time of the appeal shall become due. To avoid the possibility of paying additional interest and fees, the taxpayer may pay the amount in dispute and then file a claim for a refund if the appeal is successful. The filing of an appeal is a separate procedure from a claim for refund and taxpayers are hereby put on notice that the filing of an appeal of the determination of the amount of tax due is not a claim for refund and does not preserve any rights of the taxpayer with respect to the time limit for claiming a refund under state law. During the pendency of any appeal taken in accordance with this Section, the city shall not issue a citation pursuant to section 30-55 in connection with the dispute. 
The chief financial officer shall make a written determination on all appeals, except for claims for refunds, within six months of its filing. Other than a refund claim, any appeal, not acted on within six months is deemed denied. 
(ii)  An appeal of a decision of the chief financial officer as to decisions made under this section shall be to the Superior Court of Fulton County by writ of certiorari wherein the errors complained of are plainly and distinctly set forth. 
(iii)  Any appeal concerning the issuance of executions shall be governed in the manner set forth by state law. 
(b)  Any claim for refund of any tax provided for in this article shall be subject to the provisions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380 as it exists now or as it may be amended. 
(i)  Any claim for refund of any tax provided for in this article shall be in writing and shall be addressed, by the taxpayer, to the chief financial officer, who is herein designated by the city council to accept claims for refunds. The claim shall identify the taxpayer, specify the business location, the tax years for which refunds are claimed and the dates of payment for which the refund is claimed. The claim shall also include a summary statement of the grounds on which the taxpayer relies and shall specify the tax years and dates of payments to which such grounds apply. In the event that the taxpayer desires a conference or hearing before the chief financial officer in connection with any claim for refund, the taxpayer shall so specify in writing at the time of filing the claim. The chief financial officer shall grant a conference at a time of his/her convenience except in those cases where the city council must hear the claim. 
(ii)  The date of filing shall be the date that the claim for refund is received by the chief financial officer. In any case where the chief financial officer does not make a refund for any or all of the amount claimed, or cause the refund claim to appear on the agenda of the committee with purview over the department of finance, within one year of the date that the claim is received, the taxpayer may consider that the claim is denied. No claim shall be deemed approved by the failure of the chief financial officer to make a decision on the claim or to failure of the claim to appear on the agenda of the committee with purview over the department of finance. The chief financial officer and the taxpayer may agree in writing to extend the one year period for processing of the claim and such action shall stay the presumption of denial until the written agreement expires. 
(iii)  In cases where there is an obvious clerical error, or the amount to be refunded is $5,000.00 or less the chief financial officer is authorized to approve any refund and may pay the refund without further authorization of the city council. 
(iv)  In cases where there is no obvious clerical error or the amount to be refunded exceeds $5,000.00, the governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim through a resolution which shall also be considered at least once at a meeting of the committee with purview over the department of finance, prior to a final vote. In such cases where the taxpayer has requested a hearing before the governing authority, such hearing shall take place at said committee meeting. 
(c)  Further proceedings concerning the denial of refund claims shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380 as it may be from time to time amended. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2018-45(18-O-1458), § 1, 10-10-18 ) 
Secs. 30-87—30-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 1A. - ATTORNEYS 

Sec. 30-90. - Effective date; repeal of prior levy; levy; 
(a)  For all years including and after the calendar year 2004, Division 1A shall apply to the occupation tax imposed on attorneys engaged in the practice of law in the jurisdiction of the city. Where any part of this article is in conflict with the language of this division, the more specific language of this division shall control. 
(b)  The occupation tax levied by section 30-52 is hereby repealed only as it is applied to the professional classification set forth in section 30-63(a)(1) ("Lawyers") and replaced by the occupation tax imposed under this Division 1A. The repeal set forth in this sub-section shall not act to repeal the general levy of section 30-52, on any other occupations, businesses, trades and professions and the general levy authorized therein, except as it is applied to the professional classification set forth in section 30-63(a)(1) ("Lawyers"), is specifically preserved and not repealed. 
(c)  As of the effective date of this ordinance, an occupation tax is imposed on the professional classification set forth in section 30-63(a)(1) ("Lawyers") for income earned within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(d)  Any attorney who paid an occupation tax for any previous year under the levy imposed by section 30-52, and who is legally entitled to a refund under the terms of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380, may at his or her option instruct the business tax division to apply that refund to the tax imposed by this Division 1A. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04; Ord. No. 2005-17, § 2, 3-15-05) 
[Sec. 30-91. - Reserved.] 
Sec. 30-92. - Attorneys not required to register. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any language to the contrary elsewhere in this article, an attorney shall not be required to register with the business tax division. Information reported with any occupation tax payment may be retained by the business tax division and used for those purposes allowed by applicable law. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any language to the contrary elsewhere in this article, an attorney shall not be required to obtain, display or maintain any city issued certificate showing that any payment or information has been submitted to the business tax division. 
(c)  For the purposes of enforcement of the zoning ordinance, attorneys may be asked by to submit notarized affidavits or other written information concerning the business or profession carried on at a location and the dates of operation when applying for a certificate of occupancy for new construction or renovation. Such affidavits or documents shall be used for the purposes of determining compliance with the zoning ordinance and shall not prevent the practice of the profession of law at any other location which has a valid certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  A refusal to submit a notarized affidavit or other written information stating whether a person engages in the practice of law at a particular location or stating the dates of operation at a location shall not be a violation of this article and shall not prevent an attorney from practicing law in the city. The chief financial officer shall document this refusal for use in any later proceeding. Where an attorney fails or refuses to provide information as to the location where they may be served with notices or citations issued in support of the enforcement of this article, the city shall direct the notices or citations to the address listed with the State Bar of Georgia and shall consider the failure or refusal of the attorney to provide current address information to be consent to this method of service. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-93. - Calculation of amount of tax. 
An attorney who practices law in the jurisdiction of the city shall at their option have their tax rate determined, but not the time of payment, in the manner set forth in subsection 30-63(b)(1) and subsection 30-63(b)(2). 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-94. - Date when taxes are due; date when taxes become delinquent; amount of interest and penalties. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any language to the contrary elsewhere in this article, an attorney shall not be required to pay the occupation tax on the income generated from the practice of law in any calendar year beginning with and including the year 2004 year until April 1 of the year following. The tax may be paid in person at the business tax division or by mailing the tax to the business tax division. Any tax payment made by mail shall include the name and address of the person or law firm paying the tax and the name of each attorney whose tax is being paid, so that the business tax division may process the payment. An attorney who pays the occupation tax on their own behalf shall include the name of the law firm with which they practice, if any. Any tax paid pursuant to the option of subsection 30-63(b)(1) shall include a written submission containing sufficient information to enable the chief financial officer to determine the accuracy of the taxpayer's calculation. 
(b)  Taxes due from attorneys shall not be considered delinquent until June 1. An attorney who does not pay the tax prior to June 1 shall incur a penalty of ten percent of the tax due. Any taxes not paid by the due date shall accrue interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-95. - Option of the chief financial officer to send bills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any language to the contrary elsewhere in this article, the chief financial officer may choose to send bills to attorneys who list their address with the State Bar of Georgia as being located in the City of Atlanta, including those attorneys who list only post office boxes as their addresses. 
(b)  An attorney who prepares and signs a notarized affidavit that they did not practice law within the jurisdiction of the city during some part of the tax year for which the tax bill was generated may have their bill adjusted for the time period stated in the affidavit when such attorney did not maintain an office within the jurisdiction of the city and/or states such other reasons why the occupation tax should be adjusted. Such adjustment shall not be made for those attorneys who elect to pay the $400.00 per practitioner fee as set forth in subsection 30-63(b)(2) unless the affidavit states that the attorney did not practice law in the jurisdiction of the city at any time during the year for which the tax bill was generated. The chief financial officer is authorized to inquire whether such affidavit matches the information maintained by the State Bar of Georgia in connection with the directives of State Bar Rule 1-207 and/or to take such other steps as deemed necessary to determine the accuracy of the affidavit. The submission of an affidavit requesting adjustment shall not act to prevent the imposition of penalties and interest should the chief financial officer deny the request for adjustment. 
(c)  The option of the chief financial officer to send bills shall not relieve attorneys from the obligation to pay any tax due for any calendar year including 2004 by April 1 of the following year. 
(d)  The chief financial officer may include in any bills, the unpaid tax balance from other years, including all fees and penalties and the amount of interest, which has accrued on any unpaid tax liability. The failure of the chief financial officer to list any unpaid balance on any bill shall not operate to relieve the taxpayer from liability for any balance due. 
(e)  It shall be a violation of this section for any attorney to willfully and intentionally misrepresent a material fact in an affidavit to avoid the payment of the occupation tax imposed by this division, or the occupation tax imposed by section 30-52, and the sole enforcement action to be taken is set forth as follows: 
(i)  When the chief financial officer has reason to believe that an attorney has willfully and intentionally misrepresented a material fact in any affidavit submitted to business tax division for the purposes of avoiding full payment of the occupation tax, he or she shall consult with the city attorney to determine whether such conduct should be referred to the State Bar of Georgia for investigation as to whether a violation of the Georgia Rules of Professional Conduct has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-96. - Tax execution imposed for failure to pay the occupation tax 
An attorney required to pay the occupation tax and who fails to do so in the manner provided by this article, shall be liable to have the tax and any penalties and interest collected by the issuance of execution by the revenue collection administrator, ex officio marshal or deputy pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26. Further proceedings concerning the execution procedure employed in the enforcement of this section shall be as provided by state law. Notwithstanding any language to the contrary in other sections of this article, the use of tax executions and the reporting of any alleged mis-representations as set forth in section 30-95 shall be the sole mechanism for enforcement of the occupation tax levy against attorneys. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-97. - Payment of city funds to attorneys or law firms employing attorneys not in compliance with the requirements of this division is not authorized; occupation tax payments to be considered in employment of attorneys by the city. 
(a)  No individual attorney, or law firm employing such attorney, who is delinquent in the payment of the occupation tax authorized by this article, shall be paid for any legal work in which they have represented the city in any capacity, until any outstanding occupation tax liability, including all penalties and interest, has been paid in full. If the chief financial officer believes that an individual attorney, or any attorneys employed by a law firm, seeking compensation for legal services performed for the city, is/are not in full compliance with this division, he or she shall notify the individual attorney, or law firm and present a bill for the amount due. After payment of any outstanding occupation tax liability, the individual attorney, or law firm may be paid for the legal work in which they have represented the city. 
(b)  The chief financial officer and/or the city attorney are authorized to verify that any individual attorney, or the attorneys employed by any law firm, seeking to represent the city, including without limitation, acting as bond counsel, is/are current in their occupation tax payments prior to their employment. Because of the legal and/or fiduciary relationships, which such representation of the city may create, the chief financial officer and/or the city attorney are authorized to consider compliance with the occupation tax ordinance by the individual attorneys and/or the attorneys employed by the law firm, prior to any employment by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Sec. 30-98. - Appeals and refund claims. 
Appeals of decisions of the chief financial officer and/or refund claims under this division shall be as provided in section 30-86. 
(Ord. No. 2004-80, § 1(Exh. B), 10-20-04) 
Secs. 30-99, 30-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETAIL INCENTIVE TAX-EXEMPT ZONES 

Sec. 30-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in section 30-51, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or where defined herein: 
Dedicated pedestrian entrance means a pedestrian entrance to a retail business location which opens on a city street and which provides access to only that business location. 
Interior retail means a retail business whose primary retail sales operation is not accessed through a dedicated pedestrian entrance. 
Mixed-use including retail means any development which includes as a principal use on the same parcel both multi-family residential uses and retail uses. 
Mixed-use residential and commercial urban enterprise zone means a zone of the city created pursuant to section 146-51(g)(4) of this Code. 
Multi-level retail means a retail business whose primary retail sales operation is on the same level as a city street and which is directly accessed by a dedicated pedestrian entrance from that street which gives customers immediate access to retail shopping but which may contain one or more levels. 
Retail business means a business which sells tangible personal property taxable as defined under the Georgia Retail Tax and Sales Use Statute (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-2(6)) but for the purpose of this article including: eating and drinking establishments, grocery stores, catering establishments, delicatessens and bakeries with products sold at retail on the premises. A retail business may be a part of a development identified as "mixed-use including retail." 
Street level retail business means a retail business whose primary retail sales operation is on the same level as a city street and which is directly accessed by a dedicated pedestrian entrance from that street which gives customers immediate access to retail shopping. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-102. - Purpose and scope of exemption. 
It has been found by the bureau of planning that available commercial space in certain areas within the city is currently not utilized to their full potential. The lack of significant levels of retail activity in these areas contributes to overall economic decline in the city. While many of the commercial enterprise zone programs have stimulated some commercial development, this type of incentive is not usually passed along to the retail tenant. Many retailers who are presently located in high cost commercial space in the downtown area are often unable to afford the additional staff to expand the hours of the business and thus contribute to the development of a 24-hour street life in the downtown area. Many retailers who desire to locate in the downtown area are often unable to afford the available space. While economic development growth trends suggest strong markets in the surrounding suburbs, the urban and tourism market trends also suggest that the downtown area and other areas in the city will support clean, safe and attractive retail centers. The need for such retail centers must be ensured through public incentives which will assist this growth. 
The redevelopment or growth of certain areas of the city will be increased or sustained by the promotion of retail or mixed-use including retail and the availability of increased retail shopping opportunities will provide additional amenities to encourage and support intown or downtown residential housing. The state recognizes that municipalities desire to encourage or support such goals and in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(f) provides specific authority allowing local governments to provide an exemption from business or occupation taxes for the purpose of developing, attracting, encouraging or maintaining selected types of businesses. In order to encourage persons providing retail shopping opportunities to locate in those areas of the city presently underserved by retail uses or mixed-use including retail, an exemption from the city business or occupation tax is herein provided as permitted by state law. 
The following exemption from the business tax levied in this article, division 1 is for the purpose of promoting development of retail or mixed-use including retail in certain areas of the city and is not for regulatory purposes. The exemption only applies to those businesses and occupations that are taxed pursuant to sections 30-51—30-85 by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance and no other effect on any other code section is intended. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-103. - Effect of division upon outstanding occupation taxes. 
The outstanding liabilities under prior application of any ordinances shall continue and remain in force until such tax, fee, or assessment, including any penalties and interest, shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-104. - Administration. 
The chief financial officer and the department of planning shall administer and enforce this division for the purpose of determining the applicability of the exemption provided herein and for the enforcement of penalties herein imposed. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-105. - Exemption provided. 
In accordance with state law, an exemption is hereby provided from the business tax levied by section 30-51—30-85 for those retail locations eligible under the terms set forth in this division. Said exemptions to apply only to a retail location qualified for an exemption under this division and no exemption is provided for any other location operated by the same person, unless said location separately qualifies under the terms of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-106. - Creation of retail incentive tax-exempt zones. 
(a)  The criteria for the designation of an area of the city as a retail incentive tax-exempt zone is as follows: 
(1)  The area is presently a functional commercial district where more than 50 percent of the area has served the retail market for more than ten years; 
(2)  The retail infrastructure is already in place (also known as "second generation retail"); 
(3)  A strong crime reduction program or strategy is in place; 
(4)  The area has strong retail market potential combining easy accessibility, high traffic count and favorable demographics; 
(5)  Designation as a retail incentive tax-exempt zone will reinforce and upgrade retail activity within the designated area; 
(6)  The area meets the requirements for locations which are presently eligible for other economic development programs made available through the city (including but not limited to: the facade improvement program; the business improvement loan fund program; enterprise zone; empowerment zone). 
(b)  Based on the criteria set forth in subsection (a), the following areas are declared retail incentive tax-exempt zones for the tax years 1998—2003. 
(1)  Fairlie-Poplar/Macy's area; 
(2)  Auburn Avenue/Edgewood; 
(3)  COPA; 
(4)  Empowerment Zone; 
(5)  MLK/Ashby/James P. Brawley/Fair St./Mason Turner; 
(6)  Metropolitan Parkway Redevelopment Corridor; 
(7)  Underground Atlanta; 
(8)  All mixed-use residential and commercial urban enterprise zones; 
(9)  Bankhead MARTA station; 
(10)  DeFoor's Ferry/Marietta Blvd.; 
(11)  Marietta Rd./Bankhead Highway; 
(12)  Chapel Rd./Bankhead Hwy./Simpson Rd. 
(13)  Anderson Avenue to Martin Luther King Jr. Drive, to Fulton Industrial Blvd. 
(14)  East Atlanta; 
(15)  Kirkwood; 
(16)  Edgewood; 
(17)  East Lake. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97; Ord. No. 1998-70, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Sec. 30-107. - Duration of existence of retail incentive tax-exempt zones. 
The status of an area as a retail incentive tax exempt zone shall expire at the end of the sixth year after such area is declared to be a retail incentive tax exempt zone, unless such status is extended by ordinance. A location which qualifies for any exemption provided in this division for any of the tax years in which an area is a retail incentive tax exempt zone shall be entitled to the full term of tax exempt or tax reduced years provided for that location elsewhere in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-108. - Requirements for eligibility. 
To qualify under this division for an exemption from the business tax, a location must: 
(1)  Be a retail business location within a retail incentive tax-exempt zone; 
(2)  Be a type of retail business eligible for the retail incentive exemption; 
(3)  Be operated by a person who has filed or submitted all business tax returns or other documents required by the business tax division; 
(4)  Pay the administrative fee as required by this article; 
(5)  Apply for an exemption as required by this division; 
(6)  Comply with the City of Atlanta First Source Jobs Policy. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-109. - Types of retail businesses ineligible. 
(a)  The following types of businesses are not eligible for the retail tax incentive exemption: 
(1)  Adult businesses as defined in City Code section 16-29.001(3) or as amended; 
(2)  Any establishment which has a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits in package form as described in City Code section 10-60(3)(d) or as amended; 
(3)  Any establishment which has a license for the sale of malt beverages for off-the-premises consumption as defined in City Code section 10-60(a)(2)d, and/or a license for the sale of wine for off-the-premises consumption as defined in City Code section 10-60(a)(1)d; and which for the purpose of compliance with the state excise taxes imposed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 and O.C.G.A. § 3-6-50 reports amounts of sales of malt beverages and wine which in total are more than 30 percent of its gross retail sales. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-110. - Exemption rate structure. 
(a)  Any street level retail business or multi-level retail business location which qualifies for an exemption from business taxes under this division and which is created during the existence of a retail incentive tax-exempt zone as the result of new construction for retail use or conversion of an existing structure to a retail use, shall be exempt from: 100 percent of the business tax for the first five tax years in which the business tax would otherwise be due; 80 percent of the business tax for the sixth year in which the business tax would otherwise be due; 60 percent for the seventh and eighth years; 40 percent for the ninth year; and 20 percent for the tenth year. 
(i)  Any street level retail business or multi-level retail business location which qualifies for an exemption from business taxes under this division as the result of new construction for retail use or conversion of an existing structure to a retail use prior to the declaration of a retail incentive tax-exempt zone but which obtains a business license in the same calendar year as the declaration of the area in which the business is located as a retail incentive tax-exempt zone shall qualify for the full exemption as provided in subsection (a). 
(b)  During the existence of a retail incentive tax-exempt zone, any street level retail business located in said zone which qualifies for an exemption from business taxes under this division and which applies for an exemption for a location for which a business license has already been issued or who operates any interior retail business which qualifies for an exemption from business taxes under this division, shall be exempt from: 80 percent of the business tax which would otherwise be due tax for the first year after application for exemption; 60 percent for the second and third years; 40 percent for the fourth year; and 20 percent for the fifth year. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-111. - Application and approval required. 
(a)  Each person desiring to qualify a particular location for an exemption pursuant to this division must receive written confirmation from the city officials responsible for zoning enforcement that the location of the business is within an area designated as a retail incentive tax-exempt zone and must make application to and receive approval from the business tax division. The application for exemption must accompany the business registration for that location for that tax year. Each person who operates a qualifying location in full compliance with this article and who properly registers shall receive approval and be certified as having an exemption from business taxes for that location for that tax year. 
(b)  Each person operating a business in the city, required by any other applicable section of the City Code to file a business tax return, shall file a business tax return as a part of the application for the exemption available pursuant to this division. Failure to file a business tax return when required to do so by any other applicable section of the City Code shall be grounds for denial of the exemption provided in this division. 
(c)  Any person, who applies for an exemption for a location which fails to qualify under the term of this division, shall be responsible for the full payment of all business taxes for that location in addition to any penalties and interest as provided elsewhere in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-112. - Duration of registration for exemption. 
The qualification for a location for exemption pursuant to this division shall automatically expire on December 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-113. - Lapse in registration for exemption. 
(a)  A person receiving an exemption for a location pursuant to this division in a previous year and who has allowed the registration for exemption for said location to lapse may apply for reinstatement of the exemption for that location. The amount of the exemption allowed upon reinstatement shall be the same amount which would be charged based upon the number of years which have elapsed since that location was first granted an exemption. In no case shall this section be interpreted to allow for greater rate of exemption or longer term of expiration than if a location's registration had never lapsed. 
(b)  Any person who has allowed the registration for any exemption issued pursuant to this division to lapse and who has failed to reapply prior to the expiration of retail incentive tax zone status in the area where the business is located shall not be eligible to regain exempt status after expiration of retail incentive tax-exempt status for that area. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-114. - Separate business locations. 
Where a business is operated at more than one location, only a location in a retail incentive tax zone shall be eligible for exemption. Said business shall pay business taxes in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate at each location. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-115. - Dominant line of business. 
(a)  The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business conducted at each location, and subordinate lines when appropriate. 
(b)  Where a location includes more than one line or type of operation, such business shall pay its business tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-116. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the business tax assessed to a particular location for the purpose of this division shall be those receipts attributed to each city location as set forth in section 30-80 or elsewhere in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-117. - Change of location. 
Any person moving from one location in a retail incentive tax-exempt zone to another location shall notify the chief financial officer of the move and the new address in writing on a form provided by the chief financial officer no later than the day of moving. The same extension registration will be valid at the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning regulations of the city and the location qualifies for an exemption under this division. In no case, shall any change in location allow for a greater rate of exemption or extend the length of the term of the retail incentive tax exemption for any business. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-118. - Record of exemption to be maintained. 
All locations shall maintain documentation relating to any grant of exemption at the address for which the exemption was issued. Said documentation shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Sec. 30-119. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who registers with the business tax division for an exemption for a location pursuant to this division and who intentionally provides any false information on the registration documents shall be liable for a penalty of ten percent of the taxes due under the occupation tax ordinance or $100 whichever is greater. This penalty shall apply independently of any penalties or interest which may be imposed elsewhere in this article. 
(b)  Where it is determined by the chief financial officer that any person reallocates or attempts to reallocate any gross receipts from any non-exempt location to any location exempted from payment of business taxes, pursuant to this division, said person shall be liable for a penalty of ten percent of the taxes due under the occupation tax ordinance or $100.00 whichever is greater. This penalty shall apply independently of any penalties or interest which may be imposed elsewhere in this article. 
(c)  Any person, not entitled to an exemption for a location, and who intentionally uses or attempts to use the provisions of this division for the purpose of evading business taxes which would otherwise be due and payable for that location or any other location operated by that person shall be liable for a penalty of ten percent of the taxes due under the occupation tax ordinance or $100 whichever is greater. This penalty shall apply independently of any penalties or interest which may be imposed elsewhere in this article. 
(d)  For the purpose of administering this division and for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section any administrative or enforcement powers provided elsewhere in this article shall apply to this division. 
(Ord. No. 1997-48, § 2, 8-25-97) 
Secs. 30-120—30-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXEMPTION AVAILABLE FOR RESTAURANTS WHERE SMOKING IS ENTIRELY PROHIBITED ON A VOLUNTARY BASIS 

Sec. 30-200. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in section 30-51, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or where defined herein: 
Licensed premises means, for the purposes of this article, the entire enclosed or unenclosed physical premises where a restaurant operates under its business license including service areas or offices which are not accessible to customers. 
Restaurant means for the purposes of this article, as defined in chapter 10 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-201. - Purpose and scope of exemption. 
It has been found by the city council that the availability of smoke-free restaurants within the city should be encouraged. There is large body of scientific research which documents the deleterious effects on the health of non-smokers who are in close proximity to smoke from cigarettes and other tobacco products. The council believes that measures which increase the number of smoke-free restaurants will offer health benefits to its citizens and visitors and not cause any appreciable amount of negative economic consequences to the city or its businesses. The council wishes to encourage restaurants to make smoke-free dining available to citizens and is therefore offering an exemption from a portion of the business and occupation tax to those restaurants which meet the criteria of this division for the purpose of demonstrating the economic viability of smoke-free restaurants. 
The State of Georgia recognizes that municipalities desire to encourage or support such goals and in section 48-13-10(f) of the Official Code of Georgia provides specific authority allowing local governments to provide an exemption from business or occupation taxes for the purpose of developing, attracting, encouraging or maintaining selected types of businesses. In order to encourage restaurants to provide smoke free dining opportunities in those areas of the city where such opportunities are not presently available or are underserved by smoke-free restaurants, an exemption from the city business or occupation tax is herein provided as permitted by state law. 
The following exemption from the business tax levied in this article III, division 1 is for the purpose of promoting development of smoke-free restaurants and is not for regulatory purposes. The exemption only applies to those businesses and occupations that are taxed pursuant to section 30-51 through 30-85 by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance and no other effect on any other code section is intended. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-202. - Effect of division upon outstanding occupation taxes. 
The outstanding liabilities under prior application of any ordinances shall continue and remain in force until such tax, fee, or assessment, including any penalties and interest, shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-203. - Administration. 
The chief financial officer and the director of the bureau of buildings shall administer and enforce this division for the purpose of determining the applicability of the exemption provided herein and for the enforcement of penalties herein imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-204. - Exemption provided. 
In accordance with state law, an exemption is hereby provided from the business tax levied by section 30-51 through 30-85 for those restaurants eligible under the terms set forth in this division. Said exemption is to apply only to specific restaurant locations qualified for an exemption under this division and no exemption is provided for any other business location operated by the same person, unless said location separately qualifies under the terms of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-205. - Criteria for eligibility. 
(a)  In order to be designated a smoke-free restaurant, a restaurant must meet all of the following criteria: 
(1)  A restaurant must choose to impose a ban on smoking on the licensed premises. 
(2)  Signs shall be posted in a conspicuous place such that all customers and employees are put on notice of the restaurant's choice to ban smoking. 
a.  The minimum signage shall be 4″ × 4″ sign of the international symbol for no smoking (a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it). 
b.  In addition, all such restaurants shall have a sign not less than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches which is conspicuously posted such that all customers and employees are put on notice. The sign shall contain the following language "THIS RESTAURANT HAS VOLUNTARILY AGREED TO BAN SMOKING UNDER SECTION 30-200 et. seq. OF THE CODE OF THE CITY OF ATLANTA. SMOKING BY ANY PERSON IS PROHIBITED. ALL PERSONS ARE NOTIFIED THAT SMOKING IN THIS RESTAURANT IS A VIOLATION OF THE CITY OF ATLANTA NON-SMOKING DESIGNATION ORDINANCE AND THE FULTON COUNTY CLEAN INDOOR AIR ORDINANCE. PERSONS WHO BELIEVE THAT THIS FACILITY IS IN VIOLATION MAY REPORT THE VIOLATION TO THE CITY OF ATLANTA BUREAU OF BUILDINGS." By administrative rule, the bureau of buildings may at its discretion add other language to promote enforcement efforts and may specify the size and arrangement of the text on this or any other required sign. 
c.  A 4″ × 4″ sign of the international symbol for no smoking or a sign at least one and one half inches × six inches which shall state "NO SMOKING" shall be posted in each restroom. 
d.  Other signs concerning the restaurants' no smoking policy may be posted at the discretion of management. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-206. - Application and approval required. 
(a)  Any restaurant desiring an exemption under this division must make application to the business tax division on a form provided by the department of finance. The exemption must be approved in writing before any restaurant seeking an exemption under this division may apply the exemption to its present year tax liability. Any person who operates a qualifying restaurant in full compliance with this article and who properly registers and is approved and certified as qualifying for exemption from business taxes for that restaurant for the current tax year prior to the due date for business taxes may apply the exemption to their tax liability for the current tax year. All persons operating any restaurant location that has applied for but has not received approval for exemption prior to the due date for business taxes for the current tax year may not apply an exemption to their tax liability. The exemption shall be prorated from the date of application in the first year of qualification. 
(b)  Any person desiring to qualify a particular restaurant location, which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, for an exemption pursuant to this division must receive written confirmation from the city police department that the location is designated as a restaurant as defined herein and must make application to and receive approval from the business tax division. 
(c)  Any person desiring to qualify a particular restaurant location for the exemption made available by this division and who is required by any other applicable section of the City Code to file any business tax return, must timely file such other business tax returns in order to qualify for the exemption available pursuant to this division. Failure to file a business tax return when required to do so by any other applicable section of the City Code shall be grounds for denial of the exemption provided in this division. 
(d)  Any person, who applies for an exemption for a location which fails to qualify under the term of this division, shall be responsible for the full payment of all business taxes for that location in addition to any penalties and interest as provided elsewhere in this article. 
(e)  Each person who receives an exemption shall be provided with a list of the specific signage requirements which may be set forth by the administrative rules of the bureau of buildings. Upon making any change to the signage requirements, the bureau of buildings shall notify the holders of exemptions of the required signage. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-207. - Exemption rate structure. 
(a)  Any restaurant certified as qualifying as smoke-free restaurant classification shall be exempt from 20 percent of the business tax which would otherwise be due. In the year when the first application for the exemption is made, the exemption shall be prorated from the date of application. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-208. - Duration of registration for exemption. 
Once qualification for exemption pursuant to this division is approved, such qualification shall automatically expire unless renewed as a part of the current year registration. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-209. - Types of restaurants ineligible. 
(a)  the following types of businesses are not eligible for the smoke-free restaurant exemption: 
(1)  Adult businesses as defined in City Code section 16-29.001(3) or as amended; 
(2)  Any establishment which has a license for the sale of distilled spirits and which is not qualified as a restaurant by the end of its first 12 months of operation. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-210. - Notice of non-compliance sent to owner for failure to enforce designated non-smoking areas. 
Because the granting of an exemption under this section is a privilege which is subject to abuse solely for economic gain, the city recognizes that there must be a mechanism to monitor compliance by those restaurants that have chosen to apply for tax exemptions under the terms of this division. The city believes that those who receive the exemption have a duty to request compliance from its patrons, and for the failure of restaurants granted exemption to comply with the non smoking designations required by this division will result in a notice of non-compliance letter being issued to the owner by the bureau of buildings and being kept on file by the bureau of treasury, licensing and employee benefits. The notice of violation is an administrative notice and is not an ordinance violation. The receipt of a notice of non-compliance letter shall not require appearance in municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-211. - Loss of eligibility. 
Any restaurant which has qualified under this division for an exemption from the business tax shall lose its eligibility upon the happening of any of the following events: 
(1)  The loss of restaurant status as determined by its license status; 
(2)  Allowing smoking in violation of this division as evidenced by three notice of non-compliance letters in any 12-month period for failure to enforce the smoking ban on its premises; 
(3)  A conviction for any violation related to the use of the provisions of this division for the purpose of evading business taxes which would otherwise be due and payable at the location for which the exemption was issued; 
(4)  A conviction for any violation related to the non-payment of business taxes which would otherwise be due and payable at the location for which the exemption was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-212. - Duration of existence of restaurant smoking ban exemptions. 
(a)  The business tax exemption for smoke free restaurants shall expire at 11:59 p.m. on December 31, 2003. After this date no restaurant shall be entitled to claim any business tax exemption because of a smoke-free designation. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-213. - Lapse in registration for exemption. 
(a)  A person receiving an exemption for a location pursuant to this division in a previous year and who has allowed the registration for exemption for said location to lapse may apply for reinstatement of the exemption for that location. Upon approval of the reinstatement, the amount of the exemption shall be prorated to the date of re-application. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-214. - Separate restaurants locations. 
Where a restaurant is operated at more than one location, each location must apply for exemption. The person operating such restaurants shall pay business taxes in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate at each location. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-215. - Dominant line of business. 
(a)  No exemption under this division is available except for the restaurant portion of any business which operates more than one type of business registration at any business location in the city. Where other type of sales and services are available, the business tax division shall identify the dominant line of business conducted at each location based on percentage of sales, and the exemption provided in this division shall apply only to the sales in the restaurant portion of any location. 
(b)  Where a location includes more than one line or type of operation, such business shall pay its business tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-216. - Record of exemption to be maintained. 
All locations shall maintain documentation relating to any grant of exemption at the address for which the exemption was issued. Said documentation shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-217. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who registers with the business tax division for an exemption for a location pursuant to this division and who intentionally provides any false information on the registration documents shall be liable for a penalty of ten percent of the taxes due under the occupation tax ordinance or $100.00 whichever is greater. This penalty shall apply independently of any penalties or interest which may be imposed elsewhere in this article. 
(b)  Any person, not entitled to an exemption for a location, and who intentionally uses or attempts to use the provisions of this division for the purpose of evading business taxes which would otherwise be due and payable for that location or any other location operated by that person shall be liable for a penalty of ten percent of the taxes due under the occupation tax ordinance or $100.00 whichever is greater. This penalty shall apply independently of any penalties or interest which may be imposed elsewhere in this article. 
(c)  For the purpose of administering this division and for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section any administrative or enforcement powers or any appeal provisions provided elsewhere in this article shall apply to this division. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Sec. 30-218. - Severability. 
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this division is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof and shall not affect the validity of the taxes, penalty or interest imposed elsewhere in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-55, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Secs. 30-219—30-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROGRAM FOR TAX EXEMPTIONS FOR NEW AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY BUSINESSES 

Sec. 30-300. - Purpose of the program. 
(a)  The purpose of the City of Atlanta's Program for Tax Exemptions for New and Emerging Technology Businesses (the "program") is to encourage new businesses that operate in certain fields related to high technology, life sciences, and intellectual property by providing exemption from administrative fees and a portion of taxes imposed by the City of Atlanta Occupation Tax Ordinance. 
(b)  The program is designed to encourage the creation of new businesses in emerging markets and technologies whether developed at public or private business incubator facilities or by the efforts of individual entrepreneurs. The development of technology into a commercial product by going through the process of business planning, product development, securing funding, and other steps necessary to get the technology to the marketplace can be made easier by tax exemption and reduced cost of regulatory compliance. The city wishes to reduce the start-up costs to new businesses by providing specific regulatory and taxation relief until such business ventures become ready to compete in the marketplace. 
(c)  Three public benefits characterize the purpose of the program: 
(1)  Tax exemptions and reduced cost of regulatory compliance creates a lower cost environment for new and emerging technology businesses and encourages the selected types of businesses to locate their operations and develop their business within the city; 
(2)  Tax exemptions and reduced cost of regulatory compliance tends to have a positive impact on the city's economic health by encouraging and maximizing the success of new and emerging businesses in targeted fields that tend to provide higher paying jobs and encourage growth in related sectors; 
(3)  The program encourages registration of new and emerging businesses in targeted fields by allowing such businesses to be able to openly solicit capital investment and business advice before actively earning revenues or receiving gross receipts. 
(d)  This program is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(f) and any part of this division which is not authorized by said section or the general law is a specific limitation of this division without regard to whether it is set forth herein and such general law may be relied upon for enforcement of this division or this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-301. - Definitions. 
Business entity means any sole proprietorship; corporation and foreign corporation; nonprofit corporation and foreign nonprofit corporation; profit and nonprofit unincorporated association; business trust, estate, general partnership, limited partnership, trust, two or more persons having a joint or common economic interest; limited liability company and foreign limited liability company; limited liability partnership and foreign limited liability partnership. 
Initial registration year means the first tax year that the exemption provided by this division is made available or the tax year in which a qualifying business is organized. 
Qualifying business means a business entity (i) not previously doing business in the jurisdiction of the city in any other form; (ii) that applies for a business license in a type of business classification that has been designated as consistent with the intent of this division through reference to a classification in the North American Industry Classification System ("NAICS") or an equivalent Standard Industrial Classification that can reasonably be cross-referenced to the NAICS that is from time to time approved for an exemption by the governing authority; and (iii) the application for business license or renewal is made in an operating year that qualifies for an exemption. 
Revenue means the same as gross receipts which are defined elsewhere in this article. 
Start-up means a business entity whose business form is in the initial registration year. 
Start-up exemption means an exemption provided to a start-up business whose operations are conducted primarily at a certified business incubator location and whose operating characteristics meet the requirements of this division. 
Tax year means any year in which taxes imposed under Chapter 30 should have been paid without regard to whether the taxpayer was registered with the office of revenue. 
Year of operations means a calendar year in which a qualifying business conducts business in the jurisdiction of the City of Atlanta including those years when such business was not registered with the office of revenue. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-302. - NAICS classifications approved for exemptions. 
The governing authority has adopted by ordinance and may from time to time add or delete those NAICS classifications considered to support the intent of this division. The director shall maintain a record of the NAICS classifications which are approved to provide start-up exemptions for qualifying businesses. The removal of an NACIS classification from the list of businesses for which an exemption can be granted shall not cause a business which received an exemption to lose such exemption until after its third year of operations. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-303. - Registration and renewal required. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 30-65 of this article, registration and renewal of the business license is required even for a business which is included in the NAICS classifications which are approved to provide start-up exemptions for qualifying businesses and it shall remain a violation of this article for any business, even when entitled to an exemption under this division, to fail to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Determination of whether a business is a qualifying business is solely reserved to the chief financial officer or his designee and it shall be a violation of this article for a business which would be a qualified business if properly registered to operate without a business license. 
(2)  It shall not be a defense to a citation for failure to register for a business which would be a qualified business if properly registered to operate without a business license and such business may still be cited for violation of section 30-65 even if it is granted a start-up exemption. The chief financial officer may, but is not required to, dismiss a citation upon a determination that no tax would be due after the initial registration provided that the business is in its first year of operations. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the determination that business is determined to be a qualifying business upon its initial registration, the timely renewal of the registration in compliance with section 30-69 is required. 
(1)  Renewal is required in order to determine if gross receipts of the qualifying business exceed the level to which the exemption applied such that some tax is due; 
(2)  Renewal is required to determine if the qualifying business has exhausted its right to exemptions which is limited in all case to three tax years 
(c)  A business which is organized solely to make investments which might be exempt from some or all taxes imposed by this article by virtue of the exemptions granted by this division shall nevertheless be required to register and renew its business license. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-304. - Administrative fees exempted. 
No qualifying business shall be charged an administrative fee in connection with its registration or renewal in those operating year when exemptions available. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-305. - Amount of tax exempted. 
No qualifying business shall be taxed on the first $1,000,000.00 of gross receipts for the first three years of operations, specifically including the year of registration. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-306. - Per employee tax exempted. 
No qualifying business shall be taxed on the number of employees for the first three years of operations, specifically including the year of registration, except where the business has more than $1,000,000.00 of gross receipts in which case, the per employee exemption shall only apply to five employees. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-307. - Operating years when exemptions available. 
(a)  A qualifying business that is newly formed is eligible for an exemption in the year of its formation and for the following two years of operations. 
(b)  A qualifying business that would have been eligible for the exemption had such exemption had been available in the first three years of its operations is eligible for an exemption in first and/or second year after this division is effective; provided however that no exemption is available in the fourth year of operation of any qualifying business. 
(c)  A qualifying business that was in operation but was not registered with the office of revenue shall have the years of operation prior to registration counted as a part of the operating years used to calculate if exemptions could be available. 
(d)  Under no circumstance shall any business entity be entitled to an exemption in more than three tax years. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-308. - Change of business form or name. 
A change of business form or name by a business entity in business for three previous years shall not be sufficient for a business entity to be classified as a qualifying business even if such business operates in a field that has been designated as consistent with the aim of this division through reference to a classification in the North American Industry Classification System ("NAICS"). The chief financial officer is authorized to make a determination as to whether a business entity which has applied for an exemption is in fact operating as a start-up business or has operated under a different business form or business name. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-309. - Transfer of revenues to or from other entities. 
It is the intent of this division that an exemption from taxes be provided only for those qualifying businesses on gross receipts of up to $1,000,000.00 received in connection with their operations in an operating year when such exemptions would be available. The transfer of gross receipts or revenue to other business entities to avoid the payment of tax shall result in the 
Transfers of revenues earned by other business entities to a qualifying business in an operating year when exemptions are available shall not eligible for an exemption. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-310. - Gains from investments in qualified businesses. 
(a)  In recognition of the fact that investment is a crucial component of encouraging the creation of new businesses in emerging markets and technologies, it is the intent of this division that an exemption from taxes also be provided for gains from the sale of stocks, bonds, partnership shares or instruments of indebtedness that are given in exchange for funding the creation of a qualifying business. 
(b)  A business entity receiving stocks, bonds, partnership shares, or instruments of indebtedness that are given in exchange for a cash investment in a qualifying businesses, shall be exempt from taxes on the first $1,000,000.00 received above the amount of the initial cash investment where such gain is in connection with the sale of such stocks, bonds, partnership shares, or instruments of indebtedness, provided that cash is received as payment for the sale thereof within three years of the date of the cash investment or the date of registration of the qualifying business, whichever is earlier. 
(1)  For the purpose of this division, gain from an investment in a qualifying business that is no longer included in the list of NAICS classifications approved to provide start-up exemptions when the stocks, bonds, partnership shares, or instruments of indebtedness received in exchange for the initial cash investment are sold, shall still receive the exemption provided by this section so long as the cash that is received as payment for the sale of such investment is received within the time provided in this section. 
(c)  No exemption is allowed for gains resulting from investment in any type of business entity other than in a qualified business in its initial registration year and that was registered with the office of revenue within 30 days of the date that such investment was made or the date of initial registration whichever is later. 
(d)  In order to encourage reinvestment in new qualifying businesses, gain resulting from the exchange of stocks, bonds, partnership shares, or instruments of indebtedness given in exchange for a cash investment in a qualifying businesses for stocks, bonds, partnership shares, or instruments of indebtedness, the amount of gain recognized shall not be exempt from taxes imposed under this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-311. - Refunds for fees or taxes paid for prior operations. 
Under no circumstance shall any part of this division or this article be construed to authorize refunds for a business entity which has paid any tax or fee prior to the enactment of this division. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-312. - Penalties for filing false applications or renewals. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of the occupation tax ordinance to file false documents in order to be determined to be a qualifying business or to receive any type of exemption. 
(1)  The chief financial officer shall have all powers delegated under section 30-57 to make a determination that this section has been violated and to impose any penalty provided by this division. 
(2)  The penalty for violation of this section shall be the immediate revocation of the exemption in addition to any taxes, penalties and interest which are determined to be due. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-313. - Requesting additional data authorized. 
The chief financial officer is authorized to issue a business license to a start-up business that grants permission for operation in the City of Atlanta in the same manner an any other business license; provided however that gathering of such additional information as deemed necessary by the office of revenue for efficient management of the exemptions may be made a part of the application process. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-314. - Penalties for filing false applications or renewals for start-up business exemption or filing false returns. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this division and the occupation tax ordinance to file false documents in connection with a start-up business exemption. 
(1)  Any business which has been granted an exemption as a start-up business and which claims such exemption through filing a false application or renewal shall be in violation of this division and the occupation tax ordinance. 
(2)  The chief financial officer shall have all powers delegated under section 30-57 to make a determination that this section has been violated. 
(3)  The penalty for violation of this division shall be the immediate revocation of the exemption. The revocation of the start-up business exemption shall cause any tax and administrative fee due in the year of revocation to be fully payable as if the business was not qualified for an exemption. 
(4)  The penalty for filing a false application for exemption and/or the underpayment of taxes shall be the same as that set forth in Division 1 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-315. - Enforcement provisions. 
Any provision of this division may be administered or enforced through the use of any and all other regulations set forth elsewhere in this article or in the general law. It is the specifically intended that any method of enforcement which could be used to determine if an occupation tax was correctly paid can be used to determine whether an exemption will be or was correctly granted or whether the amount of the exemption taken by a taxpayer was proper in amount. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-316. - Appeals. 
An appeal of a decision of the chief financial officer or his designee as to whether an exemption will be or was correctly granted or whether the amount of the exemption taken by a tax payer was proper in amount is an administrative decision which shall be appealed in the same manner as decisions and in the method that is set forth elsewhere in this article. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-317. - Compliance with other laws. 
The approval of a start-up business exemption by the office of revenue shall not excuse any business from any type of filing or certification required by state law or this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Sec. 30-318. - Severability. 
In the event that any part of this division is declared invalid for any reason such that the exemption provided in division cannot be granted, this division is intended to be fully severable from the levy of the occupation tax and all parts of this article which support collection. 
( Ord. No. 2015-13(15-O-1078), § 1(Exh. A), 3-11-15 ) 
Secs. 30-319—30-485. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-14(08-O-0332), § 1, approved March 11, 2008, repealed art. IV, §§ 30-486, 30-487, 30-501—30-506, in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to astrology as enacted by Code 1977; as subsequently amended. The user's attention is directed to art. X of this chapter for similar provisions. 

Secs. 30-486—30-525. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AUTOMOBILE OR MOTORCYCLE RACES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; traffic and vehicles, ch. 150. 
State Law reference— State regulation of racetracks, O.C.G.A. § 43-25-1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-526. - Permit required. 
Every person desiring to conduct or promote an automobile or a motorcycle race within the corporate limits of the city or upon any property over which the city has police jurisdiction, shall, before engaging in the business, undertaking or enterprise, obtain a permit therefor from the mayor in the manner set forth in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6451(a)) 
Charter reference— Extraterritorial jurisdiction along sewer lines, water lines, etc., § 1-102(c)(47). 
Sec. 30-527. - Application for permit. 
Any person desiring a permit to conduct or promote an automobile or a motorcycle race shall, before engaging in that business, file an application with the department of police upon such forms as may be supplied by the department. The applicant shall furnish to the department a sworn statement, setting forth any and all facts requested by the department, and the applicant shall truthfully answer all questions contained in the application. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6451(b)) 
Sec. 30-528. - Issuance or rejection of permit. 
The police chief shall make a recommendation as to the granting or refusal of the permit to conduct or promote an automobile or a motorcycle race to the license review board. The license review board shall conduct a hearing at a regularly scheduled meeting, and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6451(c); Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 9, 11-6-08) 
Secs. 30-529—30-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BONDING AGENTS (BONDSPERSON)[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 62; law enforcement, ch. 98. 
State Law reference— Professional bondsmen, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-551. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Professional bondsperson means any person who shall for compensation sign any bond for the appearance of any accused person in the municipal court or any court of the city or of Fulton County or who shall procure bond for that person or who shall deposit collateral for that person in lieu of bond. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6032) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-552. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violations by bondsperson. Any professional bondsperson violating this article shall, on conviction in the municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-8. In addition thereto, any bondsperson convicted of any violation of this article shall automatically be barred from signing bonds in the city. 
(b)  Violations by police. Any police officer who shall directly or indirectly aid any professional bondsperson in the evasion of this article or who shall carry or otherwise furnish information to a professional bondsperson or who shall cause it to be done, by means of which the bondsperson may be enabled to evade this article or escape its penalties or who shall directly or indirectly furnish any professional bondsperson with the name or other designation of any prisoner, except as specifically provided in this article, or who shall in any manner directly or indirectly cooperate with or aid any professional bondsperson in the pursuit of the bondsperson's business or aid the bondsperson to secure a client or who, knowing of any evasion or violation of this article or any part thereof by any person fails to report it immediately to the police chief shall be guilty of conduct unbecoming an officer and, on conviction thereof by the council, shall be discharged from the service of the city. 
(c)  Violations by others. Any person other than a police officer who shall directly or indirectly aid any professional bondsperson in the evasion of this article or who shall carry or otherwise furnish information to a professional bondsperson or who shall cause it to be done, by means of which the bondsperson may be enabled to evade this article or escape its penalties, or who shall directly or indirectly furnish any professional bondsperson with the name or other designation of any prisoner for the purpose of aiding the bondsperson to secure clients or who shall in any manner cooperate with or aid any professional bondsperson in the preparation of any false schedule or list of property or bonds required to be rendered under this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6044) 
Sec. 30-553. - Exemptions. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as affecting the right of a citizen to sign a bond not for compensation or the right of surety companies that have complied with the laws of the state regulating those companies to carry on their regular business. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6031) 
Sec. 30-554. - State license required; underwriter. 
In addition to any other requirements contained in this article, no professional bondsperson or agent or subagent of a bondsperson shall be permitted to sign bonds for any person imprisoned unless the professional bondsperson, agent or subagent shall have previously procured the following: 
(1)  A limited surety agent's license issued by the insurance commissioner of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  A certified power-of-attorney agreement from an underwriter, whether the underwriter is a company, corporation, firm, partnership, association or individual, which agreement makes, constitutes and appoints the professional bondsperson, agent or subagent as the underwriter's true and lawful agent and attorney in fact with express authority to make, execute, seal and deliver, as surety, bail bonds and recognizances, such that the execution of the bail bonds and recognizances by the professional bondsperson, agent or subagent is binding upon the underwriter for the full amount of each and every bail bond or recognizance written in favor of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6045) 
Sec. 30-555. - Presence in police station; speaking to prisoners; identification. 
(a)  No professional bondsperson shall be allowed to loiter in the police station or grounds or to enter those places except when attending court or on business in connection with a case wherein the bondsperson is surety on a bond nor shall the bondsperson be allowed to speak to any prisoner at the police station unless authorized to do so by the station captain on duty. The station captain shall not grant this authority until the station captain has received from the prisoner a written request, naming the bondsperson the prisoner wishes to see. If no bondsperson is named by the prisoner, the station captain shall call them in rotation until a bondsperson is secured. 
(b)  Every professional bondsperson and the bondsperson's agents and subagents shall wear an identification badge or card, including photograph, designed by the mayor or the mayor's designee, whenever the professional bondsperson is acting as such in any city building or other city property. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6042) 
Sec. 30-556. - Reports; records. 
(a)  A copy of every report by a professional bondsperson to the department of police shall be submitted by the bondsperson to the bond clerk. 
(b)  If a discrepancy of three percent or more occurs between these reports and the records of the bond clerk, the bond clerk may inspect the bookkeeping records of the professional bondsperson. 
(c)  The permit of a professional bondsperson whose records are found to be falsified shall be suspended for 60 days. For a second violation of this section, the permit shall be suspended for 12 months. These penalties shall be in addition to any sentences imposed by any court as a result of the falsification of records. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6043) 
Secs. 30-557—30-565. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND BUSINESS LICENSES 

Sec. 30-566. - Permit required; prerequisite to issuance of license. 
(a)  No person shall carry on or be engaged in the business of professional bondsperson until authorized to do so by a permit granted by the mayor upon recommendation of the license review board. The license review board shall conduct the hearing and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant the application for a new permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. No business license shall be issued to a professional bondsperson until this permit has been granted. Fees for applications and annual permits are set forth in City Code section 30-28(a). 
(b)  No application for any permit under this section shall be granted where the application or the evidence on a hearing before the license review board shows that the applicant or any agent or subagent thereof: 
(1)  Has a past record of failure to meet payments on defaulted bonds as a bondsperson or the agent or subagent thereof in any jurisdiction; 
(2)  Is unable to read and write the English language to a sufficient degree to fill out applicable bond forms; 
(3)  Has been convicted of any felony in the courts of this state or of any other state or of the United States; or 
(4)  Is not financially solvent. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6033; Ord. No. 1999-17, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 10, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 30-567. - Permit required for visiting prisoner, signing bond. 
No professional bondsperson or agent thereof may visit prisoners or sign bonds for any person imprisoned unless the bondsperson or agent shall have procured a permit from the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6038) 
Sec. 30-568. - Petition for permit. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of professional bondsperson shall, on or before January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 in each year, file with the department of police a petition for a permit to engage in the business. The petition shall contain the following: 
(1)  A description of all real property in the five-county metropolitan Atlanta area owned in fee simple by the person and the clear market value of each item of real property so scheduled shall be set forth; 
(2)  A description of mortgages, liens or other encumbrances affecting that real property, showing the maturity date and amount thereof; 
(3)  A statement of the total amount of all bonds upon which the petitioner may, at that time, appear as surety; and 
(4)  A subschedule of all bonds upon which the petitioner may, at that time, appear as surety which have been forfeited and not paid. 
(b)  The department of police may require the petitioner to file, in addition, a schedule showing separately the date and penal sum of all of the bonds upon which the petitioner then appears as surety. 
(c)  All schedules and subschedules required by this division shall be made under oath by the petitioner; if the petitioner is a firm, each member of the firm shall sign and, if a corporation, two principal officers thereof authorized by the corporation's bylaws shall sign and the corporate seal shall be affixed. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6035) 
Sec. 30-569. - Criminal record of applicant for permit. 
The police chief shall require every applicant for a permit for a professional bondsperson to show a complete record of any conviction in any court for the violation of any offense or any crime and to present to the police chief such other information as will enable the police chief to determine the character of the professional bondsperson or agent. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6039) 
Sec. 30-570. - Deposit of negotiable securities required. 
(a)  No permit or business license shall be issued to any person to carry on or engage in the business of professional bondsperson until the person has deposited with the chief financial officer cash or negotiable securities in the sum of $25,000.00, to be held by the city and subject to levy and execution by the city to the extent of any individual bond forfeitures not paid to the city, provided that this sum of $25,000.00 shall not limit the amount of liability of a professional bondsperson to the city and the bondsperson shall remain liable to the city for the total amount for which the bondsperson is responsible. 
(b)  If any payment is made from the fund deposited by any bondsperson, the bondsperson shall deposit additional cash or negotiable securities in order to maintain the fund at the amount of $25,000.00. 
(c)  The chief financial officer may deliver to the sheriff or other officers authorized to make levy and execution under writs of fi. fa. issued pursuant to law, sufficient collateral as set forth in this section to satisfy the fi. fa. issued in connection with and for the collection of a judgment as brought about by way of bond forfeiture. 
(d)  The value of any security or other property approved for use in the signing of bonds or the financial backing of bonds shall be determined from the market value of that security or other property on the date of the deposit or the signing of the bond. On any subsequent date on which this value is again in question, the market value on that subsequent date shall control. 
(e)  The deposit of a professional bondsperson with the chief financial officer shall be increased as necessary so that it shall always equal not less than ten percent of the bondsperson's outstanding bonds, provided that the minimum deposit shall be $25,000.00. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6034) 
Sec. 30-571. - Investigation of petition for permit. 
The license review board shall investigate thoroughly every petition for a permit for engaging in the business of professional bondsperson and shall verify all schedules required in section 30-568. The board shall not recommend the issuance of a permit to a professional bondsperson unless the petition and accompanying schedules shall clearly show that the petitioner is the owner of real property in Fulton County of a fair market value, in excess of encumbrances, equal to the total of all bonds upon which the petitioner may at that time appear as surety, plus the amount allowed as exemption under the homestead laws of the state. If the petitioner is not surety on any bonds at the time of application, the petition shall clearly show that the petitioner is financially responsible. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6036) 
Sec. 30-572. - Authority to require additional schedules of property, bonds; authority to bar insolvents. 
The department of police may at all times require a professional bondsperson to submit schedules of property and of bonds upon which the bondsperson appears as surety. If the schedules disclose the insolvency or inability of a bondsperson to sign bonds because of an excess of liability over assets, the department of police may bar the bondsperson from signing further bonds in city cases for so long as the insolvency or inability exists. Any professional bondsperson who shall fail to furnish these schedules within five days after demand or who shall furnish a false schedule shall thereafter be barred from signing bonds in connection with cases in the courts of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6037) 
Sec. 30-573. - Fingerprinting required. 
As a condition to granting a permit under this division, the police chief shall cause the bondsperson or agent to be fingerprinted. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6040) 
Sec. 30-574. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  The police chief, upon the recommendation of the bond clerk, shall suspend the permit of any professional bondsperson or agent or subagent thereof for any one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Misconduct in the business of professional bondsperson by the bondsperson or the bondsperson's agent or employee; 
(2)  Failure to respond to judgments by the bondsperson or the bondsperson's surety; 
(3)  Violation of any law specifically affecting professional bondspersons or criminal bonds or violation of this article; 
(4)  The refusal for cause by Fulton County or DeKalb County to permit the bondsperson to operate in either of those jurisdictions; 
(5)  Receiving assistance by a police officer or another who is violating section 30-552(b) or (c); 
(6)  Having bonds outstanding in an amount totaling more than $200,000.00; 
(7)  Having outstanding forfeited bonds in an amount totaling more than $50,000.00; or 
(8)  Having outstanding forfeited bonds that number more than 25 percent of the total number of outstanding bonds. 
(b)  The police chief shall notify the bond clerk of every suspension or revocation of a professional bondsperson's permit, and it shall be unlawful for any person to accept a bond signed by a bondsperson whose permit has been suspended or revoked. 
(c)  The person or agent thereof whose permit is suspended shall be notified by the police chief of the reason for the suspension and shall be given the right within 30 days from the effective date of the suspension to appear before the license review board and to show cause why the suspension should not be made permanent by the mayor. Failure to appear within the specified time or any extension thereof shall require revocation by the mayor. 
(d)  If a permit is revoked, the holder of the permit shall not be permitted to again receive a permit for five years from the date of the revocation. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6041) 
Secs. 30-575—30-595. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DOOR TO DOOR SALES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate peddlers and itinerant trades, § 1-102(c)(18). 
Cross reference— Telephone sales campaigns, § 30-1381 et seq.; charitable solicitations, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; buyer's right to cancel home solicited sales, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-6. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-596. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consumer goods and services means goods or services purchased, leased or rented primarily for personal, family or household purposes, including courses of instruction or training regardless of the purpose for which they are taken. 
Door to door sale means a sale, lease or rental of consumer goods and services in which the seller or the seller's representative personally solicits the sale, except those in response to or following an invitation by the buyer, and the buyer's agreement or offer to purchase is made at a place other than the place of business of the seller. The term door to door does not include a transaction: 
(1)  Conducted and consummated entirely by mail or telephone and without any other contact between the buyer and the seller or the seller's representative prior to delivery of the goods or performance of the services; 
(2)  Pertaining to the sale or rental of real property, to the sale of insurance or to the sale of securities or commodities by a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission; or 
(3)  Conducted in the home of the seller or in the home of a person authorized by the seller to offer such merchandise for sale. 
Person means any person, partnership, corporation or association engaged in the door to door sales of consumer goods and services. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5202) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-597. - Hours of solicitation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, while conducting the activities of solicitation pursuant to chapter 30, article VII, whether licensed or unlicensed, to enter upon any private property, knock on doors or otherwise disturb persons in their residences between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day. 
(Ord. No. 1997-13, § 3, 3-10-97) 
Secs. 30-598—30-610. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 30-611. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in door to door sales of consumer goods or services in the city without first obtaining a permit from the city. Prior to any solicitation provided for in this article, the person making the solicitation shall, before making any other statement, state the following: 
(1)  The identity of the person making the solicitation; 
(2)  The name and address of the person represented by such person; and 
(3)  The identity or kinds of goods or services being offered for sale. 
(b)  In addition to meeting the requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the person making the solicitation shall show and display identification which states the information required by statement. Such identification shall be on a form approved by the mayor or the mayor's designee. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5201) 
Sec. 30-612. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following, upon presenting evidence to the mayor or the mayor's designee sufficient to show entitlement to the following classifications, shall be exempted from the requirements that they obtain permits and pay fees prior to any solicitation under this article: 
(1)  Persons certified as exempt from federal taxation as nonprofit entities by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service. 
(2)  Persons who operate or engage route salespeople who operate along regularly established routes, where periodic deliveries are made to established customers and prospective customers are called upon from time to time within the regular service area for orders for future periodic deliveries and which persons do not demand, accept or receive payments or deposits of money in advance of final delivery of goods or services. 
(b)  Any person defined by subsection (a) of this section as exempt shall be required to register annually with the mayor or the mayor's designee upon forms to be prepared and approved by the mayor or the mayor's designee. Such registration form shall state the name and address of such person, the nature and character of the door to door sales to be carried on, if a partnership the names of the partners, if a corporation the officers and such other information as may be required by the mayor or the mayor's designee and shall be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. Such person shall be required to register annually on or before the anniversary date of the original registration in the calendar year in which the person proposes to operate. 
(c)  Any person defined by subsection (a) of this section as exempt shall be required to display and state their identification prior to any solicitation. Such identification shall be on a form approved by the mayor or the mayor's designee. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5203; Ord. No. 1997-13, §§ 1, 2, 3-10-97) 
Sec. 30-613. - Application. 
(a)  Every person desiring to obtain a permit required under this division shall make written application to the mayor or the mayor's designee upon forms to be prepared and approved by the mayor or the mayor's designee. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the area of the city where the proposed door to door sales are to be conducted; the nature and character of the door to door sales to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers; and such other information as may be required by the mayor and shall be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. However, if a business employs or otherwise engages 30 or more persons to solicit sales on behalf of the business, the business is authorized to make application on behalf of such persons, and any person is thereby relieved of the responsibility to apply for a permit on an individual basis. 
(b)  Every applicant shall furnish all data, information and records requested by the mayor or the mayor's designee, and the failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall be cause for the denial of the application. Every applicant, by filing an application, agrees to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the mayor or the mayor's designee or the city attorney and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such permit. The failure to produce such person within 30 days after being requested to do so shall be cause for the denial of the application. 
(c)  Each application for a permit made pursuant to this division shall be investigated by the mayor or the mayor's designee who shall make a determination with regard to the issuance of the permit within ten days of the application. If such application shall be denied, it shall be brought before the next regularly scheduled meeting of the license review board immediately following the denial. The license review board shall investigate the denial and after a public hearing, make its recommendation to the mayor for final action. 
(d)  The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant the application for a new permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5204; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 11, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 30-614. - False information contained in application. 
Any material omission, untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original, renewal or transfer application for a permit under this division shall be cause for the denial thereof, and if any permit has previously been granted under these circumstances, such shall constitute cause for the revocation of the permit. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5205) 
Sec. 30-615. - Fees. 
(a)  The application fee for a company or individual applying for a permit to solicit door-to-door sales in the city shall be $100.00. The application fee for an individual employee, agent, independent contractor, or anyone working for a company applying for a permit to solicit door-to-door sales shall be $50.00. 
(b)  The annual permit fee for a company or individual obtaining a permit to solicit door-to-door sales in the city shall be $500.00. The annual permit fee for an individual employee, agent, independent contractor, or anyone working for a company applying for a permit to solicit door-to-door sales shall be $170.00. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-5029, 19-14.021; Ord. No. 1999-18, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 30-616. - Renewal. 
A permit required under this division shall be renewed on or before the anniversary date of the issuance of the original permit in the calendar year in which the permittee proposed to operate. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5206) 
Sec. 30-617. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  No permit issued under this division shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, and after a hearing and upon a proper five-day written notice to the holder of such permit of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held. 
(b)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such permit shall consist of the violation of any laws or sections of this Code or other ordinances regulating such persons or for the violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such persons or for the violation of any state or federal law or for the violation of any sections of this Code or other city ordinances other than the traffic ordinances. 
(c)  The license review board is delegated the authority to conduct the hearings and report its findings and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor may suspend any such permit. The suspension may be made effective immediately and remain in force until the next regular meeting of the license review board. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5207) 
Sec. 30-618. - Entry upon signed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, while conducting the activities of solicitation pursuant to chapter 30, article VII, whether licensed or unlicensed, to enter upon any residential premises in the city where the owner, occupant or person legally in charge of the premises has posted, at the entry to the premises, or at the entry to the principal building on the premises, a sign bearing the words "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," or words of similar import. 
(Ord. No. 1997-13, § 4, 3-10-97) 
Sec. 30-619. - Violations and penalty. 
(a)  Violation of any of the provisions of chapter 30, article VII of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances shall be treated as an infraction, and shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided by law. 
(b)  Any person who enters upon the premises of another after receiving notice that such entry is forbidden or who remains upon the premises of another after receiving notice to depart said premises is subject to immediate arrest for criminal trespass pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
(Ord. No. 1997-13, § 5, 3-10-97) 
Secs. 30-620—30-640. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ESCORT SERVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-641. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Escort means a person who is held out to the public to be available for hire and who, for monetary consideration in the form of a fee, commission or salary, consorts with, or accompanies or who offers, for monetary consideration, to consort or accompany another or others to social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement or within any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
(1)  Service-oriented escort is an escort which: 
a.  Operates from an open office; 
b.  Does not employ or use an escort runner; 
c.  Does not advertise that sexual conduct will be provided to the patron or work for an escort bureau which so advertises; and 
d.  Does not offer or provide sexual conduct. 
(2)  Sexually-oriented escort is an escort which: 
a.  Employs as an employee, agent or independent contractor an escort bureau runner; 
b.  Works for, as an agent, employee, contractor, or is referred to a patron by a sexually-oriented escort bureau; 
c.  Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided, or works for, as an employee, agent or independent contractor or is referred to a patron by an escort bureau which so advertises; 
d.  Solicits, offers to provide or does provide acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron, or accepts an offer or solicitation to provide acts of sexual conduct for a fee in addition to the fee charged by the escort bureau; 
e.  Works as an escort without having a current employee permit issued for the referring escort bureau in such escort's possession at all times while working as an escort; or 
f.  Accepts a fee from a patron who has not first been delivered a contract. 
Escort bureau means a person who, for a fee, commission, profit, payment or other monetary consideration, furnishes, refers to, offers to furnish or refer escorts, or provides or offers to introduce patrons to escorts. 
(1)  Service-oriented escort bureau is an escort bureau which: 
a.  Maintains an office at an established place of business; 
b.  Employs or provides only escorts who possess employee permits; 
c.  Does not use an escort bureau runner; and 
d.  Does not advertise that sexual conduct will be provided to a patron. 
(2)  Sexually-oriented escort bureau is an escort bureau which: 
a.  Does not maintain an open office; 
b.  Employs as an employee, agent or independent contractor, an escort bureau runner; 
c.  Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided, or that escorts which provide such sexual conduct will be provided, referred or introduced to a patron; 
d.  Solicits, offers to provide or does provide acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron; 
e.  Employs, contracts with or provides or refers escorts who do not possess employee permits as required in section 30-668; 
f.  Does not deliver contracts to every patron or customer; or 
g.  Employs, contracts with a sexually oriented escort or refers or provides to a patron a sexually oriented escort. 
Escort bureau runner means an employee, agent or independent contractor of the bureau who, after the bureau receives a call from a prospective customer, goes to the customer's location to collect the escort fee and to make other necessary arrangements. 
Offer to provide acts of sexual conduct means to offer, propose or to solicit to provide sexual conduct to a patron. Such definition includes all conversations, advertisements and acts which would lead a reasonably prudent person to conclude that such acts were to be provided. 
Sexual conduct means the engaging in or the commission of an act of sexual intercourse, sodomy or the touching of the sexual organs, pubic region, buttock or female breast of a person for the purpose of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of another person. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6122) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 30-642—30-650. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 30-651. - Compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an escort service without having first complied with this article, including obtaining of a permit for the operation of an escort service. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6111) 
Sec. 30-652. - Application; investigation. 
(a)  Every person desiring to obtain a permit to operate an escort service shall make written application to the department of police upon forms to be prepared and approved by the mayor. Each applicant shall submit the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The location of the proposed escort service. 
(3)  The nature and character of the business. 
(4)  If a partnership, the name of the partnership and the names and addresses of the partners. 
(5)  If a corporation, the name of the corporation and the names and addresses of the officers and members of the board of directors and stockholders. 
(6)  Any bank accounts listed in the name of the applicant or maintained by the applicant, whether an individual, partnership or corporation. 
(7)  Whether the applicant or any partners or any corporation officers or board members or any principal shareholders have, within the preceding five years, a record for any conviction for the violation of any statute of the several states or the United States or of any ordinance of any city in the United States. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond. 
(8)  A listing of all real property which the applicant is presently leasing and the names and addresses of all lessees and lessors of the property. 
(9)  A certified copy of the applicant's financial statement for the 12-month period ending one week before the filing of the application for a permit and the state of incorporation of such corporation, as well as the names and addresses of the agents and employees of such corporation for a period of two years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(10)  Documentation of oral agreements, copies of all written agreements among any persons or stockholders of corporations or partners of partnerships applying for a permit to engage in an escort service, which agreements reflect or control ownership or division of profits, sharing of revenues or payment of rents or which agreements reflect any other arrangements in connection with ownership, rents, profit sharing or income application of use. 
(b)  All applicants shall be investigated by the department of police and the department's findings shall be presented to the license review board at a public hearing on the application and the license review board shall recommend its findings to the mayor. 
(c)  The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant the application for a new permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6112; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 12, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 30-653. - Grounds for denial. 
(a)  No permit or renewal permit for the operation of an escort service shall be issued to any person where any individual, having an interest either as owner, partner, officer or principal shareholder, directly beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal ordinance involving a crime of moral turpitude or relating to sexual offenses and related matters, to alcohol or drug offenses and related matters or to gambling offenses and related matters. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued if the application contains a material omission, untrue or misleading information or if the application fails to indicate the true ownership of the proposed establishment. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued if the proposed premises do not comply with the zoning ordinance, the fire code or the building code of the city. 
(d)  No permit shall be issued where the person applying has had a permit to conduct a similar type business denied or revoked within a period of five years. The license review board may waive this prohibition if a period of two years has passed since the prior denial or revocation. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6113) 
Sec. 30-654. - Investigation fee. 
Every applicant for a permit required by this division shall be investigated by the department of police and a recommendation shall be made to the license review board within 25 days of the filing of the application. An investigation fee of $25.00 for each application for a permit shall be paid to the department of police at the time of filing the application. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-6114, 19-14.024) 
Sec. 30-655. - Renewal. 
A permit to operate an escort service establishment shall be renewed annually as of the date of the original issuance of the permit. All applicants for renewal permits shall furnish all data, information and records requested by the license review board or the department of police. There shall be an initial and annual registration charge of $3.00 for the original issuance and renewal of each permit issued pursuant to this division. The police chief shall have the authority to renew the permit, and the decision may be appealed to the license review board for a hearing and recommendation to the mayor for final action. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-6115, 19-14.025) 
Sec. 30-656. - Revocation. 
Any permit issued under this division shall be subject to revocation for the violation of this article or any section of this Code or other ordinance related to the operation of the business or for any occurrence which would have barred issuance of the original permit. The permittee shall be notified of the recommendation to revoke and a hearing held before the license review board. The notification to the permittee shall contain a specification of the violation and shall be held at least five days and not more than 21 days after service of the notice, at a time and place to be ascertained by the license review board. After receiving the recommendation of the license review board, the mayor may revoke the license. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6116) 
Secs. 30-657—30-665. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 30-666. - Minimum age. 
No person holding an escort service permit shall employ any person unless such person is 18 years of age or older. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6117(a)) 
Sec. 30-667. - Effect of conviction for certain crimes. 
No person holding an escort service permit shall employ in an escort service any person in any capacity whatsoever, including but not limited to performers, entertainers and musicians, who has, within five years of the date of employment, been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or of any municipal ordinance, which conviction relates to sex offenses and related matters and alcohol or drug offenses and related matters. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6117(b)) 
Sec. 30-668. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. Any individual working in an escort service as an independent contractor or as an employee shall first obtain a permit from the chief of police prior to beginning such work. 
(b)  Application. Application for a permit as required in this section shall be addressed to the police chief. The applicant shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  Name and address of any person having previously employed the applicant for a space of six weeks or longer. 
(3)  A record of any conviction for the violation of a federal or state law or municipal ordinance. 
(c)  Fee. Escort service companies shall pay a $100.00 fee for a certificate of eligibility (application fee). Each individual working as an employee or independent contractor of an escort service, shall pay a $50.00 application fee. Application fees are to accompany the application for a permit. The annual/renewal fee of the permit itself is $2,000.00 for escort companies and $300.00 for each person working as an employee or independent contractor of such escort service company. 
(d)  Fingerprinting. No person shall be granted an employee permit until such person has been fingerprinted by the department of police. 
(e)  Grounds for nonissuance or revocation. No person shall be issued any employee permit who has, within five years of the date of proposed employment, been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation involving sex-related, alcohol-related or drug-related offenses. The police chief shall have the authority to revoke an employee permit for violation of this subsection. The permit holder shall have the right to appeal the revocation to the license review board within ten days after the notice of revocation. After receiving the recommendation of the license review board, the mayor may revoke the permit. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-6118, 14-6119, 19-14.026; Ord. No. 1999-23, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2000-7, §§ 4, 5, 2-15-00) 
Secs. 30-669—30-690. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 86. 

Sec. 30-691. - License; health department approval required. 
Any person desiring to open a restaurant or any establishment for the sale of food, sandwiches, cold drinks and other items of food for human consumption shall file an application for a license with the chief financial officer setting out the location selected and showing the general nature of the operation to be carried on. If the establishment to be licensed is located in Fulton County, the chief financial officer shall promptly notify the Fulton County health department of the application. If the establishment is located in DeKalb County, the chief financial officer shall notify the DeKalb County health department of the application. Upon receipt of information in writing from the appropriate health department that the premises where the proposed operation is to be carried on complies with the health and sanitation requirements of the law and rules applicable thereto, the chief financial officer shall forthwith issue to the applicant a license to operate the establishment upon receipt of the proper license fee for that operation. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6141) 
Sec. 30-692. - Permit required for private clubs, fraternal orders, similar organizations. 
Any group, association, fraternal order, club or other organization, whether incorporated or not, which has a regular place of assembly in which food or beverages are served or sold and which place of assembly is locked or not open to the general public or is not open to inspection by the police, whether dues are assessed or membership rosters maintained, must before maintaining or operating the place of assembly obtain a permit from the mayor through application to the department of police and license review board. Application fees are $100.00 and are payable at the time of application. Annual/renewal fees for permits are set at $200.00. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6142; Ord. No. 1999-20, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 30-693. - Drive-in lighting standards. 
(a)  Minimum standards. Every person conducting a business of dispensing or selling at retail food and beverages prepared for consumption and served to customers in parked automobiles or at other places other than within a building shall install, maintain and operate between sundown and the time of closing a sufficient number of luminaries to provide a level of illumination of one footcandle in the entire parking area and upon all places where automobiles are parked by patrons of the establishment or where food or beverages may be served. 
(b)  Approval of installation required. Before any installation of wiring or lighting equipment as required by this section shall be installed, the owner or operator of the business shall submit detailed plans and specifications covering all wiring and installations contemplated to the chief electrical inspector for such inspector's approval or disapproval, and no such installation shall be made until the plans and specifications therefor have been so approved and a permit issued. 
(c)  Enforcement. The department of police shall enforce this section. 
(d)  Effect of violation. Any person failing to comply with this section shall be served with a notice in writing to appear before the license review board at a time stated to show cause why the permit to engage in any of the businesses referred to in this section should not be revoked. 
(e)  Penalties. Any person engaged in any business referred to in this section who shall fail to comply with this section shall be subject to the suspension or revocation of the permit. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6143) 
Secs. 30-694—30-715. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - HANDWRITING ANALYSIS, FORTUNETELLING, AND ASTROLOGY[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2008-14(08-O-0332), approved March 11, 2008, provided for repeal of art. X. Section 4 of Ord. No. 2008-14(08-O-0332) enacted a new art. X to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter and was entitled handwriting analysis and fortunetelling. 
Charter reference— Authority relative to fortunetelling, § 1-102(c)(19). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-716. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Astrology means the interpretation of human experience based upon an examination and correlation to celestial activity for fee, gift or donation. 
Fortunetelling means the prediction of the future for a fee, gift or donation. 
Handwriting analysis means the interpretation of human experience based upon an examination of handwriting or other inscription done by hand for fee, gift or donation. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6490; Ord. No. 2008-14(08-O-0332), § 4, 3-11-08) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 30-717—30-725. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 30-726. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to practice handwriting analysis, fortunetelling or astrology unless that person holds a valid unexpired and unrevoked license to engage in the practice of handwriting analysis, fortunetelling or astrology issued by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6490; Ord. No. 2008-14(08-O-0332), § 4, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 30-727. - Application and license fees. 
(a)  Any person desiring to practice handwriting analysis, fortunetelling, or astrology shall make application for a license to the department of police on forms to be prepared and approved by the mayor or the mayor's designee. The applicant, prior to being licensed to practice handwriting analysis, fortunetelling or astrology shall: 
(1)  Be 18 years of age or more; 
(2)  Not have been convicted of a crime of any grade or ordinance violation involving the following categories of criminal conduct: larceny, embezzlement, fraudulent conveyancing, perjury or false swearing or subrogation of either, gambling, deceitful means, artful practices, lottery, felonies or other group I crimes, as defined in the Uniform Crime Reporting Manual, Federal Bureau of Investigation, U.S. Department of Justice, which are reasonably related to the activities regulated in this article, within three years of the date of the application; 
(3)  Allow fingerprints to be made by the department of police at the time of application; and 
(4)  Furnish the department of police two photographs showing a front and side picture of the full face of the applicant, size 2½ inches by 2¾ inches. 
(5)  Provide a $100.00 application fee at the time of application. 
(b)  Annual/renewal fees for handwriting analysis, fortunetelling or astrology licenses shall be $500.00. 
(c)  After investigation by the department of police, the department's findings shall be presented to the license review board at a public hearing on the application. The license review board shall recommend to the mayor that the application for a license shall be granted or denied. 
(d)  The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6491; Ord. No. 1999-25, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2008-14(08-O-0332), § 4, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 13, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 30-728. - Grounds for denial. 
(a)  No license shall be issued if the application contains a material omission, untrue or misleading information. 
(b)  No license shall be issued where the person applying has had a license to conduct a similar type business denied or revoked within a period of five years. The license review board may waive this prohibition if a period of two years has passed since the prior denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-14(08-O-0332), § 4, 3-11-08) 
Sec. 30-729. - Revocation, suspension. 
Any person failing to comply with any section of this article or such other laws and regulations as may be passed by the council for the conduct of the business of handwriting analysis, fortunetelling, or astrology shall be subject to having the license to conduct the business revoked or suspended upon appropriate notice of hearing. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6492; Ord. No. 2008-14(08-O-0332), § 4, 3-11-08) 
Secs. 30-730—30-750. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - HOTELS, LODGINGHOUSES AND ROOMINGHOUSES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Hotel or motel occupancy tax, § 146-76 et seq. 
Land development code references— Housing code, § 8-2181; housing code requirements for roominghouses, boardinghouses, residence hotels, single room occupancy residences and buildings with special uses, app. F, § 26. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-751. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Roominghouse means a house or building in which sleeping or eating facilities or both are provided for the accommodation of five or more persons who are charged for boarding or rooms or both, by the day, week, month or for each meal. This definition of a roominghouse shall not include an apartment house, which means a building wherein living facilities, such as a living room, bedroom, kitchen and bath, are provided for a person or family and where the building is capable of accommodating two or more families who would have separate living facilities. Any house or residence called an apartment shall be considered a roominghouse under this definition if the house or apartment is used to room or board five or more persons who are charged for board or rooms and who do not have separate living facilities, such as living room, bedroom, kitchen and bath. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6171) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-752. - Permit for bellhops and house detectives in hotels. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any employee of a hotel performing the duty of a bellhop or house detective to continue or begin this employment without first obtaining a permit before entering or continuing upon this employment. 
(b)  Application. Each employee and prospective employee as a bellhop or house detective shall file a statement with the department of police to the effect that such person is or expects to be employed in one of the employments named, stating such person's correct name and giving such person's address, together with such person's age and former employment, and any other information required by the police chief. The application shall be in writing and shall be filed with the police chief. The statement or application shall have endorsed thereon a statement or shall be accompanied by a letter signed by three reputable citizens, not related by blood or marriage to the applicant, who are residents of the city, none of whom have any interest in the hotel where the employee is to work or serve, attesting to the good character of the applicant. 
(c)  Investigation; issuance or denial. Upon the filing of an application for a permit under subsection (b) of this section, the police chief shall fingerprint each applicant and cause an investigation to be made as to the good character of the applicant and shall issue a permit or deny the application for cause. If the police chief denies the application for a permit, the action shall be appealable to the license review board within ten days after notice of the denial. Upon the receipt of notice of appeal, the board shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. At the public hearing testimony shall be heard for or against the granting of the permit. After the hearing, the board shall make its favorable or unfavorable report to the mayor at its next regular meeting, and the mayor shall either adopt or reject the report of the board. However, the mayor, license review board or police chief shall have no authority to issue a permit to any applicant who has been convicted of any of the following enumerated offenses, federal or state: murder, voluntary manslaughter, mayhem, rape, indecent molestation of children, assault and battery, kidnapping, stabbing and shooting, blackmail, sending or delivering threatening letters, peeping Tom, eavesdropping, drugs, prostitution, procuring for prostitution, unlawful alcoholic beverages sales, white slavery, burglary, robbery, theft, sex perversion or any section of this Code or other city ordinance dealing with prostitution or procuring for prostitution committed not more than five years prior to the date of application for a permit or five years from the termination of any penal servitude by the applicant for a conviction of any of such crimes, whichever shall have last occurred. 
(d)  Issuance. If an application is approved by either the police chief, license review board or mayor, the police chief shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(e)  Employing person without permit. The manager and person in charge of the hotel are prohibited from employing any person who is denied a permit under this section, and any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction the license to operate the hotel where the person is employed shall be subject to revocation by the mayor. 
(f)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any bellboy or house detective to continue in or enter upon the employment provided in subsection (a) of this section in violation of this section. It shall further be unlawful and shall be grounds for the revocation of or refusal to issue the permit if, in filing the statement, a fictitious name or address or any false information is given by the applicant. It shall be unlawful for the manager or person in charge of any hotel to fail to keep a book or list showing the correct name and address of employees or to refuse to exhibit it to any member of the department of police under penalty of subjecting the license to operate the hotel wherein the offense occurred to revocation by the mayor. 
(g)  Revocation. Any bellhop or house detective issued a permit under this section who shall subsequently be convicted of any of the offenses set forth in subsection (c) of this section shall be subject to revocation of the permit after notice and hearing. For the purposes of this subsection notice and hearing shall consist of a written notice of a hearing for revocation setting forth the grounds for the revocation, mailed to the last known address of the licensee ten days prior to a hearing upon the revocation before the license review board. Upon proof of the charges before the license review board, the board shall revoke the permit. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6175) 
Sec. 30-753. - Locking doors to upper floors during certain hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a public roominghouse or hotel located on the second floor or other upper floors of a building with stairways leading thereto to keep the doors located in the stairways or in the halls to which the stairways lead locked between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. During those hours the doors shall remain unlocked so that members of the department of police shall have free and unrestricted access thereto when necessary to suppress disorder or detect crime. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6176) 
Secs. 30-754—30-765. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 30-766. - Required. 
Any person desiring to open or operate a hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse or similar place shall, before opening or operating this house or place, obtain a license according to the procedures established in this division. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6172) 
Sec. 30-767. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a license required under this division to open or operate any such business shall be in writing and shall be filed with the department of police. The application shall state the location of the desired business and the name, residence and occupation of the applicant and shall be signed by three citizens of the city certifying to the character of the applicant. The application when so filed shall be referred to the license review board, which shall cause an investigation to be made. When the investigation has been completed, the license review board shall hold a public hearing on the application at a regularly scheduled license review board meeting and shall recommend to the mayor that the application for a license be granted or denied. 
(b)  The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6173; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 14, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 30-768. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any license granted under this division shall be subject to revocation for cause. If any officer or employee of a hotel, lodginghouse or other place having a register containing the names of guests shall fail or refuse to permit a police officer to check the register, it shall be deemed a sufficient cause for revocation of a license. The failure of the applicant, license holder, the property owner or any person acting as an agent for or on behalf of such person to pay property taxes, hotel/motel occupancy taxes or any other taxes required by law to be paid in association with the operation of the business or licensed premises shall constitute grounds for the denial of an application for an original or renewal license and the revocation of a current license to operate the hotel, motel, lodging house, or rooming house. 
(b)  Whenever in the opinion of the license review board there is cause to revoke a license, a written notice of intention to revoke shall be furnished the holder of the license three days before a regular or called meeting of the license review board, at which time the holder of the license may make such showing as the holder of the license may deem proper. After a hearing, the license review board shall report its recommendation to the mayor, who may revoke the license if in the mayor's discretion it is to the best interest of the peace and good order of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6174; Ord. No. 1999-71, § 1, 9-29-99) 
Secs. 30-769—30-790. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-15(08-O-0334), § 1, approved March 11, 2008, repealed art. XII, §§ 30-791—30-796, in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to hypnosis as enacted by Code 1977; as subsequently amended. 

Secs. 30-791—30-815. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - INSURANCE COMPANIES 

Sec. 30-816. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1). 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-5181(a), 19-14.020(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-817. - Insurer's license fees. 
There is levied an annual license fee in the amount of $150.00 upon each insurer doing business within the city. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 30-818, which is operating on behalf of such insurer within the city, there is levied a license fee in the amount of $150.00. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-5181(a), 19-14.020(a)) 
State Law reference— License fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
Sec. 30-818. - License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article that is operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, the insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $52.50 per location for each year. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-5181(b), 19-14.020(b)) 
Sec. 30-819. - License fees for independent insurance agencies, brokers not otherwise licensed. 
There is levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 30-817 in the amount of $150.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-5181(c), 19-14.020(c)) 
State Law reference— Additional fee for separate locations authorized, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
Sec. 30-820. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed under this article shall be due and payable on or before January 25. The fees shall be collected by the city as provided by law. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5181(f)) 
Secs. 30-821—30-840. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - GYMNASIUMS, HEALTH CLUBS AND WEIGHT REDUCING OR BODY BUILDING INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 30-841. - Business license required 
Every gymnasium, health club, aerobics club or slimnastics club owner/operator must first obtain a license before transacting new business or continuing to transact ongoing business. 
Upon completion of the application, the licenses & permits unit shall assign a hearing date before the license review board. At the hearing, the applicant and the licenses and permits unit shall present all evidence regarding the application to the license review board. The license review board shall conduct the hearing and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
Annual/renewal fees for a license under this subsection are $500.00. In no event shall an owner/operator of a gymnasium, health club, aerobics club or slimnastics club be required to pay for more than one license under this subsection. In the event that a single owner/operator has more than one type of activity within a single business, that owner/operator shall obtain the more inclusive license of either a gymnasium or health club. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5191(a); Ord. No. 1999-15, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 15, 11-6-08) 
Secs. 30-842—30-850. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - LABOR POOLS[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Labor pools, O.C.G.A. § 34-10-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-851. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Labor pool means and includes any business whose principal function is to maintain and employ a pool of unskilled manual laborers for the purpose of contracting with others to make such manpower available to them on a short-term assignment basis. 
Short-term assignment of casual labor means a work assignment for a term of 40 hours or less involving work for which neither entity nor person contracting or arranging for temporary employees requires any of the following from such employees: 
(1)  A professional or occupational license which requires for its issuance a demonstration of knowledge or proficiency and which is issued by the state or a political subdivision of the state; 
(2)  A high school diploma or its equivalent; 
(3)  Education beyond high school; 
(4)  Vocational education; or 
(5)  Demonstrated proficiency with a specified type of machinery. 
Temporary help. This article does not apply to temporary help, which, for purposes of this article, means services that deal with supplying secretarial employees, clerical employees, skilled laborers, specialized assistants, or other positions requiring specialized or executive skills. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6511) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-852. - Compliance with article provisions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a labor pool without having first complied with the provisions of this article, including obtaining a license for the operation of a labor pool. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6518) 
Sec. 30-853. - Compliance with all applicable laws. 
The labor pool must comply with all applicable provisions of state and federal law, which shall include but not be limited to the following provisions: Social Security Act, the Fair Labor Standards Act, Internal Revenue Code and state department of revenue laws, Occupational Safety and Health Act, Worker's Compensation, Unemployment Insurance, and the state law relating to labor pool regulation (O.C.G.A. § 34-10-1 et seq.). The law department shall verify compliance with the above laws. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6519) 
Sec. 30-854. - Records. 
(a)  All labor pools shall be required to keep daily records. These records shall consist of the names of every person who was assigned a job for that particular day, the type of job assigned, the name and location of the contractor and the number of hours worked on that particular job. At the completion of that day's work, the worker will sign the worker's name next to the information listed in this subsection. 
(b)  Any person engaged in the business of a labor pool who shall fail or refuse to keep books as provided in this section or who shall make false entries, or who shall fail to refuse to comply with an inspection and examination by any police officer shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6516) 
Sec. 30-855. - Pay stubs. 
If a labor pool chooses to pay workers in cash, it must issue a duplicate receipt to such worker. If a labor pool chooses to pay workers by check, the labor pool must issue a pay stub to the worker. The receipt or pay stub must state the number of hours worked and the amount of pay per hour. Each receipt or pay stub issued to a worker must also specify any deductions from the worker's gross pay. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6517) 
Sec. 30-856. - Improper deductions from pay stub. 
If the labor pool makes improper deductions from pay, the license review board can condition the continuing grant of the license upon the labor pool's making restitution to the affected workers within a time period so specified by the license review board. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6522) 
Sec. 30-857. - Deductions for equipment used by workers. 
Any labor pool licensed under this article shall not charge workers any rental fee or any type of fee for supplying any type of equipment to be used by the worker in performing any work assignment. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6520) 
Sec. 30-858. - Deductions for transportation of workers to and from work site. 
Any labor pool licensed under this article shall not charge workers any expense, fee or cost for transporting such workers to and from job sites. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6521) 
Sec. 30-859. - Display of state law. 
Every labor pool must give notice of the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 34, ch. 10 (O.C.G.A. § 34-10-1 et seq.) and this article to all workers. The provisions of the state law must be posted in a conspicuous place. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6528) 
Secs. 30-860—30-870. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 30-871. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, natural or corporate, to operate a labor pool, as defined in section 30-851, without having obtained a license in compliance with the requirements as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6512) 
Sec. 30-872. - Application. 
All persons desiring to obtain a license to operate a labor pool service within the city shall make written application to the police department of the city for an appropriate investigation. The application shall be addressed to the mayor and city council and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The full legal name of the applicant, including all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms or trade names currently or heretofore used by the applicant. 
(2)  The business and residence addresses of the applicant for the two years preceding the date of the application, including current address. 
(3)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(4)  A statement revealing whether the applicant has previously operated a labor pool, and if so, the name, address and current business status of such labor pool. 
(5)  A statement whether the applicant is affiliated with any other labor pool in the city; for purposes of this subsection, "affiliated" shall mean having the status of a sole proprietor, employee, agent, partner, general or limited shareholder, director or officer. 
(6)  The applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair. 
(7)  Two current photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches in size. 
(8)  All business license history of the applicant, which shall include information as to any revocation or suspension and reason for such action. 
(9)  All convictions for violations of any law, and the grounds thereof, within the preceding five years, of the applicant, or any partners, agents, corporate officers, board members or any principal shareholders of the labor pool; the term "conviction" in this subsection shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond. 
(10)  The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the city, and such fingerprint card and record shall be attached as exhibits to the application. 
(11)  If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, such corporation or partnership shall submit the information set out in subsections (1)—(10) of this section and exhibits with regard to each employee, agent, partners, general or limited. 
(12)  If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall, in addition to the information set out in subsections (1)—(10) of this section, submit a complete list of the stockholders of said corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations. 
(13)  A copy of the applicant's financial statement for the most recently ended fiscal year, and state of incorporation, as well as the names and addresses of the agents and employees of such employees of such corporation for a period of two years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6513) 
Sec. 30-873. - Fees. 
(a)  The initial fee for all applicants seeking a labor pool license shall be $300.00. This fee shall be submitted with the application to the police department. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application, the labor pool will pay a license fee of $1,500.00 per year to the police department. This fee shall be used to offset the regulatory cost to administer this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6514) 
Sec. 30-874. - Inspection; issuance, denial; term. 
As soon as the application is submitted in proper form to the police department with the requested information and accompanied by the correct investigation fee, an inspection and investigation shall be conducted by the police and law department. If all requirements of all departments concerned as well as those qualifications set forth in this article are satisfied, the license shall be issued by the police department. If such application is denied, the application shall be submitted to the license review board, which shall conduct a hearing and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of one year. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6515; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 16, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 30-875. - Expiration; cancellation. 
Any license issued under this article shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance unless canceled by the police department for cause before expiration. Cancellation for cause shall consist of the conviction of the original applicant, any partners, corporate officers or board members of the labor pool for a felony or misdemeanor of any state or the United States or any municipal ordinance relative to alcohol or drug offenses and related matters. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6523) 
Sec. 30-876. - Revocation; hearing. 
A violation of any of the provisions of this article by any person holding a license under the provisions of this article shall constitute grounds for revocation of the license issued pursuant thereto. A hearing shall be scheduled, and notice of such hearing must be sent to the holder of the license specifying the reasons for the possibility of revocation of the licenses. After the hearing, the disposition of the license shall be determined within the sole discretion of the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6524) 
Sec. 30-877. - Renewal. 
Any license issued under this article must be renewed for each year succeeding the initial issuance. A renewal application shall be accompanied by a renewal fee of $1,500.00. A renewal license shall be issued by the police department if the applicant continues to meet all prerequisites for obtaining an initial license and no action to deny, suspend or revoke the existing license is pending against the applicant. The labor pool must rectify any noncompliance with the provisions of this section, if any, before the labor pool license is renewed. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6525) 
Sec. 30-878. - License not in lieu of business license. 
The license issued under this article shall be cumulative and not in lieu of any business license issued by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6527) 
Secs. 30-879—30-900. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-901. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Massage means any manner of manipulation, including but not limited to the rubbing, touching, stroking, kneading or vibrating of the superficial parts of the body, by direct or indirect physical contact with any portion of the body of a massage technician or by any form of contact with a massage apparatus. 
Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power which is utilized by a massage technician for the purpose of administering a massage. 
Massage establishment means any business established for profit which employs one or more massage technicians or any business that owns and operates or maintains for profit one or more massage apparatus, including but not limited to bathhouse equipment, and which, for a good or valuable consideration, offers facilities and personnel to the public for the administration of massages. 
Massage technician means any person, whether male or female or whether or not a masseur or masseuse by profession, who by direct or indirect physical contact with the body of another or by use and operation of a massage apparatus and for any good or valuable consideration administers a massage. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6232) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-902. - Records of licensee. 
It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at the establishment, the type of treatment administered and the name of the person of the establishment administering the treatment. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by any member of the department of police. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6239) 
Sec. 30-903. - Names of employees filed with police chief. 
It shall be the duty of every person holding a license under this article to file with the police chief the names of all employees, their home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees with the names of new employees must be filed with the police chief within three days from the date of any such change. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6240) 
Sec. 30-904. - Patronage of massage establishment by underage person. 
(a)  Restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to patronize any massage establishment unless such person carries, at the time of such patronage, a written order directing the treatment to be given and signed by a regularly licensed physician or such person's parent or guardian. If consent is given by a parent or guardian, such consent must be signed in the presence of the massage technician or the massage establishment operator. 
(b)  Duty of operator. It shall be the duty of the operator of such massage establishment to determine the age of the persons patronizing such massage establishment, and a violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such massage establishment. It shall be conclusively presumed that the operator of such massage establishment knows the correct age of all persons patronizing the establishment. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6241) 
Secs. 30-905—30-950. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Restrictions on levy of license, occupation or professional tax on massage, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 

Sec. 30-951. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment without having obtained a license therefor or for any person to allow a massage technician to administer massages without first having obtained the license required by this division. 
(b)  [ Reserved. ] 
(Code 1977, § 14-6231; Ord. No. 2007-29(07-O-0765), § 1, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 30-952. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-29(07-O-0765), § 2, adopted May 29, 2007, repealed § 30-952, which pertained to qualifications of massage technician. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 30-953. - Qualifications of massage establishment. 
(a)  A corporate applicant for a massage establishment license must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state. The applicant shall be the owner or legal agent of the massage establishment. Applications shall be submitted to the department of police on forms provided by the department. A massage technician who is a sole proprietor shall not be required to obtain a massage establishment license. 
(b)  No massage establishment license shall be issued unless the application required in section 30-954 and all the attached documentation and exhibits so required shall have been filed by the applicant, and no license shall be issued if it appears that the application has been materially falsified or if the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify any information contained therein. 
(c)  No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection discloses that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment, provided also that all such signs shall otherwise comply with the general sign requirements of this Code; 
(2)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the city's building code and, additionally, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth; 
(3)  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the city's building code; 
(4)  Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing any instruments used for massage shall be provided; 
(5)  Hot and cold running water shall be provided; 
(6)  Closed cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen; 
(7)  Adequate dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for customers; 
(8)  All walls, ceilings, floors, steam or vapor rooms and all other physical facilities for the establishment shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; 
(9)  Clean and sanitary towels and linen shall be provided for customers receiving massage services; no common use of towels or linen shall be permitted; and 
(10)  The establishment, prior to the issuance of any license, must be in complete compliance with the city fire code, the city electrical code, the city plumbing code, and with all other requirements of federal, state, county and municipal law designed to protect the health, welfare and safety of the persons who come into contact with the establishment. 
(d)  All massage technicians shall be completely clothed during all times when administering a massage. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "completely clothed" means having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and means having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and such pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches above the knee. The holder of the license shall have the license subject to revocation for violation of this subsection. 
(e)  The storing, serving, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages within a massage establishment is expressly prohibited unless such establishment has been issued an alcoholic beverage license in accordance with chapter 10. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6234; Ord. No. 2007-29(07-O-0765), § 3, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 30-954. - Application. 
Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a massage establishment shall make application to the department of police for an appropriate investigation. Such application shall be in writing, addressed to the mayor and city council, and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  The full legal name of the applicant, including all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms or trade names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The current and all previous business and residence addresses of the applicant within the two years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(3)  Sworn affidavits of at least three bona fide residents of Fulton County that the applicant is a person of good moral character; 
(4)  Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 21 years; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair; 
(6)  Two current photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches in size; 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  Any massage or similar business license history of the applicant, including whether such person, in any previous operation in any jurisdiction, has had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefore and any business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions of violations of any laws and the grounds therefore; 
(10)  The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the city, and such fingerprint card and record shall be attached as an exhibit to the application; 
(11), (12)  [ Reserved. ] 
(13)  If the applicant is a corporation, in addition to the information required in this section, submit a complete list of the stockholders of the corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations. 
(Ord. No. 2006-88, § 2, 12-4-06; Ord. No. 2007-29(07-O-0765), §§ 4, 5, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 30-955. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-29(07-O-0765), § 6, adopted May 29, 2007, repealed § 30-955, which pertained to reciprocity. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 30-956. - Fees. 
(a)  Each new and renewal application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall include a nonrefundable investigative fee of $100.00. A license fee of $2,000.00 shall be paid by the establishment applicant prior to issuance of an annual license. 
(b)  Renewal fees shall be the same as the original license fee. 
(c)  The regulatory fees in this section are in addition to all other license fees as prescribed in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-6236, 19-14.028; Ord. No. 1999-10, §§ 1, 2, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2007-29(07-O-0765), § 7, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 30-957. - Inspection and investigation; issuance procedures; term. 
(a)  If such application for a license required under this division is submitted in proper form, including all information and exhibits required, and accompanied by the correct investigative fee, an inspection and investigation shall be conducted. If all requirements of all departments concerned, as well as those qualifications specified in this division are met, the license shall be issued by the department of police services. If the department of police recommends denial of the license, the application shall be submitted to the license review board. The license review board shall conduct a hearing at a regularly scheduled meeting and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant the application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(b)  All licenses issued pursuant to this division shall be valid for a period of one year. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6237; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 17, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 30-958. - Transferability; change of location; display; inspection of establishment. 
(a)  Transferability. All licenses issued under this division are nontransferable; however, a change of location of a massage establishment may be permitted pursuant to this division. 
(b)  Change of location. A change of location of the massage premises shall be approved by the department of police, provided all sections of this Code are complied with and the change of location fee of $50.00 is first paid. 
(c)  Display. Every person to whom a license shall have been granted under this division shall display the license in a conspicuous place. 
(d)  Inspections. At least four times each year, an inspection of each massage establishment shall be made for the purpose of determining that the sections of this article are met. Notice may or may not be given of such inspection, and no warrant shall be required. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6238) 
Sec. 30-959. - Revocation. 
(a)  The license of a massage establishment may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the holder to maintain initial qualifications for obtaining the license. 
(2)  The holder is guilty of employing any person who is not a licensed massage technician and allowing or permitting such person to administer massage in the establishment. 
(3)  The premises in which the massage establishment is located are in violation of any of the federal, state, county or municipal laws designed for the health, protection and safety of the occupants. 
(4)  The premises are in violation of the city's building code or of this subsection. 
(5)  The original application or renewal thereof contains materially false information or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein. 
(6)  The holder or any of the holder's employees or agents has been convicted or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or to any charge of incest, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire or the distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law and in connection with the operation of the massage establishment. 
(7)  The holder or the holder's employees have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any section of this article. 
(8)  Failure of the holder to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, customers and others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and well-being of the general public and the customers. 
(b)  No license issued under this division shall be revoked until after due notice and a hearing shall have been held before the license review board to determine just cause for such revocation. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaints against the holder of such license and shall designate the time and place where such hearing will be held. 
(c)  The notice shall be served upon the license holder by delivering the notice personally or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of the license holder in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. If the license holder cannot be found and the service of notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner provided in this section, a copy of such notice shall be mailed registered postage, fully prepaid, addressed to the license holder at the license holder's place of business or residence at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. 
(d)  Any massage establishment operator having the license revoked shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a license for 12 months immediately following the revocation. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-6242, 14-6243; Ord. No. 2007-29(07-O-0765), §§ 8, 9, 5-29-07) 
Sec. 30-960. - Disposal of inventory after revocation or suspension. 
If the license of an operator under this division is suspended or revoked for some violation of this article, the mayor shall provide a period of time not to exceed 15 days for the holder of such license to dispose of the inventory. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6244) 
Secs. 30-961—30-1065. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - PARKING LOTS AND PARKING GARAGES[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, adopted July 29, 2003, repealed art. XVII, §§ 30-1066, 30-1081—30-1075, 30-1196—30-1207, in their entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Code 1977; as amended. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking generally, § 150-86 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-1066. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Park for-hire means any facility for the parking of motorized vehicles, for which service or facility the operator thereof charges a fee. 
Operator means the person who is the owner of and is responsible for the operation of each park-for-hire facility, whether such operator is in fact the title owner of the premises itself. 
Shared-use park-for-hire refers to the operation of a park-for-hire facility by an operator on property of which a portion is otherwise required of an establishment for the purpose of parking vehicles during that establishment's business hours. 
Primary establishment(s) refers to the business entity or entities whose parking is being shared, during non-business hours, with a commercial parking operator for the purpose of shared-use park-for-hire operations. 
Attendant/cashier means a person on duty at any park-for-hire facility employed by or an agent of the operator thereof. 
Corporate boundaries of the city means that area enclosed by the city limits as defined in a certain document entitled "Corporate Boundaries of the City of Atlanta," dated January 1, 1973, on file in the office of the municipal clerk. 
Environmental barriers means such barricades, chains, walls, gates, wheel stops or other like structures around the perimeter of any park-for-hire facility as may be required to reasonably regulate and control the ingress and egress to and from the facility and to eliminate the encroachment of any vehicles parked on the facility onto or over adjacent properties, including sidewalks, streets, alleys, etc. 
Special events includes but is not limited to sporting events, athletic contests, concerts or any other event that generates a large volume of vehicles near the park-for-hire facility at times other than normal business hours. 
Ticket/stub means a distinctive piece of paper, plastic or other similar substance, which shall have printed thereon a ticket number and the full name and address of the park-for-hire facility. 
Parking facility reservoir means an area located immediately inside the facility entrance and is to be used for the temporary storage of entering vehicles when the arrival rate exceeds the storage rate. 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1067. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to all park-for-hire facilities operated in the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1068. - Compliance required. 
Compliance with this article shall be a precondition to any permit issued by the city for the facilities regulated by this article. The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the department of public [works]. 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2015-60(15-O-1134), § 1, 11-25-15 ) 
Sec. 30-1069—30-1080. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS; ADMINISTRATIVE RULES 

Sec. 30-1081. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the operation of a park-for-hire facility, without having first complied with this chapter. Violations of this chapter are punishable with a fine of $1,000.00. Each and every day of a violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable with an additional fine of $50.00 per day. 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2015-60(15-O-1134), § 2, 11-25-15 ) 
Sec. 30-1082. - Required; application. 
(a)  From 1993 to present, before any lot or building may be used for new off-street public parking facilities, before any off-street public parking facility may be expanded, or following a change of the ownership thereof, the owner of the lot or building or the operator of the facility must first obtain from the commissioner of the department of public works a permit for that use. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the owner of a lot following a change of the ownership thereof may apply for a conditional permit, good for one year, to allow such owner to bring the facility into compliance with the requirements herein. 
(b)  The application form for the permit shall be filed with traffic and transportation and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The address and location of the lot or building involved; 
(2)  The capacity of the proposed facility; 
(3)  If the proposed parking facility is to be single- or shared-use park-for hire; and 
(4)  If shared-use park-for-hire is desired, the name, square footage, and business hours of the primary establishment(s); 
(5)  Certification from the office of buildings that property upon which the proposed park-for-hire facility is to be located is zoned for park-for-hire use, or that it enjoys legal non-conforming status for park-for-hire use. 
(c)  In addition, two site plans will be attached to the application form filed with traffic and transportation. The site plans will be drawn to an engineer's scale such that the following are easily identified: 
(1)  The proposed location of entrances and exits to the facility; 
(2)  The widths of access streets; 
(3)  The capacity and location of the reservoir space to be used for the receiving and temporary storage of incoming vehicles; 
(4)  The internal traffic plan; 
(5)  The proposed parking plan showing the size and location of the parking stalls and the aisles to serve them; 
(6)  The location, width and general design of ramps or elevators to be used inside of structures; 
(7)  If applying for a shared-use park-for-hire permit, the location of the stalls to be used during the primary establishment's business hours; and 
(8)  Any other information required to enable the commissioner of the department of public works to make a fair and complete appraisal of the operation of the proposed parking facility. 
(9)  Plans for multi-level facilities must also show: 
(a)  The ramp or elevator design for each level; 
(b)  The internal traffic plan for each level; and 
(c)  The parking stall layout for each level; 
(d)  Copies of either the warranty deed (if the applicant is the title holder) or lease agreement or management contract for the property upon which the proposed park-for-hire facility is to be located, which should contain the current names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner, leaseholder and/or property manager (as appropriate) of said property. 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2015-60(15-O-1134), § 3, 11-25-15 ) 
Sec. 30-1083. - Fee; required. 
(a)  The applicant for a permit required by this division shall pay to the city an application fee before such application is submitted to the commissioner of the department of public works. Such application fee shall consist of a fixed charge of $100.00. 
(b)  There shall be no refund of such application fee if the permit application is rejected by the commissioner of the department of public works or due to circumstances that are not under the control of the city. However, the applicant may resubmit the application within 90 days of rejection by the commissioner of the department of public works without paying an additional application fee. 
(c)  There shall be a base fee of $100.00 for annual renewal of off-street public parking facility permits on January 1. Applications received after January 1 will be prorated until January 1 of the following calendar year, in addition to: 
(1)  For parking facilities of up to 100 spaces, a fee of $3.00 per parking spaces or a maximum fee of $300.00. 
(2)  For parking facilities of between 101 spaces and 200 spaces, a fee of $300.00 plus a fee of $1.50 for all parking spaces that exceed 100 parking spaces, or a maximum fee of $450.00. 
(3)  For parking facilities of 201 spaces or more, a fee of $550.00. 
(d)  A park-for-hire permit is valid for one year from the date of issuance. No earlier than 45 days prior to and no later than 30 days past the expiration date, the parking facility operator must contact transportation to request renewal certification of the park-for-hire permit. The office of transportation shall then verify that the operations of the park-for-hire facility have not changed since the issuance of the permit (or since the last renewal). Once this has been determined, the renewal certification is approved. 
(e)  Failure to contact the office of transportation within said window as set out in subsection (d) immediately above for renewal certification will result in a penalty of $50.00 per day which is added to the renewal fee as calculated in accordance with this section. Any park-for-hire permit not renewed for more than three months past the expiration date shall be considered void, requiring that operations at said park-for-hire facility cease. Operations may not begin again until a new application for a park-for-hire permit is submitted to the office of transportation, and approval is received from the commissioner of public works. 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2008-47(08-O-0882), § 1, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2015-60(15-O-1134), § 4, 11-25-15 ) 
Sec. 30-1084. - Reapplication after ceasing operation. 
Any park-for-hire facility which ceases operation for more than six months shall not subsequently be operated as a park-for-hire facility, except by making a new application for and receiving from the commissioner of the department of public works a permit as required by this division. 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2015-60(15-O-1134), § 5, 11-25-15 ) 
Sec. 30-1085. - Time limit on validity of permit. 
Any permit for an off-street park-for-hire facility granted by the mayor and council shall become void if the facility has not been placed in operation within 12 months after the approval of a parking lot or within 18 months after the approval of a parking garage. 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1086. - Investigation, report on application. 
Upon receipt of an application pursuant to section 30-1081, traffic and transportation shall make a thorough and complete investigation and shall report thereon to the next meeting of the committee on transportation on such factors as: 
(a)  The size of the proposed facility and especially in relation to the vehicular capacity of streets of ingress and egress; 
(b)  The physical arrangements for ingress and egress; 
(c)  The reservoir space for incoming and outgoing vehicles; 
(d)  The effect of any plan for traffic improvement, such as the expressway program or major street plan on the flow or the pattern of traffic adjacent to the affected streets; 
(e)  If a shared-use park-for-hire permit is desired, the minimum number of parking stalls required of the primary establishment during business hours; and 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Secs. 30-1087—30-1195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATIONAL RULES 

Sec. 30-1196. - Violations. 
Any operator violating this division shall be served with a citation, at such person's principal mailing address, of the violation. The person shall have ten days from the date of such notice to remedy the violation described. If the violation has not been corrected on or before the 10th day after the date of issuance of the violation notice, the person shall be deemed guilty of an offense. A conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2015-60(15-O-1134), § 6, 11-25-15 ) 
Sec. 30-1197. - Barriers; tickets/stubs. 
All park-for-hire facilities within the corporate boundaries of the city shall provide and maintain the following: 
(a)  Automobile barriers; and 
(b)  A ticket/stub to be issued upon the parking of any vehicle in a facility if the attendant/cashier parks the vehicle and retains the key. This section shall not preclude the issuance of a monthly permit in lieu of a ticket. 
(c)  Parking lot operators will be required to digitally time date and stamp pictures of the vehicle in the parking space and the non-payment in the meter box, before booting or towing a vehicle which is said to be in violation on any off street parking meter. 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2005-93, § 1, 12-13-05) 
Sec. 30-1198. - Attendant/cashier. 
This division shall not require that a park-for-hire facility employ an attendant/cashier; however, at any facility where such is provided, the sections of this division pertaining thereto shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1199. - Uniforms of attendants/cashiers. 
All attendants/cashiers at park-for-hire facilities which provide attendants/cashiers must be dressed if a uniform designated by the operator which readily identifies such attendants/cashiers as employees of the park-for-hire facility. 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1200. - Lighting. 
Reasonable lighting shall be required for each park-for-hire facility during the hours that the facility is open for business. Subsection (2) of this section shall only be required at new facilities. Where applicable, public street lighting may be utilized to either partially or totally fulfill the following requirements; however, where such street lighting is removed it shall be the responsibility of the parking facility to independently provide these required levels of illumination. 
(a)  Open parking facilities. For open-area park-for-hire facilities, three levels of activity shall be established as high, medium and low. The levels shall reflect both traffic density and intensity and shall include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  High activity. 
(a)  Major league athletic events. 
(b)  Major cultural or civic events. 
(c)  Major regional shopping centers. 
(2)  Medium activity. 
(a)  Fast food facilities. 
(b)  Area shopping centers. 
(c)  Hospital parking areas. 
(d)  Transportation parking (airports and other similar parking areas). 
(e)  Cultural, civic or recreational events. 
(f)  Residential complex parking. 
(3)  Low activity. 
(a)  Local merchant parking. 
(b)  Industrial employee parking. 
(c)  Educational facility parking. 
The minimum safety illuminance value for areas used by the public in open park-for-hire facilities for such levels of activity shall be as follows: 

 
(b)  Open and covered parking facilities with more than one level. 

 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1201. - Park-for-hire notice signs; required. 
(a)  Upon the issuance of a park-for-hire permit, the applicant shall be required to post a notice sign at the facility, setting forth the following: 
(1)  The telephone number of the principal office of the operator of the facility; 
(2)  The business hours of operation for the facility (i.e., time of opening and closing); 
(3)  Park-for-hire parking lot permit number: 
(4)  Business license number; 
(5)  The name of the operator; 
(6)  The physical street address of the lot; and 
(7)  The number of parking spaces permitted. 
(b)  Notice signs for shared-use park-for-hire facilities will display both the number of stalls available both during the primary establishment's business hours and during its off-hours. 
The notice sign shall be posted at the main entrance to the lot in such a manner so that it is easily viewable from the driver's seat of an entering vehicle. The cost to produce and post such notice sign shall be borne by the operator of the facility. 
(c)  Changes to information contained on the notice sign (e.g. phone number or hours of operation) will necessitate the fabrication of a new notice sign that reflects these changes. 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2015-60(15-O-1134), § 7, 11-25-15 ) 
Sec. 30-1202. - Posting of fee structure; required. 
A sign setting forth the rates for any and all fees which shall be required of any parking patron for the use of the park-for-hire facility. This sign shall be posted at the main entrance to the lot in such a manner so that it is easily viewable from the driver's seat of an entering vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1203. - Responsibilities during business hours. 
A park-for-hire facility shall be operated and fees chargeable only during business hours as posted on its notices required under section 30-1202 or during the hours of operation for special events. At facilities where an attendant/cashier is provided, the operator shall have no responsibility to provide an attendant/cashier during non-business hours. 
Sec. 30-1204. - Monthly parking facilities. 
In park-for-hire facilities that provide only monthly parking, the sections of this division pertaining to issuance of a ticket/stub shall not be required. However, all other sections of this division shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1205. - Parking facility reservoirs; required. 
(a)  In facilities where attendants, ticket dispensers or other devices are used to regulate or control entering vehicles, the reservoir shall be located between the street right-of-way and the point of control. Each vehicle space in the reservoir shall be 22 feet long and ten feet wide and, in addition, sufficient space shall be provided for turning and maneuvering. 
(b)  All new off-street parking facilities, with the exception of residential and apartment parking facilities of less than 50 parking spaces, shall provide, as a minimum, the number of vehicle spaces in the inbound reservoir as required by this section. 
(c)  In parking facilities of the attendant-parking type, the number of vehicle spaces in the inbound reservoir shall be one percent of the total parking capacity of the facility or at least two spaces, whichever is greater. Where multiple inbound lanes are used, each lane shall provide two or more vehicle spaces in the reservoir. 
(d)  In parking facilities of the self-parking type, the number of inbound reservoir spaces shall be determined in the following manner: 
(1)  Facilities with capacities of 300 parking spaces or less shall provide two inbound reservoir spaces. 
(2)  Facilities with capacities exceeding 300 parking spaces shall provide two parking spaces plus one additional inbound reservoir space for each additional 100 parking spaces or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Where multiple inbound lanes are used, each lane shall provide two or more vehicle spaces in the reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2003-81, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 30-1206—30-1230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICES AND PRIVATE INVESTIGATORS[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference— Street patrols, § 30-1341 et seq.; burglar or robbery alarm systems, § 70-26 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 98. 
State Law reference— Private detectives and security agencies, O.C.G.A. § 43-38-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-1231. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Private detective business means engaging in the business of or accepting employment to obtain or furnish information with reference to: 
(1)  Crime or wrongs done or threatened against the United States or any state or territory thereof; 
(2)  The identity, habits, conduct, business, occupation, honesty, integrity, credibility, knowledge, trustworthiness, efficiency, loyalty, activity, movement, whereabouts, affiliations, associations, transactions, acts, reputation or character of any person; 
(3)  The location, disposition or recovery of lost or stolen property; 
(4)  The cause of or responsibility for fines, libels, losses, accidents, damage or injury to persons or property; or 
(5)  The securing of evidence to be used before any court, board, office or investigating committee. 
The term "private detective business" includes persons employed exclusively and regularly by only one employer in connection with the affairs of such employer only and where there exists an employer-employee relationship, unless the employer is in the detective business. 
Private security business means engaging in the business or accepting employment as a private patrol, watchperson or guard service for consideration on a private contractual basis and not as an employee. The term "private security business" includes persons employed exclusively and regularly by only one employer in connection with the affairs of such employer only and where there exists an employer-employee relationship, unless the employer is in the private security business. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6494) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-1232. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide maximum requirements for private security business and employees working as private security agents in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6493) 
Sec. 30-1233. - Carrying weapons. 
This article does not authorize the carrying of weapons by the persons having a permit under this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6497) 
Sec. 30-1234. - Uniform; vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having a permit under this article to wear uniforms and to use vehicular markings which are confusingly similar to the uniform and vehicular markings of the department of police. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6499) 
Secs. 30-1235—30-1245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 30-1246. - Registration; issuance. 
(a)  Any person licensed by the state in the private detective business or private security business and any person licensed by the state who is employed by a person to do private security work on the premises and in connection with the affairs of such employer only shall be entitled to register with the city and shall be issued a private security permit or private detective permit, which shall be effective until June 30, 1981, or until the state resumes regulatory authority. 
(b)  Registration information shall be submitted on forms provided by the department of police. There is a registration fee of $25.00 for any company and a fee of $5.00 for each employee. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6495) 
State Law reference— State license as prerequisite, O.C.G.A. § 43-38-14.1. 
Sec. 30-1247. - Application; issuance. 
(a)  Any person desiring to carry on a detective business or private security business in this city shall make a verified application in writing to the police chief. 
(b)  The police chief may grant a permit to any person meeting the following qualifications: 
(1)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant is a citizen of the United States or, if an alien, the applicant must have a U.S. Immigration Service work permit. 
(3)  The applicant has not been convicted of a felony or other violation showing a pattern of disregard for the law. 
(c)  The application fee is $25.00 for any company or individual acting independently and a company shall be required to pay $5.00 for each employee. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-6497, 19-14.031) 
Sec. 30-1248. - Suspension or revocation. 
The police chief may, after hearing, suspend or permanently revoke a permit or refuse to renew a permit issued under this division if it is determined that the holder of such permit or registration has committed an act which is a violation of this article or the provisions of any federal or state law which reasonably relates to the security industry. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6498) 
Secs. 30-1249—30-1270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - TATTOO ARTISTS AND OPERATORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-1271. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in coloring matter so as to form indelible marks or figures or by the production of scars; provided, however, the term "tattoo" shall not mean a tattoo placed upon the skin by a physician for medical identification purposes. 
Tattoo artist means any person who actually performs the work of tattooing. 
Tattoo establishment means any room or place where tattooing is practiced or where the business of tattooing is conducted or any part thereof. 
Tattoo operator means any person who controls, operates, conducts or manages any tattoo establishment, whether actually performing the work of tattooing or not. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6421) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-1272. - Tattooing certain persons prohibited. 
No tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall tattoo any person who is under 18 years of age, any person who is under either the influence of alcohol, drugs or other stimulants or depressants or any person of unsound mind. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6425) 
Secs. 30-1273—30-1285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 30-1286. - Required. 
No person shall operate a tattoo establishment or engage in the practice or business of tattooing as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist unless the person has first secured a permit from the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6422) 
Sec. 30-1287. - Application; minimum age; fingerprinting, photographing, medical certificate required. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a tattoo establishment or desiring to operate as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall make application for a permit to the department of police on forms supplied by the department. 
(b)  The minimum age of each applicant shall be 18 years of age. 
(c)  Fingerprints of all applicants shall be taken by the department of police. 
(d)  An applicant for a permit shall also furnish to the department of police two photographs showing a front and side picture of the full face of the applicant, size 2½ inches by 2¾ inches. 
(e)  An applicant for a permit shall present to the department of police a medical certificate from a medical doctor certifying that the person is sound physically and mentally, has good eyesight and is not infected with a disease which can be communicated through openings in the human skin. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6429) 
Sec. 30-1288. - Approval of health authorities required. 
A condition precedent to the issuance of a permit by the city under this division shall be satisfactory proof that the tattoo establishment has secured from the appropriate health authorities of either Fulton County or DeKalb County a permit or license to operate the establishment. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6423) 
Sec. 30-1289. - Location restricted. 
No permit shall issue for the operation of a tattoo establishment or to any person engaged as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist in any area which is zoned for residential use by the city's zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6427) 
Sec. 30-1290. - Contents, transferability. 
Every permit granted under this division shall be issued in the name of the individual person applying therefor, shall contain the location of the tattoo establishment where the applicant shall operate and shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6424) 
Sec. 30-1291. - Effect. 
The permits issued under this division shall be cumulative and not in lieu of any business license issued by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6428) 
Sec. 30-1292. - Revocation. 
Any person who shall conduct a tattoo establishment or engage in the business as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist without first securing a permit therefor or who shall knowingly violate any of the sections of this article shall subject the permit to revocation upon appropriate notice of hearing. Additionally, revocation of a license or permit procured by the appropriate health department of either Fulton County or DeKalb County shall, upon notice of hearing, constitute grounds for revocation of the permit issued by the city. An artist's or operator's permit shall be subject to revocation upon proof that the holder of the permit has become infected with a disease which can be communicated through openings in the human skin. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6426) 
Secs. 30-1293—30-1315. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - SIDEWALK PHOTOGRAPHERS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 138. 

Sec. 30-1316. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-50(15-O-1456), § 1, approved October 28, 2015, repealed § 30-1316, which pertained to prohibited acts. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 30-1317—30-1340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - STREET PATROLS[16] 
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference— Private security services and private investigators, § 30-1231 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 98. 
State Law reference— Private security agencies, O.C.G.A. § 43-38-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-1341. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Street patrol business means engaging in the business as a private street patrol, for consideration on a private contractual basis and not as an employee. Street patrol business shall not include persons employed exclusively and regularly by only one employer in connection with the affairs of such employer only and where there exists an employer-employee relationship unless the employer is in the street patrol business. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6481) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-1342. - Violations. 
Violation of any of the sections of this article by the holder of a permit issued under this article shall subject the holder of such permit to suspension or revocation of such permit. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6487) 
Secs. 30-1343—30-1355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 30-1356. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the street patrol business within the city unless a permit is obtained from the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6482) 
Sec. 30-1357. - Application. 
(a)  Required. All private street patrols and agencies within the city shall apply annually to the mayor or the mayor's designee for a permit to follow such business or vocation. 
(b)  Character of applicant. All private street patrols or street patrol agencies and their employees shall be of good moral and professional character. 
(c)  Photograph of applicant. Such private street patrol agents shall attach to each such application a photograph of the private street patrol agent making such application. If application is made by a firm, the photograph of each member of the firm shall be attached thereto. 
(d)  Filing. It shall be unlawful for any private street patrol or street patrol agency within the limits of the city to operate without filing annually the application and attaching the photograph required in this section and without having such application granted or approved, as provided in this division. The application and the photographs shall be filed in the department of police with a filing fee of $10.00. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-6483, 19-14.030) 
Sec. 30-1358. - False information. 
Any material omission, untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original, renewal or transfer application for a permit under this division shall be cause for the denial of the permit, and if any permit has been granted under these circumstances, such shall constitute cause for the revocation of the permit. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6488) 
Sec. 30-1359. - Certificate of approval of character of patrol persons. 
No private street patrol agency having a permit issued by the city shall send out or employ any person or agent unless the character and proficiency of such person or agent has been approved by the mayor or the mayor's designee and a certificate to that effect lodged with the street patrol agency. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6484) 
Sec. 30-1360. - Bond required. 
All persons approved under authority of this article to operate a street patrol agency or follow the occupation of street patrol agent shall give a bond in the sum of $5,000.00, payable to the city, for the use of any person injured or damaged because of any illegal act of such agency or agent or of a person employed as street patrol agent by such licensed agent or of any employee in and about such business. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6485) 
Sec. 30-1361. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  No permit issued by the city to any person under this division shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, and after a hearing and upon a prior five-day written notice to the holder of such permit of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held. 
(b)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such permit shall consist of the violation of any laws or sections of this Code or other ordinances regulating such businesses or for the violation of any sections of this Code or other city ordinances other than the sections of this Code pertaining to traffic. 
(c)  The license review board shall conduct the hearing and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, impose a fine against, or revoke, suspend, or refuse to renew any existing permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(d)  The police chief is delegated the authority to suspend any such permit for due cause or in any emergency situation, and the suspension may be made effective immediately and remain in force until the next regular or called meeting of the license review board. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6486; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 18, 11-6-08) 
Secs. 30-1362—30-1380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - TELEPHONE SALES CAMPAIGNS[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference— Door to door sales, § 30-596 et seq.; charitable solicitations, ch. 42. 

Sec. 30-1381. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, in such person's own name or in the name or for the benefit of any other person or organization, to conduct any sales campaign or sales promotion of any nature whatsoever by use of the telephone without first obtaining a permit from the mayor after recommendation of the license review board made at a regularly scheduled meeting of the license review board. 
(b)  Such permit shall be valid for one year and may be renewed by the police chief or the chief's designee. If the police chief, upon application, fails to renew the permit, the applicant shall be authorized to appeal the denial of the permit to the license review board within 20 days of the permit holder's receipt of written notice from the police chief. 
(c)  The license review board shall conduct the hearing referenced in subsections (a) and (b) above at a regularly scheduled meeting of the license review board and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new permit, or grant the renewal of an expired permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-6453; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 19, 11-6-08) 
Secs. 30-1382—30-1399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - VENDING IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY (PUBLIC PROPERTY VENDING)[18] 
Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, approved March 3, 2014, provides, "That Chapter 2, Article II, Division 1, Section 2-45 is waived to the extent that it is applicable to this ordinance." 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-1400. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Assistant vendor means a person who assists a Vendor at the Vendor's assigned vending site. 
Blind person means a person whose vision, with correcting glasses, is so defective as to prevent the performance of activities for which eyesight is essential. See O.C.G.A. § 49-4-51(b). 
Designated food truck area means a geographic area designated in this article wherein permitted food truck vendors may vend either from available metered parking spaces in accordance with this article and in accordance with Division 3 of Chapter 150 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances; or from spaces temporarily delineated, following the issuance of a weekly food truck vending pass pursuant to this article. 
Disabled veteran means a resident of the state who may be either a war veteran or veteran of peace-time service as set forth below and such person must obtain a certificate of exemption issued by the state commissioner of veterans' service. 
(1)  A war veteran must furnish satisfactory proof that the veteran has a physical handicap which is disabling to the extent of ten percent or more; that the veteran's service in the armed forces of the United States was terminated under conditions other than dishonorable; and that the veteran's service or some part thereof was rendered during a war period, as defined by an act of the Congress of the United States, approved March 20, 1933, entitled, "An Act to Maintain the Credit of the United States," and commonly known as PL 2, 73rd Congress; or that some part of the veteran's service was rendered on or after December 7, 1941 and before December 31, 1946; or that some part of the veteran's service was rendered on or after June 27, 1950 and before January 31, 1955; or that some part of the veteran's service was rendered on or after August 5, 1946, and before May 8, 1975. Proof of such ten percent disability shall be established upon the written certificate of two physicians as to such disability or by letter or other written evidence from the United States Department of Veterans Affairs stating the degree of disability or by written evidence from the branch of the armed forces of the United States in which such veteran served. 
(2)  A veteran of peacetime service in the United States armed forces must furnish proof that the veteran has a physical disability to the extent of 25 percent or more incurred in the line of duty during the period of such service by a letter or other evidence from the United States Department of Veterans Affairs stating the degree of disability or by written evidence, from the branch of armed forces of the United States in which such veteran served, that the veteran's service in the armed forces of the United States was terminated under conditions other than dishonorable. 
(3)  That disabled veterans and blind persons shall only have to show proof of their disability upon their initial application, as opposed to annually. If the current language of O.C.G.A. § 43-12-2 is amended, then this definition of disabled veteran shall be controlled by O.C.G.A. § 43-12-2, as amended. 
Food truck means any motor vehicle used for vending of food items to the public from designated food truck areas. 
Food vending cart means a vending cart at which prepared food, prepared non-alcoholic beverages, pre-packaged food and non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages may be offered for sale. 
Items permissible for sale means items which may be offered for sale by and are limited to tourist/traveler convenience items; third party published (non-adult) materials; non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages; pre-packaged food; prepared food; prepared non-alcoholic beverages; spirit merchandise; and cut single stem or bunched flowers. Items permissible for sale shall not include any tobacco products. 
Kiosk means a valid vendor location which is a fixed structure owned by the city, installed in the city's right-of-way. The city shall maintain the right to advertise in a kiosk and the city shall manage the maintenance of a kiosk, such maintenance to be covered by annual maintenance fees. The sale of prepared food and/or prepared non-alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted from a kiosk. 
Licenses and permits unit means that unit of the Atlanta Police Department which enforces the ordinances applicable to public property vending or any other unit or division of the Atlanta Police Department assigned by the chief of police to undertake the duties of the license and permits unit. 
Lottery-type selection process means the process by which persons shall be selected to submit an application for a vending cart or kiosk valid vendor location. There shall be no consideration required for participation in the lottery-type selection process in which persons wishing to submit applications for the valid vendor locations shall be required to place their names in a separate drawing for each valid vendor locations. No individual prospective vendor may receive the ability to apply for more than ten percent of the available valid vendor locations through the lottery-type selection process at one time. The lottery-type selection process shall take place at which time the city determines newly created or open vending cart or kiosk valid vendor locations shall be entered/re-entered therein. 
Moral turpitude means the act or behavior of baseness, vileness or the depravity in private and social duties which people owe to their fellow people, or to society in general, contrary to accepted and customary rule of right and duty between person and person; act or behavior that gravely violates moral sentiment or accepted moral standards of community and is a morally suitable quality held to be present in some criminal offenses as distinguished from others. 
Non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages means beverages sealed in plastic or aluminum single serving containers excluding all beverages in glass containers, and excluding all alcoholic beverages as defined in section 10-1, including but not limited to malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits. 
Office of revenue means the office of the City of Atlanta Department of Finance which issues permits for public property vending or any other unit or office of the department of finance assigned by the chief financial officer to undertake the duties of the office of revenue. 
Operating area means: 
(1)  The area in which a vendor may operate from a vending cart and which may not exceed 28 square feet of sidewalk including the area of the vending cart, and, when externally located, the operator and trash receptacle; 
(2)  The parameters of the kiosk; 
(3)  The parameters of the food truck. 
Pre-packaged food means single serving sealed packaged foods including but not limited to candy, popsicles, chips/bagged snacks which do not require any heating or powered refrigeration, and the service of which does not require authorization by the Fulton or DeKalb County Departments of Health. 
Prepared non-alcoholic beverages means beverages prepared on site and which are not served in glass containers, and excluding all alcoholic beverages as defined in section 10-1, including but not limited to malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits. 
Prepared food means food prepared on site, the sale of which requires authorization by the Fulton of DeKalb County Departments of Health. 
Public property and public space both mean for the purpose of this article any property owned by the City of Atlanta within street rights-of-way, including any roadways and sidewalks, but excluding city-owned parks. 
Public property vending means vending activity as permitted on publicly owned property under the jurisdiction of the City of Atlanta and in specifically designated city-owned parks. Other than where specifically designated, vending shall only be permitted in city-owned parks where such activity is associated with a special event and/or subject to regulation under a more specific permit. 
Spirit merchandise means licensed branded merchandise or generic "Atlanta" branded merchandise. Merchandise shall be limited to shirts, hats, scarves and gloves. 
Retail vending cart means a vending cart at which items permissive for sale other than prepared food and prepared non-alcoholic beverages may be offered for sale. 
Third party published (non-adult) materials means periodicals, books, newspapers, and maps which have been published by a third-party and are not adult material as defined in section 16-29.001. 
Tourist/traveler convenience items means, weather-related supplies such as umbrellas, scarves, hats, gloves and ponchos); convenience toiletries; over-the-counter medicines; cell phone accessories; and third-party produced souvenirs that celebrate Atlanta landmarks, institutions, or other Atlanta icons. 
Valid vendor location means an area which is authorized in this article, in which vending can take place. Vending at a valid vendor location shall only be permitted from kiosks installed in the city's right-of-way, vending carts that meet the standards set forth in this article, or from food trucks from metered parking spaces in designated food truck areas. Other than kiosks or approved vending carts or food trucks, vending will be prohibited from tables or semi-permanent or permanent structures. 
Valid vendor permit means a permit issued by the City of Atlanta. Such permit shall consist of a photo identification card which contains the vendor's name, photograph, vending type and classification, authorized valid vendor location(s) and time period for which such permit is valid. 
Vending cart means a cart designated either as a food vending cart or a retail vending cart which meets the following design requirements: 
(1)  Length of the cart may not exceed seven feet and width may not exceed four feet height-excluding canopies, umbrellas, or transparent enclosures-may not exceed five feet; 
(2)  Umbrellas or canopies shall have a minimum clearance of seven feet and a maximum height of nine feet six inches above the sidewalk; 
(3)  Umbrellas or canopies may not exceed forty-eight square feet (eight feet x six feet); 
(4)  All carts must be mobile, and able to roll on wheels; 
(5)  The design, materials, and colors are to be of natural wood or metal products and considerate of the immediate surroundings of the proposed location; 
(6)  Materials must be in working order, and may not include peeling paint, visible defects or areas requiring maintenance; 
(7)  The wheels located under the car are preferred, however projecting wheels must have fenders; and 
(8)  Hitches attached to the cart must be removable and detached when in operation. 
(9)  If used, propane tanks must be enclosed. 
Vendor means any person who has been issued a valid vendor permit. 
Weekly food truck vending pass means the waterproof placard issued to food truck vendors wishing vend in any non-metered designated food truck area during any particular week. Weekly food truck vending passes shall be issued by the city to food truck vendors on a first come, first served basis and shall expire at 12:00 a.m. of the Saturday of the week of issuance. Weekly food truck vending passes shall be no smaller than 8.5 × 11 inches, and shall clearly display: 
(1)  The designated food truck area wherein they are operable; and 
(2)  The dates during which they are operable. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 1, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-18(14-O-1203), § 1, 5-28-14 ; Ord. No. 2016-04(16-O-1001), § 1, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 30-1401. - Purpose, intent and applicability. 
(a)  Vending on public property in the city, as defined in this article, shall be subject to regulation as set forth in this article, including the requirement of regulatory licenses and permits. Vending in the public right-of-way without a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be unlawful and subject to punishment as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as follows: 
(1)  First conviction. A fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days or both. 
Second conviction. A fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days or both. 
Third conviction. A fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days or both. 
Fourth conviction. Any person convicted of four or more violations of this article shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days or both. 
(c)  It is the intent of council in enacting this article to: 
(1)  Serve and protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(2)  Establish a uniform set of rules and regulations which are fair and equitable. 
(3)  Provide economic development opportunities for small entrepreneurs in the city. 
(4)  Provide a variety of goods and services for sale. 
(5)  Promote stable vendors who will enrich the city's ambiance and be assets to public security. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1402. - Vending business required to remit sales taxes and keep records. 
(a)  Every vendor shall file Georgia Department of Revenue (GDOR) St-3 Forms and remit monthly sale tax revenues to GDOR. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the revocation of any permit in accordance with the provisions of Division 2 of this article. 
(b)  Prospective vendors, by filing an application, agree to produce documents and records which may be considered pertinent to the ascertainment of facts relative to the issuance and maintenance of the permit, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The prospective vendor's bank or other financial institution records, including those which are personal or from any business in which the vendor has any interest, such as savings and checking account records, bank statements, ledgers, deposit tickets, withdrawal slips, canceled checks, check stubs, bank drafts, cashier's checks, certificates of deposit, money market accounts, pass books and applications for each account; 
(2)  Personal state and federal income tax statements for the past five years; and 
(3)  Records of sales and receipts for purchases and expenses from any business in which a vendor has any interest. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1403. - Vending operational rules. 
(a)  Hours of operation shall be 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. 
(b)  Amplified sound or sound equipment must comply with the City of Atlanta Noise Ordinance. 
(c)  Any and all signage must comply with the City of Atlanta Sign Ordinance. 
(d)  Vendors may offer items permissible for sale only. 
(e)  All vendors shall display their valid vending permits and any required copies of licensing agreements at the valid vendor location. 
(f)  All vendors must maintain an auditable point-of-sale system to track and report on sales revenue and appropriate taxation in accordance with the requirements of section 30-1402. 
(g)  Vending operations may not obstruct vehicular traffic flow except for up to 15 minutes to load and unload kiosks and/or vending carts and merchandise. 
(h)  Vending operations, including but not limited to the display of merchandise and the provision of tables and/or chairs, may not exceed the approved operating area. 
(i)  Vending carts and/or food trucks shall not be left unattended or stored at any time in the operating area when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. 
(j)  The sale of prepared food and/or prepared non-alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted from a kiosk. 
(k)  The sale of branded items permissible for sale a vendor shall not be permitted absent a valid licensing agreement authorizing the vendor to engage in such sales a copy of which must be maintained at the valid vendor location. 
(l)  In designated food truck areas containing metered parking spaces, food trucks may only be open to and may only serve customers from the side of the truck facing the sidewalk, and are prohibited from operating with their trucks open to the roadway. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 2, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2016-04(16-O-1001), § 2, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 30-1404. - Littering. 
All vendors engaged in the sale of pre-packaged food, non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages, prepared food, and/or prepared non-alcoholic beverages shall affix to their vending cart, or motor vehicle, or shall locate directly outside the kiosk food truck, or motor vehicle a receptacle for trash, which shall be maintained and emptied regularly and which shall be marked as being for trash. Vendors engaged in the sale of the items permissible for sale listed in this section are responsible for the removal of trash within a 25-foot radius surrounding the vending cart, kiosk or food truck. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 3, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-56(14-O-1591), § 1, 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1405. - Aesthetic standards. 
Vending is permitted from kiosks, vending carts, food trucks, and motor vehicles in accordance with Section 30-1436 only. Vending carts must comply with the following aesthetic standards: 
(a)  Length of the cart may not exceed seven feet and width may not exceed four feet height-excluding canopies, umbrellas, or transparent enclosures-may not exceed five feet; 
(b)  Umbrellas or canopies shall have a minimum clearance of seven feet and a maximum height of nine feet six inches above the sidewalk; 
(c)  Umbrellas or canopies may not exceed 48 square feet (eight feet × six feet); 
(d)  All carts must be mobile, and able to roll on wheels; 
(e)  The design, materials, and colors are to be of natural wood or metal products and considerate of the immediate surroundings of the proposed location; 
(f)  Materials must be in working order, and may not include peeling paint, visible defects or areas requiring maintenance; 
(g)  The wheels located under the car are preferred, however projecting wheels must have fenders; 
(h)  Hitches attached to the cart must be removable and detached when in operation; and 
(i)  If used, propane tanks must be enclosed. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 4, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-56(14-O-1591), § 2, 12-10-14 ) 
Secs. 30-1406—30-1425. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS AND LICENSES 

Sec. 30-1426. - Vendor permit and business license required. 
(a)  No public property vending shall occur without a permit issued pursuant to this article, except that no permit shall be required for persons selling newspapers at-large other than from a fixed location on public property. 
(b)  Except for vendors selling ice cream or other pre-packaged food and/or non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages out of motor vehicles as prescribed in Section 30-1436, public property vending shall be permitted only on the location or designated food truck area stated on the permit. This permit requirement is in addition to any general business license required or other special permission requirement. 
(c)  No person shall engage in the business or trade of vending without first obtaining a business license. Disabled veterans and blind persons, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1, are exempt from payment of business license fees, but must obtain such licenses. 
(d)  All valid vendor permits are nontransferable, and must be displayed in clear view, together with the vending permit photo identification card, at the permitted location or designated food truck area at all times when the vendor or assistant vendor is present. 
(e)  All valid vendor permits shall indicate if the permit authorizes the sale of licensed branded merchandise. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 5, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-56(14-O-1591), § 3, 12-10-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1427. - Lottery-type selection process. 
(a)  Persons permitted by the City of Atlanta to vend in kiosks during the calendar year of 2012 may submit applications for permits to vend in accordance with this article at the kiosk locations at which they had been permitted to vend in 2012. 
(b)  Any kiosk locations for which applications have not been submitted by persons described in subsection (a) of this section within 30 days of the approval of this ordinance shall be included in the lottery-type selection process. No fewer than ten percent of the available kiosk locations shall be reserved for disabled veterans and/or blind persons as described in section 30-1435. 
(c)  No earlier than 31 days following the approval of this ordinance, the office of revenue shall administer a lottery-type selection process by which persons shall be selected to submit an application for a kiosk or vending cart valid vendor location. 
(d)  There shall be no consideration required for participation in the lottery-type selection process. 
(e)  Persons wishing to submit applications for each kiosk or vending cart valid vendor location shall be required to place their names in a separate drawing for each kiosk or vending cart valid vendor location. 
(f)  No individual prospective vendor may receive the ability to apply for more than ten percent of the kiosk or vending cart valid vendor locations available in the lottery-type selection process. 
(g)  The lottery-type selection process shall take place at which time the city has determined there are newly created or open kiosk or vending cart valid vendor locations which shall be entered/re-entered therein. Persons wishing to submit application for any newly created or open kiosk or vending cart valid vendor locations shall be required to place their names in a separate drawing therefor. Vendors wishing to continue vending from a kiosk or vending cart valid vendor location at the time of the lottery-type selection process shall not be required to participate therein and shall instead be permitted to renew their permits to vend from the valid vendor location pursuant to section 30-1429. 
(h)  Designated food truck areas shall be open to food truck vendors on a first come first served basis subject either to the parking restrictions contained in this article and Chapter 150, Article IV, Division 3; or to the issuance of a weekly food truck vending pass pursuant to this article, and shall not be entered into the lottery-type selection process. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 6, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2016-04(16-O-1001), § 3, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 30-1428. - Application. 
(a)  Except for persons who may submit applications for kiosk locations pursuant to section 30-1427(a), following selection by the lottery-type selection process, an application shall be required by all persons seeking issuance of a kiosk or vending cart valid vendor permit. Applicants for food truck valid vendor permits shall not participate in the lottery-type selection process. Each applicant must apply in person and complete an application form. Application forms may be obtained from and filed with the office of revenue. 
(b)  Permit fees and applicable maintenance fees are due and payable by money order, certified check or cashier's check if and when the application is approved by the office of revenue. 
(c)  The application shall, at a minimum, consist of the following data: 
(1)  Each applicant shall submit detailed data as follows: 
a.  Applicant's name and current address. 
b.  Applicant's previous addresses within the last five years. 
c.  Social security number. 
d.  Valid vending location designated pursuant to section 30-1427. 
e.  A dimensional drawing that clearly shows the footprint and placement of the cart and the operating area. 
f.  The times during which the vendor estimates they will vend on the proposed property. 
g.  GDOR retail identification tax number. 
h.  State issued picture identification. 
i.  City business license. 
j.  A general description of the items permissible for sale to be sold or offered for sale. 
k.  A valid licensing agreement authorizing the vendor to engage in sales of licensed branded merchandise if applicable. 
(2)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the office of revenue within 30 days from the date of request. Failure to furnish such information within 30 days shall automatically dismiss, with prejudice, the application. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 7, 3-26-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1429. - Term and renewal of permits. 
(a)  A valid vendor permit for a valid vendor location will be issued for a one-year period. When the one-year permit expires, a vendor may apply for a renewal permit which allows the vendor to vend for another one-year period at the same location. All valid vendor permits are required to be renewed annually on or before March 1. All annual permit fees and applicable annual maintenance fees are due and payable at the time of renewal. 
(b)  No applicant may receive the ability to apply for more than ten percent of the valid vendor locations available through the lottery-type selection process. 
(c)  Vendors may present to the office of revenue an application for a renewal permit. Upon a review and approval of the renewal application by the appropriate agencies, satisfaction of all other license and permit requirements, and upon payment of the appropriate fees as indicated in section 30-1430, the vendor shall be furnished with a renewal permit. 
(d)  Each applicant for a renewal application shall submit an application which shall at a minimum consist of the data required for the issuance of an initial permit as set forth in section 30-1428. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 8, 3-26-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1430. - Annual fees. 
(a)  Annual permit fees and applicable annual maintenance fees are due and payable upon approval of the application. 
(b)  The annual permit fee for all valid vendor permits shall be $75.00. 
(c)  The annual maintenance fee for a kiosk valid vendor location shall be $2,500.00. In the year when the applicant for a valid vendor permit submits their initial application, the annual maintenance fee shall be prorated from the date of the approval of the application. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 9, 3-26-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1431. - Location. 
(a)  Valid vendor locations are designated by the city as follows: 
(1)  Phase 1: 
a.  19 Kiosks. 
b.  13 Downtown vending cart locations: 
i.  Lee Street: Four retail vending cart locations on the east side of Lee Street south of Ralph David Abernathy Boulevard; 
ii.  Washington Street: One retail vending cart location on the southwest side of Washington Street and Mitchell Street; 
iii.  Washington Street: One retail vending cart location on the west side of Washington Street between Mitchell Street and Trinity Avenue; 
iv.  Peachtree Street: One retail vending cart location on the east side of Peachtree Street between Martin Luther King Jr. Drive and Mitchell Street; 
v.  Peachtree Street: One retail vending cart location on the west side of Peachtree Street between Martin Luther King Jr. Drive and Alabama Street; 
vi.  Peachtree Street: One food vending cart location on the east side of Peachtree Street between Auburn Avenue and Edgewood Avenue; 
vii.  Peachtree Street: One food vending cart location on Peachtree Street between Harris Street and Andrew Young International Boulevard; 
viii.  Broad Street: One retail vending cart location on Broad Street SW between Martin Luther King Jr. Drive and Trinity Avenue; 
ix.  Baker Street: One food vending cart location on the north side of Baker Street NW between Centennial Olympic Park Drive NW and Luckie Street NW; 
x.  West Peachtree Street: One food vending cart location on the southwest corner of West Peachtree and Pine Street NE. 
c.  Government walk designated food truck area: 
i.  Central Avenue: Four metered parking spaces (two food trucks) on the west side of Central Avenue between Trinity Ave and Mitchell Street. 
ii.  Mitchell Street: Six metered parking spaces (three food trucks) on the south side of Mitchell Street between Central Avenue and Washington Street. 
iii.  Mitchell Street: Six metered parking spaces (three food trucks) on the north side of Mitchell Street between Central Avenue and Washington Street. 
iv.  Mitchell Street: Four metered parking spaces (two food trucks) on the south side of Mitchell Street between Pryor Street and Central Avenue. 
v.  Martin Luther King Jr. Drive: Four metered parking spaces (two food trucks) on the south side of Martin Luther King Jr. Drive between Washington Street and Central Avenue. 
vi.  Pryor Street: Six metered parking spaces (three Food Trucks) on the west side of Pryor Street between Martin Luther King Jr. Drive and Mitchell Street. Food trucks utilizing these spaces shall be subject to the posted rush hour parking restrictions. 
vii.  Pryor Street: Four metered parking spaces (two food trucks) on the east side of Pryor Street between Mitchell Street and Trinity Avenue. 
viii.  Trinity Avenue: Two metered parking spaces (one food truck) on the north side of Trinity Avenue between Central Avenue and Washington Street. Any food truck utilizing this space shall be subject to the posted rush hour parking restrictions. 
(2)  Phase 2: 
a.  12 Downtown vending cart locations: 
i.  Wall Street SW: One food vending cart or retail vending cart location at the southeast corner of Wall Street SW at Peachtree Street NW; 
ii.  Broad Street NW: One retail vending cart location on the west side of Broad Street NW, near the southwest corner with Walton Street NW; 
iii.  Walton Street NW: One retail vending cart location on the north side of Walton Street NW, near the northeast corner with Broad Street NW; 
iv.  Andrew Young International Boulevard NW: One food vending cart location at the southwest corner with Spring Street NW, adjacent to Walton Spring Park; 
v.  Andrew Young International Boulevard NW: One retail vending cart location at the southwest corner with Spring Street NW, adjacent to Walton Spring Park; 
vi.  Andrew Young International Boulevard NW: One retail vending cart near the northwest corner with Peachtree Street, in the curb extension; and; 
vii.  Andrew Young International Boulevard NW: One retail vending cart or food vending cart near the southwest corner with Peachtree Street, in the curb extension; and; 
viii.  Edgewood Avenue SE: One retail vending cart or food vending cart location at the northeast corner with Peachtree Center Avenue SE; 
ix.  Decatur Street SE: Two food vending cart locations at the southwest corner with Central Avenue SW; and 
x.  Decatur Street SE: One food vending cart or retail vending cart location at the northwest corner with Piedmont Avenue SE; 
xi.  Decatur Street SE: One food vending cart or retail vending cart location at the northeast corner with Piedmont Avenue SE; and 
xii.  Andrew Young International Boulevard NW: One food vending cart location in the street furniture zone on the south side of the street between Centennial Olympic Park Drive and Williams Street at a minimum distance of 30 feet from each street corner. 
b.  3 Hardy Ivy Park food vending cart locations: 
i.  One food vending cart location inside the circular hardscaped area of the park; 
ii.  One food vending cart location inside the rectangular hardscaped portion of the park that contains a double row of trees; and 
iii.  One food vending cart location adjacent to the southern entrance to the rectangular hardscaped portion of the park that contains the double row of trees. 
c.  Broad Street Plaza designated food truck area: 
i.  Broad Street Plaza: Eight temporarily delineated spaces located within Broad Street Plaza at 12 Broad Street NW, Atlanta, GA 30303, and located between the Five Points Marta Station and Marietta Street NW. 
d.  Broad Street Arcade designated food truck area: 
i.  Broad Street SW: Four metered parking spaces (two food trucks) on the east side of Broad Street SW between Martin Luther King Jr. Drive SW and Mitchell Street SW. Food trucks operating from this designated food truck area may operate from more than one-third of the metered parking spaces on Broad Street SW. 
(b)  Valid vendor locations shall: 
(1)  With the exception of food trucks vending within designated food truck areas, not be within 15 feet of street intersections or pedestrian crosswalks or 15 feet of building entrances/exits or within 50 feet of hotels/motels; 
(2)  With the exception of food trucks vending within designated food truck areas, not be within 15 feet of other valid vendor locations; 
(3)  With the exception of food trucks vending within the Broad Street Plaza designated food truck area, not be within 200 feet of permanent businesses selling the same or similar products as the vendor; 
(4)  Provide a minimum of five feet of unobstructed pedestrian space; 
(5)  Not be within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; and 
(6)  Not be within 600 feet of the closet property line of any public or private elementary, middle or high school. 
(c)  (1)  Within designated food truck areas containing metered parking spaces, food trucks may operate from no more than one-third of the metered parking spaces on each street on a block in accordance with sections 150-132 and 150-133, except as otherwise stated in this article. 
(2)  Food trucks may operate from two contiguous metered parking spaces within parking meter zones and shall not continue to occupy such spaces for a longer period of time than has been paid for. Food trucks shall not be the subject to the parking time limits referenced in sections 150-132 and 150-133. 
(d)  Valid vendors authorized to vend in valid vendor locations within city-owned parks are not subject to the park vending fees listed in section 110-3 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  Vending in the Broad Street Plaza designated food truck area is authorized on Fridays only. 
(f)  Valid food truck vendors vending in the Broad Street Plaza designated food truck area must clearly display a weekly food truck vending pass issued by the City of Atlanta on their food trucks during the hours of operation. Weekly food truck vending passes shall be issued on a first served basis, and upon the payment of a $68.00 fee. Weekly food truck vending passes shall expire at 12:00 a.m. of the Saturday of the week of issuance. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 10, 3-26-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-18(14-O-1203), § 2, 5-28-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-26(14-O-1306), § 1, 6-25-14 ; Ord. No. 2016-04(16-O-1001), § 4, 3-30-16 ) 
Sec. 30-1432. - Notification of name change or change of address. 
Whenever either the name or address provided by the vendor on the application for a valid vendor permit changes, the vendor shall notify the office of revenue in writing within ten days of such change and provide same with the name change or address change. Vendors shall assure that a current and correct name, residence address and mailing address are on file with the office of revenue at all times. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1433. - Denials, fines, suspensions and revocations. 
(a)  No valid vendor permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or misdemeanor relating to drug possession and related matter; crimes of moral turpitude; larceny, fraudulent conveyance, perjury and/or false swearing, or subrogation. Any conviction for dealing and/or trafficking in illegal drugs will automatically disqualify an applicant. 
(b)  Failure to maintain initial qualifications shall be grounds for revocation or denial of a renewal permit. 
(c)  A denial, fine, suspension, revocation of any permit issued pursuant to this article may be imposed for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the application. 
(2)  Failure on the part of a vendor to maintain initial eligibility qualifications. 
(3)  Failure to furnish any and all documentation requested by either the police department, the office of revenue or the license review board for purposes of the investigation of any application or for the inspection of records pursuant to this division within 30 days of such request. 
(4)  Any failure to comply with any requirement set forth in this article. 
(d)  Any person whose permit is revoked may not reapply until one year following the effective date of the revocation. 
(e)  In addition to carrying out all other investigations as may be permitted under this article, the license and permits unit shall investigate any alleged violation of this article upon receipt of a written, sworn complaint by any person who witnesses or becomes aware of a potential violation. Such complaint shall be signed under penalty of perjury, and shall be accompanied by any supporting evidence. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ; Ord. No. 2014-14(14-O-1137), § 11, 3-26-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1434. - Public hearing on suspension, fine, revocation or denial. 
(a)  A fine, suspension, revocation or denial of a permit issued under this article may be appealed to the license review board within 20 days of the applicant or permit holder's receipt of notice as described herein. 
(b)  Notice of the denial, fine, suspension or revocation shall be given in writing, setting forth the complaint, the grounds for denial, fine, suspension or revocation, and the time, date and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the vendor at least five calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the address shown on the application. The license review board shall conduct the hearing at a regularly scheduled license review board meeting and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new permit and may revoke, within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony suspend, fine or refuse to renew any existing permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. The decision of the mayor may be appealed via Certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(c)  Under this section: 
(1)  A first violation within 24 months will result in a $100.00 fine; 
(2)  A second violation within 24 months will result in a fine of no less than $100.00 and no more than $1,000.00 and/or up to a 12-month suspension of the permit, or revocation of the permit. 
(3)  A third violation within 24 months will result in the revocation of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1435. - Disabled veterans. 
Permit fees are waived for disabled veterans, as that term is currently defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-12-2 or as amended, currently holding a valid certificate of eligibility as O.C.G.A. § 43-12-5, and blind persons who meet that definition of O.C.G.A. § 49-4-51(b) as it exists now or is from time to time amended. 
( Ord. No. 2014-06(13-O-1339), § 3, 3-3-14 ) 
Sec. 30-1436. - Vendors selling ice cream or other pre-packaged food and/or non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages out of motor vehicles. 
(a)  Vendors selling ice cream or other pre-packaged food and/or non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages out of motor vehicles shall be subject to this section. This section shall not apply to food truck vendors operating from a designated food Truck area. Vendors permitted in accordance with this section shall not be permitted to sell prepared food or prepared non-alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Every vendor selling ice cream or other pre-packaged food and/or non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages out of motor vehicles pursuant to this section shall, before making any sale, park the vehicle at the right curb and at least eight feet from any other vehicle that may be parked on the street and not less than 100 feet from any intersecting street. When the vending vehicle stops, all sound equipment or other devices used to notify customers of the presence of the vendor shall be stopped and shall not be resumed until the vehicle is again put in motion. 
(c)  No vehicle using sound equipment or other method of attracting customers shall operate such equipment before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. daily or between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays. Furthermore, such equipment shall not be operated within one block of a church between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays. On days in which schools are actually in session, no motor vehicle shall be operated within 600 feet of any public school in the city one hour before or one hour after published school hours. 
(d)  Vendors selling ice cream or other pre-packaged food and/or non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages out of motor vehicles pursuant to this section, shall not stop or stand and do business for more than 30 minutes. 
(e)  Vendors selling ice cream or other pre-packaged food and/or non-alcoholic pre-packaged beverages out of motor vehicles pursuant to this section shall not be restricted to an operational area, valid vendor location selected via a lottery-type selection process, or location specifically described in Section 30-1431. 
( Ord. No. 2014-56(14-O-1591), § 4, 12-10-14 ; Ord. No. 2017-28(17-O-1238), § 1, 5-15-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-35(17-O-1346), § 1, 6-28-17 ) 
Sec. 30-1437. - Temporary Turner Field locations. 
(a)  Temporary Turner Field Valid vendor locations will be located on city-owned property on Georgia Avenue between Pollard Boulevard and Capital Avenue for up to 15 locations designated by the city as follows: 
(b)  Lottery type selection process for temporary Turner Field locations: 
(1)  Persons wishing to submit applications for each temporary Turner Field valid vendor location shall be required to place their names in a separate drawing during the lottery-type selection process for each such location. 
(2)  Persons permitted on September 1, 2008 by the City of Atlanta as vendors (not as assistant vendors) authorized to vend on public property locations near Turner Field, (such) locations described in section 30-1405(a)(6) of the version of Chapter 30, Article XXIII of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances (vending on public property) in effect prior to September, 2008 and officially repealed in Section 2 of Ordinance (13-O-1339), shall be given first right of refusal in the drawings for each of the temporary Turner Field valid vendor locations described in this section. 
(3)  No individual prospective vendor may receive the ability to apply for more than one of the temporary Turner Field valid vendor locations available in the lottery-type selection process. 
(c)  This section shall expire in its entirety, and shall have no further effect on December 31, 2016. Following the expiration of this section: 
(1)  The locations contained in subsection (a) shall no longer be designated by the City of Atlanta as valid vendor locations, and no vending shall be authorized thereon; 
(2)  Valid vend or permits for temporary Turner Field locations shall expire and shall not be renewable. 
( Ord. No. 2015-03(15-O-1043), § 1, 2-11-15 ) 
Secs. 30-1438—30-1460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIV. - VENDING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-1461. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Assistant vendor means a person who assists a vendor at such vendor's vending site. 
Athletic and entertainment vending means the commercial enterprise of selling merchandise to the general public on private property in connection with events held at athletic or entertainment venues which have a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons. 
Blind person. A person shall be considered blind for the purpose of this article if such person's vision, with correcting glasses, is so defective as to prevent the performance of activities for which eyesight is essential. 
Class C food vending station means a fully enclosed, self-contained non-motor vehicle that is approved by the Fulton County health department for the purpose of vending on private property. 
Flea market means any event at which two or more persons offer merchandise for sale or exchange; and at which a fee is charged for the privilege of offering or displaying merchandise for sale or exchange; or at which a fee is charged to prospective buyers for admission to the area where merchandise is offered or displayed for sale or exchange; or regardless of the number of persons offering or displaying merchandise or the absence of fees, at which merchandise is offered or displayed for sale or exchange if the event is held more than six times in any 12-month period. The term "flea market" applies regardless of whether such sale of merchandise is conducted out of doors or within a building. The primary characteristic is that these activities involve a series of sales sufficient in number, scope, and character to constitute a regular course of business. The term "flea market" shall not mean and shall not apply to any event which is organized for the exclusive benefit of any community chest, fund, foundation, association, or corporation organized and operated for religious, educational, or charitable purposes, provided that no part of any admission fee or parking fee charged vendors or prospective purchasers or the gross receipts or net earnings from the sale or exchange of merchandise, whether in the form of a percentage of the receipts or earnings, as salary, or otherwise, inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or person participating in the organization or conduct of the event; or any event at which all persons selling, exchanging, or offering or displaying merchandise for sale or exchange are manufacturers or licensed retail or wholesale merchants. Flea markets shall not include developed and operating shopping centers, antique stores, jewelry stores, coin shops, salvage operations, clothing stores, or special sales events as accessory uses not to exceed 14 days, or other businesses of merchandise in common with flea markets where the vendor therein is not operating among a collection of vendors or renting or securing individual space within an overall operation. 
Flea market promoter, operator, or owner means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other form of business entity which owns, operates, maintains, manages, or promotes flea markets. 
Flea market vendor means any person, individual, firm, corporation, partnership, or other form of business entity of any type or character who engages in the retail sale of merchandise at a flea market. "Flea market vendor" shall not include licensed second-hand goods dealers or pawnbrokers. In addition to being subject to any regulations pertaining specifically to flea market vendors that may be included in this article, flea market vendors shall be subject to all regulations within this article pertaining generally to vendors. 
Mobile food unit means any motor vehicle or non-motorized cart approved by the department of police used for the vending of food items to the public. 
Moral turpitude means the act or behavior of baseness, vileness or the depravity in private and social duties which people owe to their fellow people, or to society in general, contrary to accepted and customary rule of right and duty between person and person; act or behavior that gravely violates moral sentiment or accepted moral standards of community and is a morally suitable quality held to be present in some criminal offenses as distinguished from others. 
Permissible food item means any food product or substance, including beverages, that legally may be dispensed for the public's consumption pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Fulton, DeKalb, or Clayton County health department. 
Private property vending means vending activity conducted out-of-doors or in a flea market on private property not owned by the city or by any other governmental agency. Produce means any agricultural product raised on a farm or orchard. 
Recording means a tangible medium on which sounds, images, or both are recorded or otherwise stored, including an original phonograph record, disc, tape, audio or video cassette, wire, film, or other medium now existing or developed later on which sounds, images, or both are or can be recorded or otherwise stored, or a copy or reproduction that duplicates in whole or in part the original. An illicit recording is a recording produced without the authorization of the recording's owner, or which is otherwise sold or offered for sale in violation of any state or federal law pertaining thereto. 
Registered agent means any person who is authorized by a vendor or itinerant vendor and who agrees to accept service or process and legal notices on behalf of the vendor or itinerant vendor. 
Seasonal vendors means a temporary vendor who vends from private property at a fixed location for seasonal vending. 
Site plan means a visual depiction of the vending site showing 1) the exact location of the vending operation on the property; 2) the length, width, and height of the vending stand; 3) the location of all on-site parking spaces which serve the property; and 4) the location of any power sources which the vendor intends to use. The site plan shall be filed along with each application. 
Stand means any fixed or movable structure, table or device used by a vendor for the purpose of displaying or storing any merchandise, article or food which is offered for sale. 
Valid vendor location means an area which is authorized in this article, and if applicable, subsection 170-2166(10), in which vending can take place. 
Valid vendor permit means a permit issued by the department of police. Such permit shall consist of a police photo identification card which contains the vendor's name, photograph, vending type and classification, authorized location and time period for which such permit is valid. 
Vending business means any commercial enterprise operated for profit in which merchandise, food, services or a combination thereof are rendered for sale to the general public on private property and approved by the city. 
Vendor means any person whose primary business is the selling or bartering, or carrying for sale or barter, or exposing therefor, any goods, wares, merchandise, services, food, confectionery or drink carried by hand from portable stands or tables, by manually propelled vehicles, or by motor vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5175; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 1, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 2005-39, § 2, 7-14-05; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 1, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 2008-58(07-O-1905), § 1, 7-16-08; Ord. No. 2011-37(11-O-0994), § 1, 9-15-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-1462. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Vending on private property in the city, as defined in section 30-1461, shall be subject to regulation as set forth in this article, including the requirement of regulatory licenses and permits. 
(b)  It is the intent of council in enacting this article to: 
(1)  Serve and protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(2)  Establish a uniform set of rules and regulations which are fair and equitable. 
(3)  Provide economic development opportunities for small entrepreneurs in the city. 
(4)  Provide a variety of goods and services for sale. 
(5)  Promote stable vendors who will enrich the city's ambiance and be assets to public security. 
(6)  Ensure that persons vending on private property have the permission of the property owner prior to providing goods and services to the public. 
(7)  Ensure that persons vending on private property do not impede on public vending spaces. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5174) 
Sec. 30-1463. - Vending business required to keep records. 
(a)  Every vendor, including flea market vendors, shall maintain a permanent record book in which shall be entered in ink and in legible English at the time any property is acquired for the purpose of retail sale. 
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the suspension or revocation of any permit by the police department's license and permit section, the license review board, or the mayor in accordance with the provisions of division 2 of this article. 
(b)  Vendors, by filing an application, agree to produce documents and records which may be considered pertinent to the ascertainment of facts relative to the issuance and maintenance of the license, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The vendor's bank or other financial institution records, including those which are personal or from any business in which the vendor has any interest, such as savings and checking account records, bank statements, ledgers, deposit tickets, withdrawal slips, canceled checks, check stubs, bank drafts, cashier's checks, certificates of deposit, money market accounts, pass books and applications for each account; 
(2)  Personal state and federal income tax statements for the past five years; and 
(3)  Records of sales and receipts for purchases and expenses from any business in which a vendor has any interest. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5180.4; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 2, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 30-1464. - Vending restrictions and prohibitions. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions set forth in subsection 16-28.008(10), persons vending on private property shall not be permitted to operate in the following areas: 
(1)  Within 15 feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
(2)  Within ten feet of any driveway. 
(3)  Within 15 feet of another vending location assigned pursuant to article XXIII of this chapter to another vendor on a public sidewalk. 
(4)  Within a minimum of nine feet of unobstructed pedestrian space. 
(5)  Any area within 15 feet of a building exit, or in the case of a hotel or motel, within 50 feet of building entrances or exits. 
(6)  Within 1,500 feet of a permanent business selling the same or similar products. This provision shall not apply to vendor sites located near athletic and entertainment venues which have a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons. 
(b)  Any power sources must be depicted on the site plan and must meet all applicable electrical code standards. 
(c)  Vending structures shall not be left unattended or stored at any time on the open vending site when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. 
(d)  Hours of operation shall be 5:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. 
(e)  Amplified sound or sound equipment must comply with the City of Atlanta Noise Ordinance. 
(f)  Any and all signage must comply with the City of Atlanta Sign Ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5180.8; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 2, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 30-1465. - Littering. 
All vendors engaged in food vending shall affix to their vending station a receptacle for litter, which shall be maintained and emptied regularly and which shall be marked as being for litter. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5180.9) 
Sec. 30-1466. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as follows: 
(1)  First conviction. A fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days or both. 
(2)  Second conviction. A fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days or both. 
(3)  Third conviction. A fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days or both. 
(4)  Fourth conviction. Any person convicted of four or more violations of this article within any 12-month period shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and costs or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days or both; and a court-ordered referral shall be forwarded to the chief of police for revocation of their permit. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5180.10) 
Sec. 30-1467. - Aesthetic standards. 
(a)  Vending is permitted from skirted tables only. Tables shall not extend beyond the perimeter of the covered canopy area. 
(b)  Canopy. If used, must be a portable folding canopy only. One canopy shall be permitted (not required), shall be white in color, shall not contain any writing and shall not exceed ten by 20 feet in size. 
(c)  Vending structures must be removed from the open vending site when the vendor is not doing business and during restricted hours of operation. 
(d)  Vending structures must be in good repair at all times. 
(e)  Merchandise shall be displayed on the table only and shall be stored within the interior area of the canopy. 
(f)  All storage of merchandise shall be beneath the skirted tables. 
(g)  If signage is allowed, no more than one sign which shall not exceed two × three feet in size and displayed only on or attached to the vending table. Any such sign shall be included in the site plan, if signage is to be used. 
(h)  A description of the structure and the hours of operation shall be included in the site plan. 
(Ord. No. 2006-85, § 5, 12-12-06) 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 2006-85, adopted Dec. 12, 2006, provided for a new section 30-1488. Inasmuch as § 30-1488 was previously enacted by Code 1977, § 14-5180.3, the provisions of said ord. have been included as a new § 30-1467 at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 30-1468. - Athletic and entertainment vending. 
In order to commence vending on private property, all athletic and entertainment vendors must have an initial permit issued and must meet all the qualifications set forth in this article. An athletic and entertainment vending permit for a private property vending location shall be issued for one-year periods. A vendor who has been issued an athletic and entertainment vending permit shall not be subject to any limitation as to the length of time from which she or he can operate from the same vending location. 
(Ord. No. 2008-58(07-O-1905), § 2, 7-16-08; Ord. No. 2009-55(09-O-1652), § 1, 9-30-09) 
Sec. 30-1469. - Prohibitions and restrictions; athletic and entertainment vending. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions set forth in subsection 16-28.008(10); persons vending on private property shall not be permitted to operate in the following areas: 
(1)  Within 15 feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
(2)  Within ten feet of any driveway. 
(3)  Within 15 feet of another vending location assigned pursuant to article XXIII of this chapter to another vendor on a public sidewalk. 
(4)  Within a minimum of nine feet of unobstructed pedestrian space. 
(5)  Any area within 15 feet of a building exit, or in the case of a hotel or motel, within 50 feet of building entrances or exits. 
(6)  Within 1,500 feet of a permanent business selling the same or similar products. This provision shall not apply to vendor sites located near athletic and entertainment venues which have a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons. 
(b)  Any power sources must be depicted on the site plan and must meet all applicable electrical code standards. 
(c)  Vending structures shall not be left unattended or stored at any time on the open vending site when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. 
(d)  Hours of operation shall be 5:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. 
(e)  Amplified sound or sound equipment must comply with the City of Atlanta Noise Ordinance. 
(f)  If signage is allowed no more than one sign which shall not exceed two by three feet in size and displayed only on or attached to the vending table. Any such sign shall be included in the site plan, if signage is to be used. Handwritten signage is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2008-58(07-O-1905), § 2, 7-16-08) 
Sec. 30-1470. - Aesthetics; athletic and entertainment vending. 
(a)  Vending is permitted from skirted tables only. Tables shall not extend beyond the perimeter of the covered canopy area. 
(b)  Canopy. If used, must be a portable folding canopy only. One canopy shall be permitted (not required), shall not contain any writing and shall not exceed ten feet by 20 feet in size. 
(c)  Vending structures must be removed from the open vending site when the vendor is not doing business and during restricted hours of operation. 
(d)  Vending structures must be in good repair at all times. 
(e)  Merchandise shall be displayed on the table only and shall be stored within the interior area of the canopy. 
(f)  All storage of merchandise shall be beneath the skirted tables. 
(g)  If signage is allowed, no more than one sign which shall not exceed two by three feet in size and displayed only on or attached to the vending table. Any such sign shall be included in the site plan, if signage is to be used. 
(h)  A description of the structure and the hours of operation shall be included in the site plan. 
(Ord. No. 2008-58(07-O-1905), § 2, 7-16-08) 
Sec. 30-1471. - Vending from mobile food units. 
(a)  Regulations, restrictions and prohibitions. Persons conducting business from a mobile food unit on private property may conduct such business only in compliance with the following: 
(1)  They must have the written expressed consent of the owner to use the business property on which they propose to operate. 
(2)  They must have a valid city business license unless otherwise exempted by city ordinance. 
(3)  The business use must be a use that is otherwise allowed within the zoning district in which the vendor proposes to operate. 
(4)  Vending on private property shall also comply with the requirements of Chapter 30, Article XXIV, Vending on Private Property. 
Persons conducting business from a mobile food unit on private property shall not be permitted to operate in the following areas: 
(5)  Within 15 feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
(6)  Within ten feet of any driveway. 
(7)  Within 15 feet of another vending location assigned pursuant to article XXIII of this chapter to another vendor on a public sidewalk. 
(8)  Within a minimum of nine feet of unobstructed pedestrian space. 
(9)  Any area within 15 feet of a building exit, or in the case of a hotel or motel, within 50 feet of building entrances or exits. 
(10)  Within 200 feet of a stationary business selling the same or similar products. This provision shall apply to vendor sites located near athletic and entertainment venues which have a seating capacity in excess of 3,500 persons, nor shall it apply to vendor sites where the stationary business and the mobile food unit(s) share a common ownership interest. 
(b)  Any power sources must be depicted on the site plan and must meet all applicable electrical code standards. 
(c)  Vending structures shall not be left unattended or stored at any time on the open vending site when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. 
(d)  Hours of operation shall be 5:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. 
(e)  Amplified sound or sound equipment must comply with the City of Atlanta Noise Ordinance. 
(f)  Any and all signage must comply with the City of Atlanta Sign Ordinance. 
(g)  Mobile food unit vendors shall be allowed to vend from the multiple locations as indicated on the vending permit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-37(11-O-0994), § 2, 9-15-11) 
Secs. 30-1472—30-1480. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 30-1481. - Vendor permit and business license required. 
(a)  No person shall vend any article, merchandise, produce, permissible food item, or service on private property in the city without first having obtained an initial vending permit and satisfied all other requirements, including but not limited to those of the health department in the county in which the vending site is located. No permit shall be required for persons selling newspapers at-large other than from a fixed location on private property. 
(b)  No person shall vend in the city on privately-owned property, except in conformity with the privileges granted for the particular class or permit issued to such person, and only on the location stated on the permit. This permit requirement is in addition to any general business license required or other special permission requirement. 
(c)  No person shall engage in the business or trade of vending without first obtaining a business license from the bureau of treasury, licensing and employee benefits. Disabled veterans and blind persons, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1, are exempt from payment of business license fees, but must obtain such licenses. 
(d)  All permits issued to vendors, including flea market vendors or assistant vendors, or registered agents are nontransferable, and must be displayed in clear view, together with the vending permit photo identification card, at the permitted location at all times when the vendor or assistant vendor is present. 
(e)  All permits issued to vendors, including flea market vendors, shall contain a general description of the merchandise, food, services, or any combination thereof to be offered for sale by such vendor at the permitted location, and shall indicate if the permit authorizes the sale of recordings. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5176; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 4, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 30-1482. - Classification of permits. 
(a)  Food permit. A food permit shall authorize a person to vend permissible food items in an individually assigned vending site or from a motor vehicle, but not from door-to-door. A food permit shall allow the sale of food only pursuant to the conditions specified by the health department of the county in which the vending site is located. Fulton County Health Department regulations class A nonhazardous, nonregulated foods do not require a health department food service permit. Where applicable, class B and class C foods require a valid certificate of inspection from the county in which the vending site is located and must specify the particular foods authorized to be sold. No vendors shall sell any cooked food from an open-pit barbecue grill from any private property location within the city without first obtaining written approval from the health department of the county in which the vending site is located. 
(b)  Merchandise permit. A merchandise permit shall authorize a person to vend items including but not limited to the following from a designated location on private property: 
(1)  Crafts: 
a.  Baskets. 
b.  Jewelry. 
c.  Leather. 
d.  Quilts. 
e.  Wood carvings. 
f.  Needle crafts. 
g.  Fragrances/incenses. 
(2)  Fresh flowers. 
(3)  Clothing and apparel. 
(4)  Seasonal items, such as Christmas trees, firewood. 
(5)  Accessories: 
a.  Leather goods. 
b.  Sunglasses. 
c.  Umbrellas. 
(6)  Licensed nonethnic apparel. In order to vend any items which are licensed by an organization (e.g., the Braves), a vendor must have a license from the appropriate organization to sell such goods and must produce such license to the police department for inspection when requested. 
(c)  Service permit. A service permit shall authorize a person to sell services, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Face paintings. 
(2)  Shoe shining. 
(3)  Portrait painting. 
(4)  Street music. 
(5)  Photography. 
(d)  Combination permit. A combination permit shall authorize a person to vend food and merchandise at individually assigned vending sites and locations. Any person may apply for and receive a combination permit, if all applicable requirements are met. 
(e)  Flea market vending permit. In addition to any other permits that must be obtained pursuant to paragraphs (a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section for the items or services sold, a flea market vending permit shall authorize the sale of items or services by a flea market vendor. Such a permit must be obtained by a flea market vendor as well as by any flea market promoter, operator, or owner. Flea market vending permits obtained by the flea market promoter, operator, or owner shall authorize the operation of the flea market. Such flea market vending permits shall be administered in the same manner as other permits required under this article, and the holders of such permits shall be subject to all applicable requirements of this article as a condition to holding such permits. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5177; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 5, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 30-1483. - Annual application. 
(a)  An application shall be required by all persons seeking issuance of an initial permit for vending on private property, and such application shall be filed annually. Each applicant must apply in person and complete an application form. Application forms may be obtained from and filed with the department of police license and permits unit. 
(b)  A nonrefundable application fee of $50.00 is required to accompany each application for an initial private property vendor's permit. 
(c)  Permit fees for food, merchandise, service or combination permits are due and payable if and when the application is approved by the city. 
(d)  The application for an initial private property vendor's permit shall, at a minimum, consist of the following data: 
(1)  Each applicant shall submit detailed data as follows: 
a.  Applicant's name and current address. 
b.  Applicant's previous addresses within the last five years. 
c.  Social security number. 
d.  Vending location sought, including exact location on such property. 
e.  Size of the proposed vending station, if applicable, i.e., length, width, and height. 
f.  Name and current address of each proposed assistant vendor. 
g.  The exact times during which the vendor intends to vend on the proposed property. 
h.  State department of revenue retail identification tax number. 
i.  State i.d. 
j.  City business license. 
k.  A general description of the food, merchandise, or services to be sold or offered for sale at the proposed vending location, including whether recordings will be sold or offered for sale. 
(2)  All applicants who intend to vend from private property must present to the department of police a private property permission letter on the form as issued by the license and permits division of the police department. The private property permission letter shall be provided along with the permit application and shall be a part of the required site plan. Such vendors shall be subject to all zoning restrictions and must be approved through the city bureau of buildings prior to the issuance of any vending permit (see subsection 170-2166(10)). This provision must be followed each and every time a vendor changes location. 
(3)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the police department licenses and permits unit within 30 days from the date of request. Failure to furnish such information within 30 days shall automatically dismiss, with prejudice, the application. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5178; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 6, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 30-1484. - Application procedure. 
All private property vendor applications shall be reviewed by the bureau of buildings to determine compliance with applicable zoning regulations as stated in subsection 16-28.008(10). Subject to favorable determination and written verification by the bureau of buildings and a private property permission letter issued by the License and Permits Division of the Atlanta Police Department, the bureau of treasury, licensing and employee benefits shall issue the business license for the applicant. Upon completion of all prerequisites, the police department license and permits units shall then issue a permit. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5179; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 4, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 30-1485. - Term and renewal of permits. 
(a)  In order to commence vending on private property, all vendors must have an initial permit issued and must meet all the qualifications set forth herein before reapplying for a permit. The length of time that a vendor on private property may remain on such property, excluding those holding a food permit as set out in section 30-1482(a), but including those holding a merchandise, service or combination permit as set out in section 30-1482(b)—(d), shall be two years, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. A vendor permit for a private property vending location will be issued for a one-year period. When the one-year permit expires, a vendor may apply for a renewal permit which allows the vendor to vend for another one-year period. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, after a vendor has been issued a renewal permit to vend on the same parcel of land for an additional year, the vendor, excluding those holding a food permit as set out in section 30-1482(a), but including those holding a merchandise, service or combination permit as set out in section 30-1482(b)—(d), may not renew a vending permit for such location for two years, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. At the expiration of the two-year vending term, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the property owner shall not allow another vendor to vend on said property for a period of 90 days. 
(b)  If, after two years at one location, a vendor wishes to vend on that same parcel of land for another period up to two years, the vendor must secure a new initial permit as provided in sections 30-1483 and 30-1484. An initial permit issued in accordance with this subsection shall be otherwise subject to the provisions of this section, (30-1485), in the same manner as other initial permits. 
(c)  No applicant shall be issued more than one permit; provided that an applicant for a flea market vending permit may be issued a flea market vending permit in addition to any other permit. 
(d)  After the initial permit for the first year expires, vendors may present to the police department an application for a renewal permit. Upon a review and approval of the renewal application by the appropriate agencies, satisfaction of all other license and permit requirements, and upon payment of the appropriate fee as indicated in section 30-1486, the police department license and permits unit shall furnish the applicant with a renewal permit. 
(e)  Each applicant for a renewal application shall submit an application which shall at a minimum consist of the following data: 
(1)  Applicant's name and current address. 
(2)  Applicant's previous addresses within the last five years. 
(3)  Social security number. 
(4)  Vending location sought, including exact location on such property. 
(5)  Size of the proposed vending station, if applicable, i.e., length, width, and height. 
(6)  Names and current addresses of proposed assistant vendors. 
(7)  The exact times during which the vendor intends to vend on the proposed property. 
(8)  City business license. 
(9)  A general description of the food, merchandise, services, or combination thereof to be sold or offered for sale at the proposed vending location, including whether the permit authorizes the sale or offering for sale of recordings. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5180; Ord. No. 1997-15, §§ 1, 2, 3-24-97; Ord. No. 2002-4, § 1, 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2002-85, § 1, 11-26-02; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 7, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 2005-35, § 1, 6-23-05; Ord. No. 2007-19(07-O-0498), §§ 1, 2, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2012-06(12-O-0278), § 1, 3-14-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-19(07-O-0498), § 3 states that this ordinance shall take effect on April 5, 2007, so the current permit holders can apply for a new permit for the same location, and said permit shall be for a period of two years beginning at the end of the expired permit. 
Sec. 30-1486. - Fees. 
(a)  Initial permit fees are due and payable by certified funds after approval of the initial vending application. Initial permit fees for vending shall be as follows: 

 
In on event shall a vending permit be issued prior to payment of the above fees. 
(b)  The fee for a replacement vending permit photo identification card that has been lost shall be $30.00 and may be obtained at the police department's license and permit section. 
(c)  Fees for renewal permits shall be the same as those fees for new permits. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5180.1; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 8, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 30-1487. - Location. 
Permits are to be used only for the location specified in the vendor's application and such location shall be clearly written on the permit. The vendor or an assistant vendor to whom the permit is issued shall be present at the location specified on the permit at all such times as merchandise, food, services, or any combination thereof are sold or offered for sale at such location. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5180.2; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 9, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 30-1488. - Notification of name change or change of address. 
Whenever either the name or address provided by the permit holder on the application for a vending permit or health or building inspection certificate changes, the licensee shall notify the department of police's license and permit section in writing within ten days of such change and provide same with the name change or address change. Vendors shall assure that a current and correct name, residence address and mailing address are on file with police department's license and permit section at all time. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5180.3) 
Sec. 30-1489. - Denials, revocation and suspension. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued for vending to any person who has been convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or misdemeanor relating to alcohol or drug offenses and related matter; crimes of moral turpitude; gambling offenses and related matters; larceny, fraudulent conveyance, perjury and/or false swearing, or subrogation. Any conviction for dealing and/or trafficking in illegal drugs will automatically disqualify a vending applicant. 
(b)  Failure to maintain initial qualifications shall be grounds for revocation or suspension. 
(c)  Any permit issued pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked by the police department's license and permit section for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the application for the vending permits. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in connection with the selling of any article, merchandise, produce or permissible food item. 
(3)  Violation of the provisions of Fulton County or DeKalb County Health Department regulations applicable folders of food permits. 
(4)  Conduct of a vending business in an unlawful manner or in such a way as to constitute a menace or detriment to the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(5)  Failure on the part of a vendor to maintain initial eligibility qualifications. 
(6)  Failure on the part of the vendor's assistant to maintain initial eligibility qualifications shall be grounds for the revocation or suspension of the vendor's assistant permit. 
(7)  Failure to furnish any and all documentation requested by either the police department, the department of finance or the license review board for purposes of the investigation of any application or for the inspection of records pursuant to section 30-1463 within 30 days of such request. 
(8)  Failure to abide by the duties imposed on the permit holder pursuant to section 30-1491. 
(d)  Any person whose permit is revoked may not reapply for a vending permit until after the expiration of one year from the date of revocation. Four violations of any part of this article within a 12-month period shall constitute grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a vendor permit. 
(e)  In addition to carrying out all other investigations as may be permitted under this article, the police department's license and permit section shall investigate any alleged violation of this article upon receipt of a written, sworn complaint by any person who witnesses or becomes aware of a potential violation. Such complaint shall be signed under penalty of perjury, and shall be accompanied by any supporting evidence. After receiving a properly filed complaint, the police department's license and permit section shall conduct its investigation and, based on the results of such investigation, may suspend or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article to the person who is the subject of such complaint by providing notice as required by section 30-1490(b). A copy of such notice also shall be provided to the person who filed the complaint. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5180.5; Ord. No. 2004-59, §§ 10, 11, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 30-1490. - Public hearing on suspension, revocation or denial. 
(a)  A suspension, revocation or denial of a permit issued under this division may be appealed to the license review board within 20 days of the applicant or permit holder's receipt of notice as described in section 30-1490(b). 
(b)  Notice of the denial, suspension or revocation shall be given in writing, setting forth the complaint, the grounds for denial, suspension or revocation, and the time, date and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the vending permit holder at least five calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the address shown on the application. The license review board shall conduct the hearing at a regularly scheduled license review board meeting and report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new permit and may revoke, suspend, or refuse to renew any existing permit. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5180.6; Ord. No. 2001-75, § 2, 10-23-01; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 21, 11-6-08) 
Sec. 30-1491. - Duties of permit holder. 
Every person authorized to vend under this article shall: 
(1)  A vendor shall comply with all laws and regulations applicable to the operation of a vending business; 
(2)  A vendor shall refrain from engaging in any vending business after the expiration of the vendor permit and during any period when it has been suspended or revoked; 
(3)  A vendor shall surrender the vendor permit promptly to the police department's license and permit section upon its expiration, or upon revocation or suspension. 
(4)  A vendor shall have no more than two assistants who shall first obtain assistant vendor permits from the police department licenses and permits unit. At no time shall more than three vendors or assistant vendors be present at the assigned vending location. 
(5)  A vendor conducting a vending business out-of-doors on private property within any zoning district in which such activities are permitted by the city's zoning code, shall be regulated by the provisions of section 16-28.008(10). 
(6)  A vendor shall be responsible for the on-site activities of the vendor's assistants. 
(7)  No vendor or flea market vendor shall sell or offer for sale any illicit recordings. 
(8)  No flea market promoter, operator, or owner shall permit any flea market vendor operating on the premises controlled by such flea market promoter, operator, or owner to sell or offer for sale any illicit recordings. 
(9)  No flea market promoter, operator, or owner shall permit any flea market vendor operating on the premises controlled by such flea market promoter, operator, or owner to sell or offer for sale any services, merchandise, or combination thereof unless the vendor's vending permit photo identification card, and that of all assistant vendors, are displayed as required by section 30-1481(d). 
(Code 1977, § 14-5180.7; Ord. No. 2002-4, § 2, 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2004-59, § 12, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 30-1492. - Duties of flea market promoter, operator, or owner. 
(a)  Every flea market promoter, operator, or owner authorized to operate a flea market under this article shall, on a regular basis, inspect or cause to be inspected the merchandise sold or offered for sale by flea market vendors who are operating on the premises of the flea market promoter, operator, or owner. Such inspections shall also verify that each vendor's vending permit photo identification card, and that of any assistant vendors, are displayed as required by section 30-1481(d). Such inspections shall be carried out on at least a monthly basis during the time the flea market is in operation; provided that the inspection of merchandise maintained by flea market vendors selling recordings shall be inspected on a weekly basis. In connection with such regular inspections, flea market promoters, operators, or owners shall be authorized to inspect the records maintained by flea market vendors pursuant to section 30-1463. Should the flea market vendor fail or refuse to provide such merchandise for inspection, or should the inspection of such merchandise or any records kept regarding such merchandise indicate to the flea market promoter, operator, or owner, or their designee, that illicit recordings are being sold or offered for sale by the flea market vendor, the flea market promoter, operator, or owner, or their designee shall within 24 hours provide such information, together with information identifying the flea market vendor, to law enforcement officials, and take all such other actions as may be reasonable under the circumstances to stop such illegal activities, including the filing of a written complaint as provided in section 30-1489(e). 
(b)  Failure by a flea market promoter, operator, or owner or their designee to carry out the inspections required by this section; to report the failure or refusal of flea market vendors to make merchandise or any associated records available for inspection by the flea market promoter, operator, or owner or their designee; or to report the sale or offering for sale of illicit recordings to law enforcement officials within 24 hours shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of the flea market promoter's, operator's, or owner's flea market vending permit, as provided in section 30-1489. 
(c)  Each flea market promoter, operator, or owner shall, as a condition of receiving a flea market vending permit for the operation of any flea market, certify that he or she is aware of the duties imposed on flea market promoters, operators, and owners to take all actions as required by this section to prevent the sale of illicit recordings by flea market vendors who are operating on the premises of the flea market promoter, operator, or owner. 
(Ord. No. 2004-59, § 13, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 30-1493. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of chapter 30, article XXIV (section 30-1461 et seq.) shall not apply to any real person who engages only in outdoor sales of merchandise no more than two days in any one-week period, but who otherwise meets the definition of flea market vendor as defined in section 30-1461. 
(Ord. No. 2005-39, § 1, 7-14-05) 
Secs. 30-1494—30-1499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXV. - CAR WASHES[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, approved June 8, 2001, amended §§ 30-1500—30-1507 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to similar subject matter. Further, said ordinance added §§ 30-1508 and 30-1509 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 30-1500. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Active participation means control or supervision over the employees and the premises licensed under this article. 
Agent means any person, real or artificial, designated by the owner in the application for a license to operate a car wash to receive correspondence from the mayor's office and/or department of police. The owner may also be the agent. 
Attendant means a person on duty at the car wash premises employed by or at the instance of the owner or agent of the car wash establishment. 
Car wash establishment means any commercial enterprise operated for profit and open to the public for the purpose of cleaning, washing, waxing, vacuuming, polishing, detailing, or a combination thereof. 
Car wash premises means the property on which the car wash establishment is located, including parking areas and all areas on the licensed property that may be lawfully used by the owner, employees, agents, and patrons of the car wash establishment. 
Full-service car wash means a car wash establishment operated for profit and open to the public for the purpose of cleaning, washing, waxing, vacuuming, polishing, detailing, or a combination thereof with the assistance of one or more attendants/cashiers in active participation during all hours of operation and which provides other services incidental to the car wash business, including but not limited to, car maintenance, car repair and/or other retail services. 
Hand and/or detail car wash means a car wash establishment where vehicles are washed by hand, by persons permanently employed by the car wash or by persons allowed to remain on the premises to perform this service, operated for profit and open to the public for the purpose of cleaning, washing, waxing, vacuuming, polishing, detailing, or a combination. Said washes do not include mobile car washes and/or car washes done for charitable and/or fund-raising purposes on a temporary basis. 
In-bay automatic car wash means a car wash establishment operated for profit and open to the public for the purpose of cleaning, washing, waxing, vacuuming, polishing, detailing, or a combination thereof that utilizes mechanical equipment to wash, rinse, and sometimes dry a stationary occupied vehicle. 
Owner means any and all person(s) who have any ownership interest in the car wash establishment. 
Self-service car wash means a car wash establishment operating for profit and open to the public for the purpose of cleaning, washing, waxing, vacuuming, polishing, detailing, or a combination thereof without the assistance of a full-time on-site attendant. 
(Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Sec. 30-1501. - Intent. 
It is the intent of the council in enacting this article to: 
(1)  Serve and protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(2)  Establish a uniform set of rules and regulations governing self-service car washes. 
(3)  Assure that businesses licensed by the city do not promote or allow illicit or illegal activity to take place on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Sec. 30-1502. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any agent or owner to operate a self-service car wash establishment without having first obtained a license issued by the city as provided by this section. The license issued under this article shall be cumulative and not in lieu of any other license or license required by law. Full service automatic car wash establishments, in-bay automatic car washes, and hand or detail car wash establishments with attendants on duty during all hours when the business is open are expressly exempted from the license requirements in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Sec. 30-1503. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person seeking to operate a self-service car wash shall obtain a license by filing a written application with the Atlanta Police Department, License and Permits Unit. A separate application is required for each self-service car wash location, even if owned by the same person. Moreover, a new application for license must be filed in the event there is a change of ownership or location of a currently licensed car wash establishment. Upon receiving an application for a self-service car wash license, the permits division of the department of police, shall forward a copy of said application to the chairperson(s) of the affected neighborhood planning unit(s) for review. Said NPU(s) shall subsequently forward its recommendation, which shall become a part of the permits division's report to the license review board." 
(b)  Any person operating a self-service car wash on the effective date of this article shall apply for a license as prescribed above by September 1, 2001. 
(c)  A non-refundable application fee of $50.00 for the processing of each license application is required to accompany each application for a car wash establishment license. 
(d)  A complete application for a car wash license shall include the following: 
(1)  Owner and agent's name and current address. 
(2)  Owner and agent's social security number. 
(3)  Owner and agent's previous address for the last five years. 
(4)  Location of car wash establishment. 
(5)  Days and hours of operation of car wash establishment. 
(6)  If the owner and/or agent is a corporation, written verification from the Secretary of State that the corporation is in good standing. 
(7)  Written verification such as a lease, deed, rental agreement etc., demonstrating that the applicant has legal access to the proposed premises. 
(e)  When the investigation has been completed, this application will be considered at a regular meeting of the license review board which may recommend that the mayor grant or deny the license. The mayor, upon receiving the recommendation of the license review board, may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of said recommendation, deny or grant an application for a new license. In addition, within said 60-day period, if the mayor determines there is a need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice, the mayor may remand the application or matter back to the license review board for further hearing. If the mayor fails to take action within the 60-day period, the recommendation of the license review board shall become the final decision of the mayor. 
(f)  Any change of the agent designated in the license application must be reported to the Atlanta Police Department, License and Permits Unit within 30 calendar days of the change. Failure to report a change may result in a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 22, 11-6-08; Ord. No. 2009-10(07-O-1526), §§ 1, 2, 2-25-09) 
Sec. 30-1504. - False information contained in application. 
Any material omission, untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original, renewal or transfer application for a license under this article shall be cause for the denial thereof, and if any license has previously been granted under these circumstances, such shall constitute "due cause" for the imposition of a fine and/or suspension, revocation or non-renewal of the license. This subsection is independent of any other penalty provisions in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Sec. 30-1505. - Grounds for denial, suspension, revocation or imposition of a fine. 
(a)  No application for a new license, a renewal license or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership shall be denied, and no license that has been issued or that may hereafter be issued hereunder shall be revoked, suspended, or be subjected to a fine except upon a finding of "due cause" as defined in this subsection, and after a hearing before the license review board. In the event of a decision to deny, revoke, or suspend a license and/or impose a fine under this article, written notice shall be mailed to the agent and the owner, stating the place, date, time and purpose of such hearing. The notice shall set forth with specificity the reasons for the proposed adverse action for which the hearing shall be held. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "due cause," for the denial of applications for a new license or renewal of an existing license, for denial of a transfer of location or transfer of ownership or for revocation, suspension, or imposition of a fine includes, but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  The conviction of the owner or agent of any felony reasonably related (as explained throughout this article and particularly in this section and in section 30-1509 of this Code) to the ability of the owner to operate and maintain the car wash premises in a proper manner. 
(2)  The violation of any law, ordinance or regulation or operational rules set forth governing the operation of a car wash establishment. 
(3)  Allowing the commission by, or solicitation of, patrons on the car wash premises for any unlawful act (such as prostitution, gambling, or drug-related crimes) where the operator or the operator's employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct. Evidence of arrests on the premises for any of the unlawful acts above shall not be considered, for purposes of this section, as evidence of "allowing the commission" of these acts where the owner has participated or cooperated in the arrest and/or prosecution of these individuals by providing evidence or testimony as requested by the police or the prosecuting authority. 
(4)  The failure to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license under this article. 
(5)  Failure by the operator or agent to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, patrons and others on the car wash premises in order to protect the safety and well-being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. Evidence of arrests on the premises shall not be considered, for purposes of this section, as evidence of failure by the operator to "adequately supervise and monitor" the conduct of patrons and others on the car wash premises where the owner has participated or cooperated in the arrest and/or prosecution of individuals by providing evidence or testimony as requested by the police or the prosecuting authority. 
(c)  The license review board, after any hearing pursuant to this article, shall report its conclusions and recommendations to the mayor or the mayor's designee. The mayor or the mayor's designee, upon receiving the report, may deny applications for new or renewal licenses or for transfer of location or transfer of ownership and may impose a fine and/or revoke or suspend any license for due cause. In lieu of or in addition to, the mayor or the mayor's designee may impose a fine upon any owner or agent in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation occurring on the licensed premises. Should the mayor or the mayor's designee decide to impose a fine and/or deny, revoke, suspend or not renew a license, the applicant shall be notified in writing within ten calendar days of this decision and be provided with the specific reasons for said decision. 
(d)  The decision of the mayor or the mayor's designee may be appealed by the filing of a petition for writ of certiorari in the Fulton County Superior Court within 30 calendar days of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Sec. 30-1506. - Term and renewal of license. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, all licenses issued under this article shall be valid for one calendar year after the date of issue. 
(b)  Owners or operators of car washes, except those expressly exempted, shall renew their licenses not later than January 1 of each year with the department of police. 
(c)  Any car wash establishment that ceases operation for more than six months, or for which no city business license is maintained for more than six months, shall not subsequently be operated as a car wash, except by making a new application for and receiving a license as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Sec. 30-1507. - License fees. 
(a)  License fees are due immediately upon approval of the license. A license shall not be issued prior to payment of said fees. License fees for car wash establishments shall be $100.00 per year, per location. 
(b)  The fees for renewal or transfer of a license shall be the same as the initial license fee specified above. 
(Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Sec. 30-1508. - Duties of car wash establishments. 
(a)  Comply with all laws and regulations applicable to the operation of a car wash establishment; 
(b)  Refrain from operating a self-service car wash after the expiration of a car wash license and during any period when it has been suspended or revoked; 
(c)  Surrender car wash license promptly to the Atlanta Police Department, License and Permits Unit, upon its expiration, revocation or suspension. 
(Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Sec. 30-1509. - Car wash establishment regulations. 
(a)  The following shall apply at all times to all car wash establishments, except those expressly exempted: 
(1)  The establishment shall maintain reasonable lighting on the premises during the hours it is open for business. Illumination shall be provided at a minimum of six lux/0.6 foot candles on the entire premises during the hours the establishment is open for business. Where available, public street lighting may be utilized to either partially or totally fulfill the lighting requirements. Otherwise, it shall be the responsibility of the car wash establishment to independently provide the requisite levels of illumination. 
(2)  At all times during the operation of the car wash, the agent for the car wash, or his or her designee, must be on-site or available by telephone. 
(3)  A notice shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises and shall set forth: 
a.  The telephone number for the agent of the car wash establishment; 
b.  The days and hours of operation for the establishment; and 
c.  A statement that loitering as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36 or being on the premises for any purpose other than washing, waxing, vacuuming, polishing, detailing, or a combination thereof or for any purpose for which the operator/agent has given express permission is prohibited under state law and a warning that such activity is considered trespassing for which law enforcement agencies are authorized to enter onto the car wash premises and take appropriate action. 
(4)  No public telephones located on car wash premises shall be capable of receiving incoming calls; 
(5)  The owner, his or her agent, or a designee of either shall maintain an active participation in the operation of the car wash premises and shall be on the premises at least once a day. 
(Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 6-8-01) 
Secs. 30-1510—30-1520. - Reserved. 
Chapter 34 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), §§ 1.0—20.0, adopted November 28, 1994, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Ch. 34 was at the direction of the city. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Telecommunications franchises and revocable licenses, § 138-126 et seq. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; theft of cable services, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2 et seq. 

Sec. 34-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Atlanta Cable Communications Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 1.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
Access cablecasting means that form of cablecasting wherein the production and content of the programming is under the control of a party other than a grantee, and wherein such programming is carried on certain channels dedicated for the use of individuals and groups within the city, subject to the provisions of the franchise, any related agreements between the city and the grantee, and any agreements between the city and the designated access channel users. 
Alphanumeric means consisting of a combination of letters, numbers or other symbols, used in reference to electronic systems capable of generating messages in such form and in reference to channels or programs transmitting information in such form. 
Basic service means, unless otherwise defined by the Cable Act or other laws or regulations of the United States of America, all signals of domestic television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station,, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system), any public, educational, and governmental programming required to be carried on the basic tier, and any additional video programming signals and services added to the basic tier by a grantee. 
Broadcast means over-the-air transmission of a television or other radio frequency signal. 
Cable Act means the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460 (1992) and the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-549, 98 Stat. 2779 (1984), which amend the Communications Act of 1934, and as hereafter amended. 
Cablecast means transmission of a non-broadcast video, broadcast video, or other radio frequency signal through a cable system. 
Cable service means the one-way or two-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or video, voice, data or other service as may be developed, including subscriber interaction. Cable service shall not include telephone services as defined and regulated by Georgia law. 
Cable system or cable communications system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (B) a facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way; (C) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of Communications Act of 1934, as it may be amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of said Communications Act of 1934, as it may be amended) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of cable service directly to subscribers; or (D) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. 
Cable system facilities means the cable communications system constructed for use within the city, including without limitation, the headend, antenna, cables, wires, lines, towers, amplifiers, converters, health and property security systems, equipment or facilities located within or without the corporate limits of the city designed, constructed or wired for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and distributing by coaxial cable, fiber optics, microwave or other means, audio, radio, television and electronic signals, and video, voice, and data to and from subscribers, in the city and any other equipment or facilities located within the corporate limits of the city intended for the use of the cable communications system; provided, however, such cable system facilities excludes building, contractual sites, facilities, and equipment where its sole use is for providing service to other cable system facilities located outside the city limits. 
Closed-circuit or institutional service means such video, audio, data and other services provided to institutional users. These may include, but are not limited to, one-way video, two-way video, audio or digital signals transmitted among institutions and/or to residential subscribers. 
Commercial subscriber means a subscriber who receives a service in a place of business where the service may be utilized in connection with a business, trade, or profession. 
Complaint means a verbal or written indication from a subscriber of a problem with any aspect of cable service provided by grantee. 
Converter means an electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber, and any channel selector which permits a subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated converter dial locations at the set or by remote control. 
Council means the governing authority of the City of Atlanta, i.e., the city council. 
Days means calendar days unless otherwise specified. 
Discrete channel means a channel which can only be received by the person and/or institution intended to receive signals on such channel. 
DROP means a service connection from feeder cable to the subscriber/user television set, radio or other terminal. 
Educational access channel means any channel designated for educational use and which is provided by the grantee to the city at no charge to the city or the programmers of the channel. 
Fair market value means the price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller for a going concern based on the cable system valuation prevailing in the industry at the time. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission (the federal regulatory agency having jurisdiction on the effective date of this chapter) or such other federal regulatory agency as may have jurisdiction at any time during the term of any Franchise, or any extension thereto, granted pursuant to this chapter. 
Franchise means a franchise contract entered into by the grantee, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including referenced specifications, franchise proposal, applications and other related material. Franchises granted pursuant to this chapter shall grant nonexclusive rights to construct, operate and maintain cable communications systems along the streets and public grounds within all or a specified area in the city. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city as required by other ordinances and laws of the city. 
Franchise area means the entire city, or portions thereof, for which a franchise is granted under the authority of this chapter. If not otherwise stated in the franchise, the franchise area shall be the corporate limits of the city, including all territory thereafter annexed to the city. 
Franchise fee means the percentage, as specified by this chapter and the franchise, of the grantee's gross revenues. 
Franchisee or grantee means any natural person(s), partnership(s), domestic and foreign corporation(s), association(s), joint venture(s), or organization(s) of any kind which has been legally granted a franchise by the city. 
Government channel or government access channel means any channel specifically designated or dedicated for government use and which is provided to the city by the grantee at no charge to the city or the programmers of the channel. 
Gross revenues means all revenues received from subscribers for the provision of cable service or video service, including franchise fees for cable service providers and video service providers, and advertising and home shopping services revenues and shall be determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Gross revenues shall not include: 
(1)  Amounts billed and collected as a line item on the subscriber's bill to recover any taxes, surcharges, or governmental fees that are imposed on or with respect to the services provided or measured by the charges, receipts, or payments therefore; provided, however, that for purposes of this Code section, such tax, surcharge, or governmental fee shall not include any ad valorem taxes, net income taxes, or generally applicable business or occupation taxes not measured exclusively as a percentage of the charges, receipts, or payments for services; 
(2)  Any revenue, such as bad debt, not actually received, even if billed; 
(3)  Any revenue received by any affiliate or any other person in exchange for supplying goods or services used by the provider to provide cable service or video programming; 
(4)  Any amounts attributable to refunds, rebates, or discounts; 
(5)  Any revenue from services provided over the network that are associated with or classified as noncable or nonvideo services under federal law, including, without limitation, revenues received from telecommunications services, information services other than cable service or video service, Internet access services, or directory or Internet advertising revenue, including, without limitation, yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisements, and electronic publishing advertising. Where the sale of any such noncable or nonvideo service is bundled with the sale of one or more cable services or video services and sold for a single nonitemized price, the term "gross revenues" shall include only those revenues that are attributable to cable service or video service based on the provider's books and records; such revenues shall be allocated in a manner consistent with generally accepted accounting principles; 
(6)  Any revenue from late fees not initially booked as revenues, returned check fees, or interest; 
(7)  Any revenue from sales or rental of property, except such property as the subscriber shall be required to buy or rent exclusively from the cable service provider or video service provider to receive cable service or video service; 
(8)  Any revenue received from providing or maintaining inside wiring; 
(9)  Any revenue from sales for resale with respect to which the purchaser shall be required to pay a franchise fee, provided the purchaser certifies in writing that it shall resell the service and pay a franchise fee with respect thereto; or 
(10)  Any amounts attributable to a reimbursement of costs including, but not limited to, the reimbursements by programmers of marketing costs incurred for the promotion or introduction of video programming. 
Installation means the connection of the cable system from feeder cable to the point of interconnection with subscriber-owned facilities. 
Leased access channel means any channel designated or dedicated for use by persons unaffiliated with the grantee, at rates in accordance with the Cable Act. 
Mayor means the Mayor of the City of Atlanta, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
Non-cable service means any service which is distributed over the cable system other than a cable service. 
Normal business hours means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend hours. 
Normal operating conditions means those service conditions which are within the control of the grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
Pay cable or premium service means those certain optional, video program services in addition to cable programming service, offered by a grantee at an additional charge beyond the monthly charge for each grantee basic service tier and equipment. 
Plant mile means a linear mile of strand-bearing cable as measured on the street or easement from pole to pole or pedestal to pedestal. 
Public access channel, community access channel or community channel means any channel designated or dedicated for use by the general public or noncommercial organizations which is provided to the city by the grantee at no charge to the city or the programmers of the channel. 
Public-rights-of-way or streets and public grounds means the surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkways, waterways, utility easements or other public right-of-way or hereafter held by the city which shall entitle the city and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the grantee's cable communications system. No reference herein, or in any franchise, to the "streets and public grounds" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that its title to any property is sufficient to permit its use for such purpose, and the grantee shall, by its use of such terms, be deemed to gain only such rights to use property in the city as the city may have the undisputed right and power to give. 
Reasonable notice shall be a written notice received by the grantee at its principal office within the city or such other office as the grantee has designated to the city as the address to which notice shall be transmitted to it, which notice shall be certified and postmarked not less than ten days prior to that day in which the party giving such notice shall commence any action which requires the giving of notice. In computing said ten days, holidays recognized by the city shall be excluded. 
Renegotiation means the right of a party to a franchise executed pursuant to this chapter to require the other party thereto to discuss and consider in good faith a proposal for a modification of a franchise, it being understood that unless and until the parties agree to a modification, their agreement shall remain in full force and effect. 
Residential subscriber means a subscriber who receives a service in an individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade or profession. 
Sale shall include any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale. 
Service means any cable service or non-cable service, including any basic service, or any other service, whether or not originated by a grantee which is offered to any subscriber in conjunction with, or distributed over the cable system. 
Service area means the entire geographic area within the franchise territory. 
Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels. 
Service related activity means any activity or function associated with the production or distribution of any service over the cable system, including without limitation, use of studio or other facilities or equipment, billing, audience promotion, or installation or lease of equipment. 
State means the State of Georgia. 
Subscriber means any person, firm, corporation or other entity who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee in the operation of a cable communications system. 
Upstream signal means a signal originating from a terminal to another point in the cable communications system including video, audio or digital signals for either programs or other uses such as security alert services, etc. 
VTR/VCR service means that service which makes available a second converter and necessary equipment to provide subscribers with the ability to record programming from one converter while viewing programming from the second converter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 2.0, 11-28-94; Ord. No. 2009-51(09-O-1222), § 1, 9-11-09) 
Sec. 34-3. - Grant of non-exclusive franchise. 
(a)  Grant. Grantees which are determined, in the discretion of the council, to meet the standards and requirements set forth herein to provide a modern cable communications system to the residents and institutions of the city may be granted, subject to the provisions hereof, a non-exclusive right, privilege and authority to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, retain, operate and provide cable service in, over, under, upon, across and along any street, way, lane, avenue, sidewalk, alley, and other public place, now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the City of Atlanta, Georgia, such poles, towers, necessary wiring, lines, cables, fiber optics, conductors, ducts, conduit vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the purpose of the transmission and distribution of audio, visual, electronic and electric impulses, and other forms of electronic and electric signals through cables and/or wires, commonly called a cable system, in accordance with the Cable Act and other laws and regulations of the United States of America, and the State of Georgia, and the Ordinances and regulations of the city. 
All rights granted herein to provide cable service shall not be construed to include telephone services, as defined and regulated by Georgia law and as traditionally required by the city to be obtained by separate franchise, but upon application of any grantee for a telephone franchise, any portion of the rights granted herein may be re-designated as a part of such telephone franchise, if appropriate. Nor shall such rights be construed to authorize the license or lease to any person or entity of the right to occupy or use the public rights-of-way for the conduct of any private business unless such person or entity has obtained a franchise or right-of-way agreement from the city for such use. 
There shall be granted a further non-exclusive right, privilege, and authority to each grantee to lease, rent, or in any other lawful manner obtain the possession or use of towers, poles, lines, cables, conduit, and other equipment and facilities from any and all holders of public licenses and franchises within the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta, including but not limited to the Southern Bell Telephone Company and the Georgia Power Company, and to use such towers, poles, lines, cables and other equipment and facilities, subject to all existing and future Ordinances and regulations of the city. The poles used by a grantee other than those owned by each grantee, shall be those erected and maintained by existing public utility systems or those owned by the city, when and where practicable, provided mutually satisfactory agreements can be entered into with said utility systems and with the city by separate agreements subject to the provisions of the Cable Act and state law. 
All rights granted for the construction and operation of the cable communications system shall be subject to the continuing right of the city to require such reconstruction, relocation, change or discontinuance, of the appliances used by the cable communications system in the streets, alleys, avenues, and highways of the city, as shall in the reasonable opinion of the city be necessary in the public interest. 
The application for and the acceptance of a franchise by a grantee under this chapter shall constitute by said grantee an acknowledgement of and consent to the provisions of this chapter as it may be amended; provided, however, that any amendment to this chapter binding on the grantee shall be confined to the lawful exercise of the city's police powers and to changes which do not materially alter the rights of the grantee under the franchise. The granting of a franchise hereunder shall not prevent the city from granting a franchise to any person other than the grantee. 
(b)  General ordinances. Any franchise granted by the city is hereby made subject to the general ordinance provisions now in effect and hereafter made effective. Nothing in the franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the city regarding permits, taxes, fees to be paid, or manner of construction. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 3.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-4. - Application procedure and franchise. 
(a)  Applications. Before any person, firm or corporation shall be allowed to proceed with the installation of its cable system hereunder, it shall first file an application for such franchise with the bureau of purchasing and real estate of the city in the form of a response to a request for proposal prepared by the city which includes but is not limited to, the following information: applicant's name and address; the date and place of incorporation if applicant is incorporated; a list of the names and addresses of stockholders, directors and officers of applicant if incorporated; the most recent certified balance sheet of the corporation or partnership or a sworn statement of net worth if the applicant is an individual; location of all other cable operations of the applicant; location and telephone numbers of all offices and facilities inside and outside the city to be used in building, operating, and maintaining the cable communications system in the city; the means of erecting wires contemplated by applicant; names of companies from which permission has been obtained to use existing poles or lines; plans (including a map) and timetable of construction and expansion of the cable system; plan of financing the cable system; financial projections for the cable system; a plan showing the effects of competition or interconnection with any existing franchise; cable system design, capacity, equipment, and performance specifications; operations, maintenance, and construction practices; programming and other services; rates; public, educational, and government access channels, equipment, facilities, and services; institutional network facilities, equipment, and services; EEO and affirmative action plans; equal business opportunity plans; customer service and consumer protection policies and procedures; and such other information as may be required by the city. 
Application shall also include policies or certified copies of said policies of insurance and indemnification as prescribed by this chapter; a certified check in the amount of $35,000.00, plus cost of living adjustments based on CPI-PI published by the United States Department of Commerce determined from the initial date of adoption of this chapter, as a non-refundable filing fee, payable to the city; an agreement to comply with and be bound by all ordinances of the city existing as of the date of the issuance of the franchise as may be amended as provided herein. 
The mayor shall review the application and may request related information from the applicant, and shall thereafter make a recommendation to the council. Following its review of the application and related information the council, in its sole discretion, shall either grant or deny the application. Upon granting the application, the council shall, by ordinance, authorize the mayor to execute a franchise with the applicant. 
(b)  Franchise. Each grantee shall execute a franchise consistent with this chapter which shall meet the cable communications needs of the community and which shall include the following items: 
(1)  Acknowledgement of the regulatory authority of the city and the legal right of the city to issue a franchise and to grant other franchises for cable communications systems. 
(2)  Agreement to be bound by all terms of the cable ordinance. 
(3)  Term of franchise. 
(4)  Provisions for service to residential and commercial areas, and single-family and multi-family dwellings. 
(5)  Detailed description of the cable system design, cable system capacity, and equipment to include without limitation, the bandwidth capacity; the number of homes served per fiber node; the equipment for the distribution cable system, the headend, status monitoring and reception of signals; converter specifications; emergency override capability; standby power capacity; parental control devices; stereo capability; and audio scrambling capability. 
(6)  Schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire franchise area. 
(7)  Technical standards, performance specifications, and testing procedures for the cable system. 
(8)  Franchisee's ongoing preventive maintenance plan and construction practices. 
(9)  Information relating to programming services to be offered. 
(10)  Bandwidth capacity on the cable system for city use. 
(11)  Plans for maintaining state of the art technology and improving cable system facilities. 
(12)  Construction standards in conformance with all local, state, and federal laws and regulations. 
(13)  Public, educational, and government access channels, equipment, facilities, and services to be provided. 
(14)  Cable drops and services to be provided at no charge. 
(15)  Institutional network equipment, facilities, and services to be provided. 
(16)  Interconnection between jurisdictions to be provided. 
(17)  Customer service and consumer protection policies and procedures which meet or exceed local, state, and federal standards. 
(18)  Equal employment opportunity, equal business opportunity, first source jobs, and business non-discrimination plans which comply with city law. 
(19)  Sale of cable system provisions. 
(20)  Franchise fee provisions. 
(21)  Performance bond provisions in an amount required by the city. 
(22)  Insurance provisions in an amount required by the city. 
(23)  Indemnification and defense of litigation provisions. 
(24)  Records and reports provisions as the city deems necessary and appropriate to review the performance of the franchisee with respect to the franchise, the Cable Ordinance, and applicable laws and regulations. 
(25)  Security fund and liquidated damages provisions. 
(26)  Such financial commitments as may be required pursuant to the franchise. 
(27)  Such other requirements as the city may include in a request for proposal for cable communications systems. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 4.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-5. - Ownership. 
Grantee Ownership. Except as otherwise provided herein, each grantee shall at all times during the term of the franchise and any extension thereto, be the owner of, or have possessory rights to, all facilities and property, real and personal, of the cable system. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 5.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-6. - Service area, cable system, construction. 
(a)  Service area. Each grantee shall provide cable service to the franchise area authorized by the city which may include territory annexed to the city which is not already served by another cable system, provision of cable service to commercial areas shall be in accordance with the franchise. 
(b)  Cable system. Each grantee shall install a broadband telecommunications system capable of distributing at least 78 NTSC television channels or their equivalent, said cable system to be installed, maintained, operated and upgraded in accordance with the generally accepted standards of the cable communications industry, the Federal Communications Commission's Cable Television Technical Standards, and any requirements contained in the franchise. 
(c)  Construction. 
(1)  Compliance with construction and technical standards. No franchise shall be approved which does not provide that the grantee shall construct, rebuild, install, operate and maintain its cable system in a manner consistent with all laws, construction standards and codes, safety regulations, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards, Bellcore Manual of Construction Procedures ("Blue Book"), and detailed technical standards provided for in the franchise. The grantee, through the cable system, shall provide uniform, strong signals which are free from any significant distortion and interference. The cable system shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained for 24-hours-a-day continuous operation. The cable system shall produce, for reception on subscribers' receivers which are in good working order, either monochrome or color pictures (providing the receiver is color capable) which are free from any noticeable interference or distortion which would cause any material degradation of video or audio quality. 
The cable communications system permitted to be operated shall be installed and operated in conformance with this cable ordinance, the franchise, and FCC rules and regulations. Any FCC technical standards or guidelines related to the cable communications system and facilities (unless invalidated by federal law) shall be deemed to be regulations under this chapter. At such time as the FCC does not regulate technical standards, grantee will continue to comply with the FCC standards which were effective prior to such discontinuance of regulation by the FCC. 
(2)  City approval of construction plans. Prior to the erection of any towers, poles or conduits or the upgrade, rebuild, or extension of the cable communications system under this chapter, the grantee shall first submit to the city and other designated parties for approval a concise description of the facilities proposed to be erected or installed, including engineering drawings, if required, together with maps and plans indicating the proposed location of all such facilities. No erection or installation of any tower, pole, underground conduit, or fixture or any upgrade, rebuild, or extension of the cable communications system shall be commenced by any person until approval therefor has been received from the city. 
(3)  Joint use of facilities. Grantee shall grant to the city, free of expense, joint use of any and all poles and up to 25 percent of any unused conduit space owned by it for any proper municipal purpose, insofar as it may be done without interfering with the free use of grantee's own wires and fixtures. Proper regard shall be given to all existing safety rules covering construction and maintenance in effect at the time of construction. If, in accommodating the city's joint use of its poles, grantee is required to change or replace poles or install new poles, the city shall compensate grantee for such additional expense. 
(4)  Tests and performance monitoring. Not later than 30 days after any new or substantially rebuilt portion of the cable system is made available for service to subscribers, and thereafter annually, the grantee shall conduct technical performance tests to demonstrate full compliance with all applicable technical standards contained in this chapter and the franchise, and the technical standards and guidelines of the FCC. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 6.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-7. - Bond, security fund, and liquidated damages. 
(a)  Performance bond. Upon being granted a franchise, a grantee shall file with the chief financial officer of the city and shall thereafter during the period of the franchise maintain in full force and effect a corporate performance bond or other adequate surety agreement acceptable to the city, in its sole discretion, in the amount of $250,000.00 to guarantee grantee's performance of all obligations under the franchise. The bond shall be so conditioned that in the event that grantee, other than for reasons beyond grantee's control, shall fail to meet the yearly time schedule for the installation of all necessary equipment, as required herein, the city may call upon the surety to complete the installation work scheduled for that year. 
(b)  Security fund. 
(1)  Initial deposit. Immediately upon execution of a franchise, the grantee shall deposit with the chief financial officer (or upon direction to a designated depository as provided in the next succeeding paragraph) of the city, and maintain on deposit throughout the term of the franchise, the sum of $35,000.00 as security for the faithful performance by the grantee of all the provisions of the franchise, compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency of the city having jurisdiction over the grantee's acts or defaults under the franchise, and the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, ownership, operation or maintenance of the cable system. 
The city shall cause the deposit of the security fund in an interest-bearing account, payable, in whole or in part, solely to the city only upon demand. Interest on the security fund, as accrued, shall be withdrawn and paid to the grantee semi-annually by the city; provided that, until paid, all such accrued interest shall be subject to withdrawal by the city for the same purposes for which the security fund is subject to withdrawal. 
(2)  Withdrawal from security fund. If the grantee fails to pay the city any compensation within the time fixed herein; or, fails, after ten days' notice to pay to the city any taxes due and unpaid; or fails to repay to the city, within such ten days, any damages, costs or expenses which the city shall be compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with the franchise or this chapter; or fails to pay any liquidated damages after three days from receipt of a decision of an arbitration panel confirming said liquidated damages pursuant to section 34-7(c)(4) (below); the chief financial officer of the city may immediately withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties, from the security fund. Upon such withdrawal, the chief financial officer of the city shall notify the grantee of the amount and the date thereof. 
(3)  Replenishment of security fund. Within 20 days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn pursuant to section 34-7(b)(2) above, from the security fund deposited pursuant to section 34-7(b)(1) above, the grantee shall pay to, or deposit with, the chief financial officer of the city, a sum of money sufficient to restore such security fund to the original amount of $35,000.00. 
(4)  Disposition of security fund. Amounts received by the city from the grantee, whether directly paid by the grantee to the city or withdrawn from the security fund by the city, may be used by the city for any purposes it deems fit. The grantee shall be entitled to the return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit with the chief financial officer of the city, at the expiration of the term of the franchise, provided that there is no outstanding default on the part of the grantee. The city shall return the balance of the security fund to the grantee within 90 days of the expiration of the franchise. 
(c)  Liquidated damages. 
(1)  Determination and assessment. Upon a determination by the city that the grantee has violated any of the material provisions of the franchise, or has, after reasonable written notice from the city, repeatedly failed to comply with other provisions of the franchise or this cable ordinance, the city shall direct the grantee by written notice sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to correct such violation within a time and manner and upon such terms as are reasonable. Upon failure of the grantee to correct the violation within the reasonable time and upon the reasonable terms as the city may direct, the city may assess the grantee and the grantee agrees to pay to the city, liquidated damages in accordance with the schedule of liquidated damages set forth in section 34-7(c)(4). Because the grantee's failure to comply with certain material provisions of the franchise and this cable ordinance will result in injury to the city, its residents and/or to subscribers, and because it will be difficult to estimate the extent of such injury, the city and the grantee hereby agree that the liquidated damages stated herein represent both parties' best estimate of the damage resulting from the specified injury. Such assessment shall not constitute a waiver by the city of any other right or remedy it may have under this chapter, or under applicable law, including, without limitation, its right to recover from the grantee and its sureties such additional damages, losses, costs and expenses as may have been suffered or incurred by the city by reason of, or arising out of, such breach of this chapter. 
(2)  Notification. Upon the city's assessment of liquidated damages pursuant to section 34-7(c)(1) above, written notice of such assessment shall be sent to the grantee by certified mail, return receipt requested, with a concise statement of the reason(s) therefor. 
(3)  Arbitration. Within ten days after the grantee has received a notice from the city pursuant to section 34-7(c)(2) above, the grantee may request arbitration. Pendency of the arbitration procedure shall suspend payment of liquidated damages until three days after mailing to the grantee by first-class mail of the decision of the arbitration panel confirming said liquidated damages in whole or in part. The decision of the arbitration panel shall be final and binding upon the parties hereto. 
Arbitrable matters shall be determined by a panel of three arbitrators. One arbitrator shall be appointed by the city, one by the grantee, and the third by the first two arbitrators appointed pursuant to this section. The expenses of the arbitration, including the fees of the arbitrators, shall be borne by the parties in such manner as the arbitrators may provide in their award. The determination of a majority of the arbitrators shall be binding on the parties. 
(4)  Schedule of liquidated damages. Pursuant to section 34-7(c)(1) above, the following liquidated damages shall be chargeable to the security fund on a per day basis. The determination of the date of commencement of the liquidated damages shall be determined at the time of the decision by the arbitration panel: 
a.  For failure to complete construction or extend service in accordance with franchise for reasons not beyond grantee's control: $1,000.00/day for each day the violation continues; 
b.  For failure to make franchise fee payments as required: $375.00/day for each day the violation continues; 
c.  For failure to comply with provisions of the franchise for public, educational and government access: $250.00/day for each day the violation continues; 
d.  For failure to comply with provisions of the franchise for the municipal network for reasons not beyond grantee's control: $500.00/day for each day the violation continues; 
e.  For violation of consumer protection requirements and customer service standards required by the franchise, this chapter, or by FCC regulation: $250.00/day per standard violated; 
f.  For violation of the equal employment opportunity and equal business opportunity requirements of the franchise and this chapter: $250.00/day for each day the violation continues; and 
g.  For violation of other material provisions of the franchise or this chapter: $250.00/day for each day the violation continues. 
No damages shall be chargeable for violations which are minor, isolated, trivial or de minimis in nature, or which occur as a result of force majeure. As used herein the term "force majeure" shall mean, without limitation, the following: acts of God; strikes, orders of any kind of the city, of the government of the United States of America or the state or any of their respective departments, agencies or officials, or any civil or military authority; insurrections, riots; epidemics; landslides; lightning; earthquakes; fire; storms; floods; washouts; droughts; arrests; restraints of government and people; civil disturbances; explosions; partial or entire failure or unavailability of utilities; or any other cause or event not reasonably within the control of the franchisee (specifically, not including the availability of funding from any financing source). 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 7.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-8. - Insurance and indemnification. 
(a)  Insurance. 
(1)  Requirements. Prior to commencement of construction, but in no event later than 60 days after the effective date of the franchise and thereafter continuously throughout the duration of the franchise and any extensions or renewals thereof, the grantee shall meet the insurance requirements of the city as established by the city's chief financial officer. The city shall reserve the right to inquire periodically into the adequacy of any grantee's insurance coverage and, from time to time, the city may require, and the grantee shall furnish, reasonable changes in such policies to reflect changing liability limits and/or to compensate for inflation. 
(2)  No liability limit. None of the provisions of this chapter or any insurance policy required herein, or any damages recovered by the city hereunder, shall be construed to excuse the faithful performance by or limit the liability of grantee under this chapter or the franchise for damages either to the limits of such policies or otherwise. 
(3)  Financial security requirements. Any and all companies providing insurance required by this chapter must meet certain minimum financial security requirements set forth below. These requirements conform to the ratings published by A.M. Best & Co. in the current Best's Key Rating Guide - Property Casualty. The ratings for each company must be indicated on the Acord Certificate of Insurance Form. 
a.  Best's Rating not less than B and current. 
b.  Best's Financial Size Category not less than Class XIII. 
c.  Companies must be authorized to conduct and transact insurance contracts by the Insurance Commissioner, State of Georgia; furthermore, all bid, performance and payment bonds must be a U.S. Treasury Circular 570 listed company. 
(4)  Additional insured. The city shall be covered and named as an additional insured for all insurance policies written under the provisions of this chapter or the franchise. Confirmation of this shall appear on all said policies and certificates of insurance. 
(5)  Commercial general liability insurance. The grantee shall purchase, and will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, general liability insurance insuring the grantee in the minimum of: 
a.  $1,000,000.00 for property damages per occurrence; 
b.  $2,000,000.00 for property damage aggregate; 
c.  $5,000,000.00 for personal bodily injury or death to any one person; and 
d.  $10,000,000.00 bodily injury or death aggregate per single accident or occurrence, 
(6)  Policy inclusions. Such general liability insurance must include coverage for all of the following: commercial form, premises-operations, explosion and collapse hazard, underground hazard, products/completed operations hazard, contractual insurance, broad form property damage, and personal injury. 
(7)  Automobile liability insurance. The grantee shall purchase, and will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, automobile liability insurance for owned, non-owned, hired, or leased vehicles in the minimum amount of: 
a.  $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury and consequent death per occurrence; 
b.  $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury and consequent death to any one person; and 
c.  $500,000.00 for property damage per occurrence. 
(8)  Workers' Compensation and Employer's Liability Insurance. The grantee shall purchase and will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, worker's compensation and employer's liability, valid in the state, in the minimum amount of: 
a.  Statutory limit for Workers' Compensation; 
b.  $100,000.00 for bodily injury by accident/disease, each accident; 
c.  $100,000.00 for bodily injury by accident/disease, each employee; and 
d.  $500,000.00 for bodily injury by accident/disease, each policy limit. 
(9)  Subcontractors. If grantee employs any subcontractor who does not obtain insurance in his or her name, then the grantee will either cover such subcontractor by obtaining endorsements to be attached to its policies or require the subcontractor to obtain the necessary insurance coverage. In no event will the subcontractor be allowed to commence work on the project covered by the franchise unless and until certificates of insurance for the necessary types of insurance are provided. 
(10)  Self-insurance. Grantee shall be allowed to provide in above-referenced types and amounts of insurance through self-insurance. The city shall have the right to request reasonable information to assure itself that grantee has the necessary financial resources to self-insure. The city shall not unreasonably withhold approval from grantee to self-insure. 
(b)  Indemnification. The grantee agrees to indemnify, save harmless and defend the city, its agents, servants, and employees, and each of them against and hold it and them harmless from any and all lawsuits, claims, demands, liabilities, losses and expenses, including court costs and reasonable attorney's fees for or on account of any injury or losses to any person, or any death at any time resulting from such injury, or any damage to any property, which may arise or which may be alleged to-have arisen out of or in connection with the work covered by the franchise and performed or caused to be performed by the grantee; provided, however, the grantee shall not be liable for the negligent acts of the city and its employees. The grantee shall also pay for the cost to the city of defending in any court any action brought against the city arising out of the operations of the grantee hereunder. The grantee shall carry insurance in the above-described amounts to protect the parties hereto from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities which may arise or result directly or indirectly from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage. All insurance required shall be written with a company or companies approved by the city and shall remain in full force and effect for the entire term of the franchise. Grantee shall provide to the city certificates of insurance evidencing that the insurance required herein is in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 8.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-9. - Compensation. 
(a)  Franchise fee. Each grantee shall pay the franchise fee hereinafter set forth. In exchange for the rights granted pursuant to this chapter and under the franchise, each grantee shall pay to the city on a monthly basis a franchise fee, as specified in its franchise. Such payment by the grantee to city shall not be in lieu of any occupation tax, license tax, or similar levy, property tax, or any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers). 
(b)  Failure to make required payment. In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified herein, grantee shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge, computed from such due date, at the annual rate equal to the commercial prime interest rate of the city's primary depository bank during the period that such unpaid amount is owed. 
(c)  Payments to be made monthly. The franchise fee and any other cost or damages assessed shall be payable monthly to the City of Atlanta. The grantee shall file a complete and accurate verified statement, itemized by category and for the franchise area only, of all gross revenue as defined in section 34-2 showing subscriber revenues from each and every category of service and non-subscriber revenues from each and every source during the period for which said monthly payment is made. Said payment shall be made to the city not later than 30 days after the expiration of each calendar month. 
(d)  The city right to inspection. The city shall have the right to inspect the grantee's income records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this chapter. Audits shall be at the expense of the city; provided that if such audit establishes that grantee is in arrears of more than five percent, grantee shall reimburse the city for reasonable audit expenses. Any additional amount due to the city as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the grantee by the city which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. 
(e)  Use of franchise fees. Consistent with the cable act, use of the funds derived from franchise fees shall be at the sole discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 9.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-10. - Rate regulation. 
(a)  Regulation. Subject to the provisions of applicable laws and regulations, the city shall have the authority to regulate the rates of the grantee. The mayor, or his designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC rate regulations in order to enable the city to regulate basic service rates and charges. 
(b)  Nondiscriminatory rates. Grantee shall establish rates that are nondiscriminatory within the same general class of subscribers which must be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area for all services. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the grantee in its sole discretion from offering (i) discounts to multiple family dwelling subscribers billed on a bulk basis; (ii) promotional discounts; (iii) reduced installation and service rates for subscribers who have multiple services; (iv) discount for senior citizens and/or low income residents; or (v) commercial rates. Grantee's charges and rates for applicable services shall be itemized on subscribers' monthly bills. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 10.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-11. - Consumer protection. 
Each grantee shall, at a minimum, meet the customer service standards released by the Federal Communications Commission on April 7, 1993, or any standards subsequently adopted by the FCC which supersede those released on April 7, 1993. Should grantee not meet the FCC customer service standards or any customer service standards set forth in this chapter or the franchise for two consecutive quarters, grantee shall submit to the city a written plan which describes the corrective action that the grantee is taking and plans to take to ensure compliance within a reasonable period of time. The city reserves the right to promulgate new, revised or additional customer service standards. 
Each grantee shall also comply with the consumer protection and customer service provisions of its franchise and with, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Business office. Each grantee shall be required to establish, operate and maintain in the city a conveniently located walk-in facility for the purpose of receiving inquiries, requests and complaints concerning all cable services, all aspects of the construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of the cable system, all aspects of billing policies and procedures, and for the payment of subscribers' service charges. Said facility shall be open during normal business hours. Grantee shall provide all subscribers or users with at least 30 days' prior notice of a change in said facility's business hours. The facility shall maintain a staff adequate to process complaints and requests for installation, service or repairs, and to conduct other business in a timely and efficient manner. Additional offices and payment stations to be provided by the grantee shall be included in the franchise. 
(2)  Telephone service. The grantee shall have a listed, toll free, staffed telephone number for service calls available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Said number shall be made available to subscribers and the general public. Grantee shall add additional phone lines when existing lines are substantially utilized. 
The grantee shall provide an unlisted, toll free telephone number to the city and utility companies to enable the city or utility companies to reach the grantee in case of emergency on a 24-hour, seven-days-a-week basis. 
The grantee shall prominently display its business and service telephone numbers on each monthly subscriber statement. 
(3)  Repair response. Each grantee shall maintain a repair and trouble-shooting force capable of responding to subscriber complaints or requests for service within 24 hours after receipt of the complaint or request. 
(4)  Complaint procedures. Each grantee shall ensure that all subscribers, programmers, and members of the general public have recourse to a satisfactory complaint resolution procedure. Each grantee shall present to the city, no later than three months after the execution of its franchise, a set of rules, regulations, and procedures concerning the handling and settling of complaints. Provided, further, that each grantee shall provide its subscribers with copies of procedures for filing complaints, and shall provide additional copies to any persons on request. 
(5)  Complaint records. Written complaints received by grantee and service complaint summary reports shall be maintained for at least a five-year period. Aggregate data based upon these written complaints shall be made available for inspection by the city. Service complaint summary reports shall include verbal and written complaints and shall be segregated by type and category of complaint. 
(6)  Non-discrimination. All cable services shall be offered throughout the franchise area on a non-discriminatory basis. Grantee shall not refuse service to any resident who will not provide his or her social security number; however, grantee may require subscribers who do not provide their social security numbers to pay no more than two months of monthly service, deposits, and other applicable connection charges in advance of connection to the cable system. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit test marketing. 
(7)  Subscriber solicitation. Each grantee representative and all other grantee employees entering upon private property shall be required to wear an employee identification card issued by grantee and bearing a picture of said representative. 
(8)  Sales and annual information. Upon in-person solicitation of service or connection of cable service and annually thereafter, and at any time upon request, grantee shall furnish to each subscriber or potential subscriber a simple, but complete written explanation of all services offered; the fees, charges, terms and conditions of such services; information regarding billing, rebates, and service calls; procedures for ordering changes in or termination of services; complaint procedures; information regarding the availability of parental control devices; a complete statement of the subscriber's right to privacy in conformance with Section 631 of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C.; information concerning the utilization of video cassette recorders (VCRs) with cable service(s) and the cost for hooking up such VCRs so that they function as manufactured. Such written materials shall clearly disclose the price and other information concerning grantee's least costly service. 
(9)  Information with respect to viewing habits and subscription decisions. Grantee shall at all times comply with the protection of subscriber privacy provisions of the Cable Act and all laws governing subscriber privacy. The city reserves the right to promulgate new laws governing subscriber privacy. 
(10)  Subscriber and user contracts. Grantee will include the following provision in every contract agreement between grantee and any subscribers or user; 
The subscriber/user as part of this contract, has certain rights of privacy restricting the collection and publication of personal information under the control of (name of grantee), including without limitation, information regarding program selections or service uses. (Name of grantee) shall make available upon the request of the subscriber/user further description of said rights as established in its chapter and franchise with the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 11.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-12. - Equal employment opportunity and equal business opportunity (EEO and EBO). 
Each grantee shall comply with the city's requirements for contractors with respect to equal employment opportunity, equal business opportunity, first source jobs, and business non-discrimination. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 12.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-13. - Term and renewal of the franchise. 
(a)  Term. The term of the franchise shall be specified in the franchise. 
(b)  Renewal. Upon completion of the term of any franchise granted under this chapter, the city may grant or deny renewal of the franchise of the grantee in accordance with the provisions of the Cable Act. Discussions between the city and a grantee of each grantee renewal request shall include, but not be limited to, all terms and conditions of the franchise, such additional requirements as either party may request, whether the grantee has complied with the terms and conditions of its franchise, and the provision of a state-of-the-art cable system. The city's consideration of each grantee request for renewal shall be in accordance with the renewal of provisions of the cable act. The grantee shall own the cable communication system, but shall have no right to use of public rights-of-way upon the expiration of the franchise term. Upon notice to the grantee at least 30 days prior to expiration of the franchise, the city may direct the grantee to operate the cable system for a period of time not to exceed 12 months under the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as existed under the non-renewed franchise, and the company agrees to comply with such direction. 
(c)  Application fee. A grantee may file an application for a renewal of a franchise and upon filing shall be required to pay an application filing fee payable to the City of Atlanta in the amount of $35,000.00, plus cost of living adjustments based on CPI-PI published by the United States Department of Commerce determined from the initial date of adoption of this chapter. 
(d)  City right of first purchase. In the event of non-renewal as permitted by the cable act, the city reserves the right of first purchase of the cable system in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 34-16 of this chapter. If the city does not exercise its right to purchase the cable system, then such grantee shall be free to sell the physical assets of the cable system, in place, to any operator subject to city approval of such sale. If the grantee does not sell its assets, the city may require such grantee to remove, at its own expense, all portions of the cable system from all public ways and places within the franchise area. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 13.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-14. - Assignment and transfer. 
(a)  Transfer of franchise. Any franchise granted hereunder shall not be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, by means including but not limited to, transfer by force or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership, hypothecation or other means, nor shall the control of the grantee be changed, without the prior consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, In this regard, the city may inquire into, and determine to its reasonable satisfaction, the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall assist in any such inquiry. Failure to provide all information reasonably requested by the city as part of said inquiry shall be grounds for denial of the proposed change, transfer, or acquisition of ownership or control. The city may impose conditions on its consent regarding the technical, operating, customer service, and financial aspects of the cable system as well as the transferee's acceptance of conditions related to past non-compliance with this chapter or the franchise. The grantee shall cooperate with and respond to any city inquiry on whether any change of control has taken place. 
(b)  City right of first purchase. The city reserves the right of first purchase in any sale, transfer, lease, assignment or disposal of the cable system in accordance with the terms set forth in section 34-16 of this chapter. 
(c)  Transfer application fee. Upon requesting city consent as provided in section 34-14(a), the Grantee shall be required to pay a transfer application fee in the amount of $25,000.00, plus cost of living adjustments based on CPI-PI published by the United States Department of Commerce determined from the initial date of the adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 14.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-15. - Revocation and cancellation. 
(a)  Revocation. Subject to the provisions of this section 34-15, the city may revoke a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter in the event of any of the following after notice and an opportunity for cure by the grantee as provided in section 34-15(b): 
(1)  The grantee defaults in the performance of any of the material obligations under this chapter or under such documents, contracts and other terms and provisions entered into by and between the city and the grantee. 
(2)  The grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect the liability and indemnification coverage, performance bond, or the security fund as required herein. 
(3)  The grantee violates any substantial and material final orders or rulings no longer subject to review, reconsideration or appeal of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this chapter or the franchise. 
(4)  The grantee evades any of the material provisions of this chapter or the franchise or practices any fraud or deceit upon the city or cable subscribers. 
(5)  The grantee substantially fails to comply with the construction standards and schedule in the franchise for reasons not beyond the grantee's control. 
(6)  The grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts or is adjudged bankrupt. 
(7)  The grantee has failed to restore service after 96 consecutive hours of service area-wide interrupted service, except for reasons beyond the grantee's control. 
(8)  The grantee has permanently ceased to provide service over the cable communications system for any reason not beyond the grantee's control. 
(9)  The grantee substantially fails to meet the requirements regarding cable system characteristics or technical performance standards as provided in this chapter or the franchise. 
(10)  The grantee substantially fails to comply with the access or municipal network provisions of this chapter or the franchise. 
(11)  The grantee fails to comply with material customer service standards as provided in this chapter or the franchise. 
(12)  The grantee fails to make franchise fee payments as provided herein. 
(13)  The grantee repeatedly fails to comply with material EEO or EBO provisions of this chapter or the franchise. 
(14)  The grantee materially misrepresents facts in the application for or negotiation of the franchise or any extension or renewal thereof. 
The use of the term "beyond the grantee's control" in this section 34-15(a) shall have the same meaning as the term "force majeure" as set forth in section 34-7(c)(4). 
(b)  Procedure prior to revocation. The mayor shall give written notification to the grantee and to the council at any time that one or more of the violations set forth in section 34-15(a) are deemed to exist. 
(1)  In the event the violation continues for a period of 60 days following such written notification without good faith action by the grantee to cure or initiate action to cure the violation, the mayor may request the council to revoke the franchise. 
(2)  The council shall consider the request of the mayor for revocation and in connection therewith shall, with not less than 15 days' prior written notice to the grantee, hold a public hearing, following advertisement to the public in a newspaper of general circulation in the community, at which time it shall hear any persons interested therein. Grantee shall have the right at such public hearing to address the issue of violations and to respond to any public or city concerns. The council shall then determine whether or not any such violation has occurred and warrants revocation of the franchise. 
(3)  If the council shall determine that such violation by the grantee occurred and warrants revocation of the franchise, then the council may, by ordinance, declare that the franchise is revoked and forfeited unless there be compliance by the grantee within such period as the council may fix to cure any violation determined to have occurred within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable. 
(4)  The revocation and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the city under any provision of law or ordinance. 
(c)  Failure to operate. In addition to the procedures set forth above complete failure of a grantee to operate or otherwise make any use of the cable system for a continuous period of 12 months shall serve automatically to terminate the franchise, and the city shall have the option to purchase the cable system as provided herein. 
(d)  City option to purchase. Upon non-renewal or revocation for cause, or termination or cancellation pursuant to section 34-15(c), 34-15(e) or 34-15(f) of a grantee's franchise and any extensions thereto pursuant to the terms of this chapter, the city may, at its option, purchase the cable system as provided in section 34-16 herein subject to the provisions of the cable act. If the city does not exercise its right to purchase the cable system, then such grantee shall be free to sell the physical assets of the cable system, in place, to any operator, subject to city approval, to provide cable service in the city. If the grantee does not sell its assets, the city may require such grantee to remove, at its own expense, all portions of the cable system from all public ways and places within the franchise area. 
(e)  Cancellation upon foreclosure or judicial sale. Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the cable system, an affected grantee shall notify the city of such fact within ten days of its occurrence, whereupon the city shall have the right to cancel the franchise unless, (a) within 90 days after the foreclosure or other judicial sale, the purchaser at such sale shall have fully complied with all provisions of this chapter and remedied all defaults under the franchise; and (b) such purchaser, within said 90-day period, shall have executed an agreement whereby such purchaser assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this chapter and the franchise. 
(f)  Cancellation upon appointment of receiver or trustee. Each grantee's franchise shall be subject to cancellation upon the expiration of 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of any grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or unless: 
(1)  Within 120 days after his or her election or appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of this chapter and remedied all defaults thereunder; and 
(2)  Such receiver or trustee, within said 120 days shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this chapter and the franchise. 
(g)  Abandonment by grantee. In the event that the use of any part of the cable system should permanently cease operation for any reason, or the rights granted hereunder or pursuant to a franchise have been terminated, canceled or have expired, the grantee shall promptly remove from the streets and public places all such property and poles of such cable system, other than any which the city may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the city. 
Any property of grantee's to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the city may prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of a grantee in place, each grantee shall submit to the city an instrument to be approved by the city, transferring to the city the ownership of such property. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 15.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-16. - Purchase by city. 
Upon the termination, revocation pursuant to section 34-15, expiration of franchise term without request for renewal, cancellation pursuant to sections 134-5(c), 34-15(e) or 34-15(f), or the non-renewal of any grantee's franchise, the city shall have the right to purchase the cable system as provided herein subject to the provisions of the cable act, and the city may direct such grantee to cease operation of the cable system. 
If, upon termination, revocation pursuant to section 34-15, expiration of franchise term without request for renewal, cancellation pursuant to sections 34-15(c), 34-15(e), or 34-15(f), or the non-renewal of a franchise, the city exercises its option to purchase the cable system, the value calculated below upon the date of such termination, cancellation, non-renewal or revocation, shall constitute the agreed purchase price subject to the provisions of the cable act. 
The purchase price to the city for the cable system shall be the fair market value of the cable system as of the date of such termination, cancellation or non-renewal. Such fair market value shall be determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern, but with no value allocated to the franchise itself. Such fair market value, if not agreed upon by the city and the grantee, shall be determined by mediation, or if still unresolved, the parties may seek resolution in the courts. The purchase price to the city for the cable system in the event of revocation shall be at an equitable price. 
Prior to the transfer or assignment of the beneficial ownership of any franchise, pursuant to section 34-14, the city shall have the right to purchase such cable system assets at the price and on the terms comparable to those offered by the proposed transferee or assignee, within 60 days of grantee's notice to the city of such proposed transfer or assignment, provided, however that the city shall not have such right of purchase in the event of transfer to an affiliated entity directly or indirectly controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, such grantee or its parent company. 
If the city elects to purchase the cable system, such grantee shall be required, upon payment of the purchase price, promptly to execute all appropriate documents to transfer title to the city, and shall assign all of the contracts, leases, licenses, permits, and any other rights necessary, in the discretion of the city, to maintain continuity of service to the public. The grantee shall be required to cooperate with the city or with any other person, partnership, corporation or legal entity authorized or directed by the city to operate the cable system for a temporary period, in maintaining continuity of service. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 17.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-17. - Regulatory authority. 
(a)  Change in law or regulation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the local, state and federal government, including, without limitation, those applicable to the construction and operation of the cable communications system. Nothing herein shall be deemed a waiver of grantee's right to challenge the validity of any such law, rule or regulation. In the event that any actions of the state or federal government or any agency thereof, or any court of competent jurisdiction upon final adjudication, substantially reduce in any way the power or authority of the city under this chapter or the franchise, or if in compliance with any local, state, or federal law or regulation, the grantee finds conflict with the terms of this chapter, the franchise, or any law or regulation of the city, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the city of the point of conflict believed to exist between such law or regulation and the laws or regulations of the city, this chapter and the franchise. The city, at its option, may notify the grantee that it wishes to negotiate those provisions which are affected in any way by such modification in regulations or statutory authority. Thereafter, the grantee shall negotiate in good faith with the City to develop alternate provisions which shall fairly restore the city to the maximum level of authority and power permitted by law. 
(b)  Authority. The city reserves the right to exercise the maximum plenary authority, as may at any time be lawfully permissible, to regulate the cable communications system, the franchise and the grantee. Should applicable legislative, judicial or regulatory authorities at any time permit regulation not presently permitted to the city, the city may without the approval of the grantee engage in any such additional regulation as may then be permissible, whether or not contemplated by this chapter; provided, however, that any amendment to this chapter shall be confined to the lawful exercise of the city's police powers and to changes which do not materially alter the rights of the franchisee under the franchise. 
(c)  Right of inspection of records. To the extent consistent with laws governing subscriber privacy and any other applicable laws, the city shall have the right to inspect all books, records, reports, maps, income tax returns (at the time of transfer, renewal or rate proceedings where necessary), financial statements, service complaint summary reports, performance test results and other like materials of the grantee which relate to the operation of the franchise, upon reasonable prior notice, at any time during normal business hours. 
(d)  Right of inspection of cable system facilities. The grantee shall grant the city the right to inspect all cable system facilities or installation work performed subject to the provisions of this chapter, the franchise and applicable laws and regulations, and shall have the right to make such tests as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter, the franchise, and other applicable laws and regulations. 
(e)  Right of inspection of property. At all reasonable times and upon reasonable notice to grantee, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the city, of cable system facilities, together with any appurtenant property of grantee situated within or without the city. 
(f)  Right to require removal of property. In the event of non-renewal of the franchise, or upon its revocation or expiration, as provided for herein, the city shall have the right to require the grantee to remove, at its own expense, all portions of the cable communications system required by public necessity and convenience from all streets and public ways within the city. 
(g)  Expense reimbursement to city. The grantee shall pay the city a sum of money which will, when added to any application fees received, reimburse all costs and expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting, transferring which requires city consent as provided herein, extending for more than two years, or renewing a franchise, including, but not limited to, consultant fees, attorneys' fees, publication fees, travel expenses and all other direct costs; provided, however, that the city shall submit a detailed schedule of all such costs. Such payment shall be made within 30 days after the city furnishes the grantee with a written statement of such expenses. Such payment by the grantee shall not be deemed to be part of the franchise fee obligations of the grantee pursuant to section 34-9(a) of this chapter and the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 17.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-18. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Records. 
(1)  Grantee right of inspection of records. To the extent consistent with laws governing subscriber privacy and any other applicable laws, the city shall have the right to inspect all books, records, reports, maps, income tax returns (at the time of transfer, renewal or rate proceedings where necessary), financial statements, service complaint summary reports, performance test results and other like materials of the grantee which relate to the operation of the franchise, upon reasonable prior notice, at any time during normal business hours. 
(2)  Review. The grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the city to examine and copy or transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by grantee or under its control concerning the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the grantee. If any such maps or records are not kept in the city, or upon reasonable request made available in the city, and if the city shall determine that an examination of such maps or records is necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of their duties, then all travel and maintenance expenses necessarily incurred by the city in making such examination shall be paid by grantee. 
(3)  Records required. The grantee shall at all times maintain for a five-year period, coinciding with the city's five-year performance review, the following: 
a.  All written complaints received and service complaint summary reports. 
b.  A record of service interruptions or degradation of service experienced. 
c.  A comprehensive record of all personnel transactions and utilization of contractors, subcontractors, vendors and suppliers by race and sex. 
d.  Records from which customer service standards compliance data are derived. 
The grantee shall at all times maintain a full and complete set of plans, records and "as built" maps showing the exact location of all cable communication system equipment installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops. 
The grantee shall provide to the city such additional information, records and documents the city may deem reasonably necessary and appropriate to review the performance of the grantee with respect to this chapter and the franchise. 
(b)  Reports required. The grantee shall file the following reports with the city. Unless otherwise specified, all annual reports shall be submitted 60 days after the end of the grantee's fiscal year. 
(1)  Regulatory communications. A copy of material reports and documents required by and/or submitted to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), including any proof of performance tests, annual employment reports (FCC Form 395-A), basic signal leakage reports (FCC Form 320), and annual reports of cable television systems (FCC Form 325) shall be submitted simultaneously to the city by delivery to the office of marketing and communications. Financial information, and all petitions, applications and communications of all types; and all materials required by and/or submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction over any matter affecting operation of the grantee's cable system will be made available to the city upon request. 
(2)  Construction reports. Construction reports shall be submitted to the city within 90 days after the franchise is awarded and quarterly thereafter within 14 days after the end of the month for any construction undertaken during the term of the franchise until construction is complete, including the rebuild, as specified in the franchise. Such report shall include a description of the progress in applying for any necessary agreements, licenses, or certifications and any other information the city and the grantee may reasonably deem necessary. The content and format of the report will be reasonably determined by the city and the grantee and may be reasonably modified at their discretion. 
(3)  Proof of performance tests. Proof of performance test results shall be submitted to the city when sections of the cable system are rebuilt and annually as required by the franchise. 
(4)  Tests required by city. Report of technical tests required by the city shall be submitted as specified in the franchise. 
(5)  Change in service. A report on any change in programming or service shall be provided to the city 30 days prior to implementation. 
(6)  Franchise rules. All printed materials related to rules, regulations, terms and conditions adopted as the grantee's policy in connection with its subscribers, and which may be included on the grantee's contract or application form for subscriber service shall be filed with the city at the time the material is first provided to subscribers. 
(7)  Customer service reports. Within 30 days after the end of each quarter, the grantee shall submit reports which demonstrate the grantee's compliance with the FCC customer service standards, and any additional standards of this cable ordinance and franchise. The grantee shall use best efforts to segregate City of Atlanta data from metro Atlanta data. 
(8)  Financial reports. The grantee shall submit annually to the city the following financial reports within 90 days following the end of the grantee's fiscal year: 
a.  An ownership report, indicating all persons, who at any time during the preceding year did control or benefit from an interest in the franchise of five percent or more. 
b.  An annual, fully audited and certified financial report for the previous fiscal year, including year-end balance sheet; gross income statement showing subscriber revenue from each and every category of service and non-subscriber revenue from each and every source; line item operating expenses, depreciation expense, interest expense and taxes paid; statement of sources and applications of funds. 
c.  A list of officers and directors of the grantee and of any parent corporation and/or officers or managers of partnerships or other entities having an ownership interest of at least five percent. 
d.  For the franchise area only, a current annual statement of all capital expenditures, including new construction and equipment. 
(9)  Proof of insurance. The grantee shall submit annually to the city certificates of insurance for any and all policies of insurance required hereunder and in the franchise. 
(10)  Operational reports. Grantee shall submit annually a summary of the previous year's activities including, but not limited to, subscriber totals for each category of service offered including number of pay units; subscriber penetration, number of bulk and commercial subscribers; rates, channel alignment and program services; public, educational, government, and leased access services offered; new services offered; hours of operation; customer service agreement and handbook; service complaint summary reports; and the physical miles of plant construction and plant in operation. 
(11)  Future projections. The grantee shall submit annually a projection of cable system and service plans for the future. 
(12)  EEO and EBO. The grantee shall submit all reports relating to equal employment opportunity, equal business opportunity, business non-discrimination, and first source jobs at the time and in the form prescribed in the franchise. 
(13)  Additional reports. The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the city at the times and in the form prescribed, such additional reports with respect to its operation, affairs, transactions or property, the city may deem reasonably necessary and appropriate to review the performance of the grantee with respect to the franchise, this chapter, and applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 18.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-19. - Renegotiation. 
The field of cable communications is a rapidly changing field which shall, no doubt, see many legal regulatory, technical, and, financial, changes during the term of the franchise. Therefore, in order to provide for a maximum degree of flexibility and to achieve a continued advanced and state-of-the art cable system for the city, the grantee shall plan for re-negotiation sessions within 120 days of every five-year anniversary date of the award of the Franchise. The following topics shall be discussed at every scheduled re-negotiation session: rates; application of new technologies; state of the art; cable system performance; subscriber and non-subscriber services offered in the city and available nation-wide; customer service; subscriber privacy; amendments to this chapter; new laws and regulations; judicial and FCC rulings; equal employment opportunity and equal business opportunity and franchise fee. Topics in addition to those listed may be added by either party. Members of the general public may add topics either by working through the negotiating parties, or by presenting a petition. If such a petition bears the valid signatures of 500 or more qualified electors of the city, the proposed topic or topics shall be added to the list of topics to be discussed at the re-negotiation session. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 19.0, 11-28-94) 
Sec. 34-20. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Captions. The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this chapter. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this chapter. 
(b)  Severability. If any section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision of this chapter is determined to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional upon final adjudication by any court of competent jurisdiction, or by any state or federal regulatory agency having jurisdiction thereof, such determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof, all of which will remain full force and effect. 
(c)  Effective date. This chapter shall take effect and be in force from the date of adoption. 
(d)  No waiver of rights. No course of dealing between the grantee and the city nor any delay on the part of the city in exercising any rights hereunder shall operate as a waiver of any such rights of the city or acquiescence in the actions of the grantee in contravention of rights except to the extent expressly waived by the city or expressly provided for in the franchise. 
(e)  Limitation on use of financial commitments. As may be specified in a franchise, any financial commitments obtained by the grantee which have been confirmed to the city pursuant to the franchise shall be used solely in connection with the construction, operation or maintenance of the cable communications system or the grantee's performance of the terms, obligations, and conditions of this chapter and the franchise. 
(f)  Effect of pending litigation. In the absence of a stay or other similar remedy granted by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, no pending litigation or appeal to any regulatory body or court having jurisdiction over the grantee shall excuse the grantee from the performance of its obligations under this chapter or the franchise. Failure of the grantee to perform such obligations because of pending litigation or petition may result in forfeiture or revocation pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(g)  Conflict. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-51.1(94-O-1777), § 20.0, 11-28-94) 
Chapter 38 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; cemeteries generally, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-130 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL CEMETERIES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Naming of public facilities and streets in honor of persons, § 2-2; vending machines on city property and in city facilities, § 2-3. 
State Law reference— Receipt of cemetery lots in trust, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-4. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commissioner means the commissioner of parks, recreation and cultural affairs. 
Department means the department of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2001; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-27. - Designation of use; adoption of rules and regulations. 
The commissioner may designate the use of any cemetery and may adopt appropriate rules and regulations governing the use of any cemetery and the general operation of all cemeteries. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2071) 
Sec. 38-28. - Free burial permits for paupers. 
The mayor may grant free burial permits for the interment of the bodies of paupers or of those dying in charitable institutions or in similar cases, if the mayor decides that the circumstances justify them. 
(Code 1977, § 14-7034) 
Cross reference— Social services, ch. 126. 
Sec. 38-29. - Disturbing graves. 
It shall be unlawful to disturb any grave, or deface, pull up or remove anything placed to mark a grave. 
(Code 1977, § 17-1003) 
Sec. 38-30. - Injuring or destroying tombs or flowers. 
It shall be unlawful to destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure placed in the cemetery, or any fence, railing or other work used for the protection or ornament of any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure, or for the ornament or protection of the cemetery, or to willfully destroy, cut, break, remove or injure any tree, shrub or plant that may have been planted or may be growing in the cemetery, or to commit any other trespass within the limits of the cemetery. 
(Code 1977, § 17-1004) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Secs. 38-31—38-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OAKLAND CEMETERY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Oakland Cemetery landmark district, § 701-2001 et seq. 

Sec. 38-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cemetery means Oakland Cemetery. 
Sexton means the Sexton of Oakland Cemetery. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-42. - Scope. 
The provisions of this division apply to the cemetery. 
Sec. 38-43. - Use of funds for restoration. 
All revenues derived from the operation of the cemetery and the sale of spaces therein shall be used for the restoration of the cemetery. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2072) 
_____
Sec. 38-44. - Schedule of charges for cemetery services. 
The schedule of charges for specified services at the cemetery is established as follows: 

 
(Code 1977, § 10-2079; Ord. No. 2002-66, § 1, 8-26-02) 
_____
Sec. 38-45. - Schedule of charges for guided tours. 
(a)  The following fee schedule of charges is adopted by the department for guided tours of the grounds in historic Oakland Cemetery: 
(1)  Students (ages 7—22) ..... $6.00 
(2)  Senior citizens (ages 65 and above) ..... 5.00 
(3)  Adults (ages 23—64) ..... 10.00 
(4)  Group rates: Students (age 7—22, with ID) ..... 6.00 
Adults (age 23—64) ..... 12.00 
Senior citizen (age 65 and above) ..... 6.00 
(5)  Minimum charge for any adult group of less than ten ..... 50.00 
(6)  Family of four, two adults, two children ..... 28.00 
Each additional child ..... 6.00 
(b)  Payment of the charges stated in subsection (a) of this section are due at the start of the tour based on the number of attendees. 
(c)  All revenues generated from the tours will be used for restoration of historic Oakland Cemetery as contemplated in section 38-43. 
(d)  No person shall sell merchandise in the cemetery except literature of the cemetery and tickets for conducted guided tours or cultural events. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2077; Ord. No. 2002-66, § 2, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 2004-34, §§ 1, 2, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 2010-40(10-O-0936), § 12, 7-15-10; Ord. No. 2015-37(15-O-1216), § 1, 7-15-15 ) 
Sec. 38-46. - Use at night prohibited. 
No person, unless authorized by the commissioner or director, bureau of parks, shall be within the limits of the cemetery between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2073) 
Sec. 38-47. - Care of lots. 
(a)  No tree, shrub, plant or grass shall be planted on or removed from any private plot in the cemetery without the permission of the sexton. 
(b)  No lot in the cemetery shall be covered with gravel, cement or concrete. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2074) 
Sec. 38-48. - Trespass on plots. 
No person shall trespass on any plot within the cemetery. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2075) 
Sec. 38-49. - Stone rubbings. 
No person shall conduct any stone rubbings within the cemetery, unless approved by the commissioner or director, bureau of parks. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2076) 
Sec. 38-50. - Disturbing graves; disinterments. 
(a)  Where evidence of a grave exists, either in the records of the cemetery or by sounding, a rightful burial by permission of the lot owner shall be presumed, and the body shall not be moved. Removal may be allowed only when proof is tendered that the person requesting removal is the next of kin and has the right of removal. A copy of this proof must be tendered to the sexton at the time of removal with payment therefor, and the city shall be supplied by the person requesting removal with a statement of indemnity by the person releasing the city from liability by the performance of the removal. 
(b)  No person shall exhume a dead body at the cemetery without a permit as required by law. 
(c)  The opening of a grave in the cemetery and the interring in the grave of an additional body is forbidden. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2078) 
Disinterment of dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-42 et seq. 
Sec. 38-51. - Pets. 
(a)  No person shall walk or possess any pet in the cemetery. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of any person bringing a pet into the cemetery to clean up any matter excreted by the pet. 
(c)  The prohibition in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any guide dog especially trained for the purpose of accompanying a totally or partially blind person or a deaf person or a service dog especially trained for the purpose of accompanying a physically disabled person. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2015(a), (b), (d)) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Right of visually handicapped and deaf persons to be accompanied by guide dog or service dog, O.C.G.A. § 30-4-1. 
Secs. 38-52—38-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CEMETERY OR BURIAL GROUND DISTURBANCE PERMIT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2006-58, adopted Aug. 29, 2006 states: The provisions of this article shall not apply to any cemetery owned by the City of Atlanta, including but not limited to, Oakland Cemetery. 

Sec. 38-60. - Intent. 
The urban design commission (UDC) shall have the power to hear, grant or deny applications for a cemetery or burial ground, as defined in paragraphs (3) and (5) of O.C.G.A. § 36-72-2, as amended, disturbance permit in accordance with the powers delegated to the City by O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq. as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-61. - Procedures. 
Applications shall be filed with the director, urban design commission or their designee and shall include any supporting material as required by the rules of the commission or this section. Upon receipt of a complete application and the supporting material the UDC shall place the application on a regularly scheduled meeting agenda for public hearing, cause due notice of the time and place thereof to be published and give notice to surrounding property owners and descendants of those located in the cemetery or burial ground subject to the application. UDC staff shall review the information submitted and submit a findings of fact and recommendation to the urban design commission for their review and recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-62. - Application. 
Application for a permit shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(a)  Evidence of ownership of the land on which the cemetery or burial ground is located in the form of a legal opinion based upon a title search; 
(b)  A report prepared by an archeologist as defined in paragraph (2) of O.C.G.A. § 36-72-2, as amended, stating the number of graves believed to be present and their locations as can be determined from the use of minimally invasive investigation techniques, including remote sensing methods and the use of metal probes, which activities shall not require a permit; 
(c)  A survey prepared by or under the direction of a registered surveyor showing the location and boundaries of the cemetery or burial ground based on an archeologist's report; 
(d)  A plan prepared by a genealogist as defined in paragraph (7) of O.C.G.A. § 36-72-2, as amended, for identifying and notifying the descendants of those buried or believed to be buried in such cemetery. If those buried or believed to be buried are of aboriginal or American Indian descent, the genealogist, in preparing the notification plan, shall consult with the Council on American Indian Concerns created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-12-280, as amended, and shall include in the notification plan not only any known descendants of those presumed buried but also any American Indian tribes as defined in paragraph (2) of O.C.G.A. § 44-12-260, as amended, that are culturally affiliated; and 
(e)  A proposal for mitigation or avoidance of the effects of the planned activity on the cemetery or burial ground. If the proposal includes relocation of any human remains or burial objects, the proposal shall specify the method of disinterment, the location and method of disposition of the remains, the approximate cost of the process, and the approximate number of graves affected. 
(Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-63. - Identification and notification of descendants. 
The applicant shall implement its plan for identifying and locating descendants no later than the date the application is submitted to the director, urban design commission. The UDC staff shall review the applicant's plan for identifying and notifying the descendants of the deceased persons and may require as a condition for issuing a permit that the applicant implement additional reasonable attempts to identify and locate descendants. Notice to possible descendants shall include information on how to contact the city and a summary of the rights of descendants under this chapter. The UDC shall promptly inform any descendant who indicates an interest in the disposition of the human remains and burial objects regarding any proposals for mitigation, the terms of any permit issued, the time and place of any scheduled public hearings, and appeal procedures and events. 
(Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-64. - Public hearing; decision of city council. 
(a)  The commission shall conduct the public hearing within 60 days of the filing of an application and shall make a written recommendation to the city council no later than 15 days following the public hearing with respect to the sufficiency of the notice to descendants, the plan for mitigation, the disturbance and adverse effects on the cemetery or burial ground, the survey of the cemetery, and plans for disinterment and reinterment. The applicant shall be required to post the nearest public road and the burial ground not less than 30 days prior to the both public hearing to be conducted by the UDC and the hearing before city council. 
(b)  Within 15 days following receipt of the recommendations of the UDC, the city council shall schedule a second public hearing at which any interested party or citizen may appear and be given an opportunity to be heard. In addition to the notice required in section 38-63, notice of the public hearing shall be advertised in the legal organ of the jurisdiction once a week for the two consecutive weeks immediately preceding the week in which any such hearing is held. 
(c)  Within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision. The city council shall have the authority to deny the application with written reasons therefore, to issue a permit adopting the application in whole or in part, or to issue a permit which may include additional requirements to mitigate the proposed activity's adverse effects on the cemetery or burial ground, including but not limited to relocation of the proposed project, preservation of the cemetery or burial ground as an undeveloped area within the proposed development or use of land, and respectful disinterment and proper disposition of the human remains. The city may adopt the applicant's proposal for mitigation. 
(d)  Findings required. The city council shall consider the following in making its findings: 
(1)  The presumption in favor of leaving the cemetery or burial ground undisturbed; 
(2)  The concerns and comments of any descendants of those buried in the burial ground or cemetery and any other interested parties; 
(3)  The economic and other costs of mitigation; 
(4)  The adequacy of the applicant's plans for disinterment and proper disposition of any human remains or burial objects; 
(5)  The balancing of the applicant's interest in disinterment with the public's and any descendant's interest in the value of the undisturbed cultural and natural environment; and 
(6)  Any other compelling factors which the city council deems relevant. 
(Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-65. - Application fee. 
The city council shall be authorized to impose an application fee which shall reflect the cost to the city for processing and reviewing the application including, but not limited to, the cost of hiring an attorney, independent archeologist, publication of notices and independent surveyor to assist in making recommendations regarding the applicant's plan. Such fee, if imposed, shall not exceed $2,500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-66. - Appeals. 
Should any applicant or descendant be dissatisfied with a decision of the city council, he or she, within 30 days of such decision, may file an appeal in the Superior Court of Fulton County by filing with the clerk of said court a petition in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly wherein such decision is contrary to law. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the decision of city council is rendered. 
(a)  Activities during time for appeal and after filing of appeal. Until the expiration of the time for appeal as set forth in section, the applicant shall not begin or resume activities which comply with the permit issued by the city. If an appeal is filed, the applicant may begin or resume activities which comply with the permit only upon consent of the city and the party seeking judicial review or upon order of the reviewing court for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-67. - Inspections. 
The department of police shall inspect as necessary to determine whether the applicant has complied with the provisions of this chapter requiring cessation or limitation of activity and with the terms of the permit as issued by the city council or as modified by the superior court or reviewing court. 
(Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-68. - Disinterment and disposition of human remains. 
Any disinterment and disposition of human remains or burial objects permitted under this chapter shall be supervised, monitored, or carried out by the applicant's archeologist and shall be done at the expense of the person or entity to whom the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Sec. 38-69. - Violations. 
Any person convicted of violating this chapter shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-8 of the Atlanta City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-58, § 1, 8-29-06) 
Chapter 46 - CIVIC AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Bureau of cultural affairs, app. IV, § 33. 
Cross reference— Payment of certain investment income to Atlanta Art Association, § 2-923; library, ch. 102; parks and recreation, ch. 110. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Lease agreements for Cyclorama. 
(a)  Authority to negotiate and execute. The mayor or a designee, which is presumed to be the director of the Cyclorama of the city, is authorized on behalf of the city to negotiate and execute lease agreements from time to time with persons or organizations wishing to rent the Cyclorama. 
(b)  Discrimination prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any lessee of the Cyclorama to discriminate among potential exhibitors or patrons because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. 
(c)  Contents of contracts. All contracts entered into for the leasing of the Cyclorama shall contain language which incorporates subsection (b) of this section pertaining to antidiscrimination and shall provide that a material violation of this section shall, at the option of the mayor or a designee, operate to void the contract and to terminate the event being held, should the mayor or a designee so declare. 
(Code 1977, § 10-4012; Ord. No. 2000-72, 12-12-00) 
Cross reference— Discrimination generally, § 94-66 et seq. 
Secs. 46-2—46-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CIVIC CENTER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Naming of public facilities and streets in honor of persons, § 2-2; vending machines on city property and in city facilities, § 2-3; amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; duties of Civic Center director relevant to boxing and wrestling contests, § 14-37. 

Sec. 46-36. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  No person shall smoke in the Civic Center except in the restrooms and areas designated by the Civic Center director. 
(b)  No person shall skateboard or roller skate on the sidewalks which are on the premises of the Civic Center, including the area composing the plaza of the Civic Center. 
(c)  The violation of subsection (b) of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 10-4003) 
Sec. 46-37. - Lease agreements. 
(a)  Authority to negotiate and execute. The mayor or the mayor's designee, which is presumed to be the director of the Civic Center, on behalf of the city, shall negotiate and execute lease agreements from time to time with persons or organizations wishing to rent the Civic Center. 
(b)  Discrimination prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any lessee of the Atlanta Civic Center to discriminate among potential exhibitors or patrons on the grounds of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. 
(c)  Contents of contracts. All contracts entered into for the leasing of the Civic Center shall contain language which incorporates subsection (b) of this section pertaining to anti-discrimination and shall provide that a material violation of this section shall, at the option of the mayor or a designee, operate to void the contract and to terminate the event being held, should the mayor or a designee so declare. 
(d)  Surcharge on tickets. All contracts for the leasing of the Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta Civic Center entered into shall contain language requiring the lessee to collect for and on behalf of the City of Atlanta a surcharge in the amount of $1.50 for each ticket sold for admission to any event taking place at the Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta Civic Center during such lease. The surcharge is due no later than close of business on the first business day following the closing of the box office for each such event. The surcharge is to be delivered to the Director of the Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta Civic Center or designee in the form of a certified check or cash, an amount equal to $1.50 for each such ticket sold and certified ticket sales accurately reflecting the number of tickets sold and the surcharge due and paid, such amounts are to be dedicated to the Civic Center's capital and non-capital improvements and is to be deposited in FDOA: 5581 (Civic Center Revenue Fund) 000002 (Default/Revenue Department 3473001 (Ticket Surcharge; General). 
(Code 1977, § 10-4001; Ord. No. 2000-71, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2004-35, § 1, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 2010-26(10-O-0629), § 2, 6-16-10) 
Discrimination generally, § 94-66 et seq. 
_____
Sec. 46-38. - Rental rules and regulations. 
(a)  Rules and regulations. The Mayor or her designee may establish rules and regulations governing the use of the Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta Civic Center complex. (The Code of Ordinances, Section 10-4002 (a)) 
(b)  Rates. The following fee schedule is hereby adopted for the Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta Civic Center: (The Code of Ordinances, section 10-4002(b)) 

 
  

 
(Code 1977, § 10-4002; Ord. No. 2004-35, § 2, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 2010-26(10-O-0629), § 1, 6-16-10; Ord. No. 2010-26(10-O-0629), § 1, 6-16-10) 
_____
Secs. 46-39—46-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WORKS OF ART IN PUBLIC PLACES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Procurement of construction, architect, engineer and land surveying services, § 2-1266 et seq. 

Sec. 46-76. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construction project means any capital project, including but not limited to those paid wholly or in part by the city with voter non-school general obligation bonds, annual general obligation non-school bonds, public grants except where prohibited, park improvement funds, revenue bonds and general funds, for the purpose of constructing or remolding any building, decorative or commemorative structure, park, street, sidewalk, parking facility or utility or any portion thereof within the city. 
Eligible funds means funds which pay for actual construction costs. This excludes funds which pay for engineering, architecture, acquisition, land acquisition and interest costs, as well as any incidental costs not associated with construction. Further, it refers only to that portion of public funds, which come from sources other than general obligation school bonds, private grants (except where expressly stated in the conditions of the grant itself) and assessment programs. 
Municipal art account means the account within each eligible fund in which one and one-half percent of all eligible funds for construction projects are deposited each year, and of which 80 percent shall be expended on the selection, design and development of works of public art, and 20 percent reserved for maintenance of works of public art and arts administration by the bureau of cultural affairs (BCA). BCA shall be the administrator of all municipal arts accounts and have sole expenditure authority on said accounts. 
Municipal art plan means an annual plan developed and administered by the bureau of cultural affairs for the aesthetic enhancement of all capital construction projects paid for by eligible funds in a particular year. 
(Code 1977, § 10-4005; Ord. No. 2001-55, § 4, 7-24-01) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-77. - Policy. 
A policy is established to direct the inclusion of works of art in the public works projects of the city and to place art on municipally owned or rented property. The city's public art master plan shall guide the development, administration and maintenance of public art in Atlanta. 
(Code 1977, § 10-4004; Ord. No. 2001-55, § 3, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 46-78. - Funds for works of art. 
All request for appropriations for construction projects from eligible funds as defined in section 46-76 shall include the encumbrance of an amount equal to one and one-half percent of the estimated cost of such projects for public works of art and shall be accompanied by contractual requirements authorizing the bureau of cultural affairs to expend such funds after the same have been deposited in a municipal arts account. When any such request for construction projects is approved, the appropriation for such construction projects shall be made and shall include an appropriation of funds for works of art, at the rate of one and one-half percent of project costs to be deposited into the municipal arts account as a line item in each fund. Money identified by each bureau, or agency for its public art percentage program shall be expended for payees as prescribed by the municipal arts plan, as provided in section 46-79(2). 
(Code 1977, § 10-4006; Ord. No. 2001-55, § 5, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 46-79. - Authority of bureau of cultural affairs. 
To carry out its responsibilities under this article, the bureau of cultural affairs shall: 
(1)  Prepare for review by the mayor and council, a municipal arts plan which shall outline the expenditure of funds from the municipal arts account(s). Such plan shall include, but not be limited to, the method(s) of commissioning artists, specific locations and expenditures for specific works of art, and maintenance and administration of the public arts program; 
(2)  Cause the municipal arts plan to be an integral part of the office's recommendations with regard to the city's comprehensive development plan and the capital improvement plan; 
(3)  Bring to the attention of the city council any proposed work of art requiring extraordinary operation or maintenance expenses; 
(4)  Recommend the placement of works of art consistent with section 46-81; 
(5)  Make recommendations regarding artist(s) selections without regard to an individual's or the perception of an individual's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a trained dog guide by a blind, deaf or otherwise physically disabled person; 
(6)  Make recommendations to the council as to the amount of money required in advance to carry out contracted projects by artist(s); the amount advanced shall not exceed one-third of the total allocable to such artist(s) for the contracted work of art and shall be approved by the council and mayor prior to payment; and 
(7)  Review prior to final payment all works in order to report on the conformity of the finished work with the approved plans or other document describing the work of art to be carried out. 
(8)  Approve all expenditures from municipal arts accounts of which 80 percent shall be expended on the design, selection and development of works of public art, and 20 percent shall be expended on maintenance and administration of the public art program. 
(9)  Develop procedures for implementation of the policy governing the acceptance of gifts of public art to the city and the policy governing the process for the de-accessioning of public art. 
(10)  Establish guidelines for and recommend the appointment of a public art advisory committee comprised of representatives from the business community, the arts community and the citizens of the city, to advise and assist the bureau of cultural affairs on matters regarding the implementation of public art policies for Atlanta. 
(11)  Review and approve all capital construction projects for compliance with the percent for art section of the Code of Ordinances, and determine if said percent for art funds shall be utilized on or about a specific project, or pooled with other funds for larger public arts projects located within the city, with the assistance of the public art advisory committee. 
(Code 1977, § 10-4007; Ord. No. 2000-70, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2001-55, § 6, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 46-80. - Placement of art. 
Works of art selected and implemented pursuant to this article may be placed in, on or about any city construction project or other city-owned, city-leased or city-rented property. They may be attached or detached within or about such property and may be either temporary or permanent. Placement of works of art shall be authorized by the city council after a report of the mayor or the mayor's designee. 
(Code 1977, § 10-4008) 
Sec. 46-81. - Account and payments. 
There is established a special account within each eligible fund designated the "municipal arts account into which funds are appropriated as contemplated by section 46-78 and 46-79 hereof shall be deposited. Each disbursement from such account(s) or from other appropriations for works of arts shall be approved by the bureau of cultural affairs, as authorized by the city council. Twenty percent of each municipal arts account shall be reserved for the administration and maintenance of works of public art by the bureau of cultural affairs. 
(Code 1977, § 10-4009; Ord. No. 2001-55, § 7, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 46-82. - Waiver of article. 
This article may be waived by resolution adopted by the city council and approved by the mayor when the construction project covered under this article is not appropriated for works of art. 
(Code 1977, § 10-4010) 
Secs. 46-83—46-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ENTERTAINMENT FILMING 

Sec. 46-100. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means the individual applying for a permit, who is legally authorized to bind the Producer. 
Application means the document created by the CAOE that must be completed and submitted to the CAOE by a producer or the producer's authorized representative, in order to request a permit. 
CAOE means the City of Atlanta Office of Entertainment. 
Change request means the document created by the CAOE that must be completed and submitted to the CAOE by a producer or the producer's authorized representative in order to request a material change to a permit. 
City means the City of Atlanta. 
Code means the Atlanta, Georgia Code of Ordinances. 
Department of purview means the city department that decides or recommends to the CAOE whether to allow an aspect of filming that is within the department's operational responsibilities. 
Director means the Director of the City of Atlanta Office of Entertainment. 
Element means an activity that is listed in Code section 46-105 below. 
Entertainment industry work means the production of motion pictures, television series, commercials, music videos, interactive games and animation, where the final product is intended to be commercially released and/or commercially distributed. 
Filming means creating motion picture images on public property, including the on-site/on-location pre-production activities associated therewith, where the final product is intended to be commercially released and/or commercially distributed. Filming does not include activities performed as part of: 1) documenting current affairs; or 2) producing newscasts. In addition, Filming does not include location scouting. 
Permit means a permit validly issued by the CAOE director that authorizes Filming and the Elements contained therein, if any. 
Producer means an individual, organization, corporation or any other entity that is ultimately responsible for the filming that is the subject of the application and the permit (where applicable). 
Public property means real property owned by the city or for which the city is a lessee, including, without limitation, parks, streets, sidewalks, other rights of way, and buildings. Public property shall not include real property which is being leased by the city to a lessee. 
Traffic control plan means a drawing that is submitted with a request for a sidewalk, lane and or street closure that details the location of the closures, the alternative routes that will be utilized for the detoured vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic, and the mechanisms (including without limitation barricades and signage and the locations thereof) for implementing the closures and alternatives. 
(Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-101. - Purpose and intent. 
The intent of the city in adopting this entertainment filming ordinance is to facilitate entertainment industry work performed in Atlanta while safeguarding the interests of Atlanta's residents and businesses. The article creates the City of Atlanta Office of Entertainment which will be dedicated to responding to the needs and issues pertaining to entertainment industry work. The article simplifies the permitting requirements associated with filming by enabling entertainment industry professionals to obtain required city approvals through the CAOE rather than through numerous individual departments. It strengthens the city's ability to anticipate and provide adequate services for the multiple filming projects throughout Atlanta. It also enhances the city's ability to accommodate unanticipated circumstances and requested changes. The CAOE similarly will respond to the needs of Atlanta's neighborhoods regarding entertainment industry work. and will promote community awareness of the entertainment industry's impact upon Atlanta's economic development. This article furthers the city's commitment to being a best-in-class location to work and to live. 
(Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-102. - Office of entertainment as resource and liaison. 
The office of entertainment will serve as a resource for Atlanta's residents and businesses, providing information upon request about current or scheduled filming, helping to resolve problems that arise from entertainment industry work, and acting as a liaison between residents, businesses and the entertainment industry to address inconvenience experienced generally and with regard to a specific project. The office will also serve as an ambassador to the entertainment industry, providing information, answering questions, helping to resolve challenges and facilitating the industry's work in the city. The office of entertainment will offer a "hot-line" to receive and respond to complaints and concerns after normal business hours; the hot-line will be available to Atlanta's residents and businesses and to the industry. The office will implement other mechanisms that enhance the experience of all people performing and effected by entertainment industry work, which may include an informational web-page and on-line permitting. While permits are required for entertainment industry work that occurs on public property only, the office of entertainment will be a resource and liaison for all entertainment industry work, including work that occurs on private property. 
(Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-103. - Permits for filming. 
(1)  Any producer that wishes to perform filming must first obtain a filming permit. No filming permit is required unless the entertainment industry work is performed on public property. 
(2)  Filming permits shall be issued by the CAOE director. Permits shall be issued to the producer. 
(3)  A permit will specify the filming that may occur at a particular location at a particular time. The permit will authorize element(s) to be performed as part of the filming provided that the elements have been approved by the department of purview. After receiving a permit, a producer may request modifications to the permit as described in subsection 46-107(1) below. 
(4)  Where the filming application includes a request to close a city street, lane and/or sidewalk, the request shall be evaluated under and the closure must comply with code section 138-75 ("Fees charged for permits which allow blocking or closing sidewalks or streets") and with all other sections and subsections of chapter 138 article III that are applicable to the filming at issue. 
(5)  A producer that receives a permit is responsible for knowing and complying with all other laws, including other ordinances and regulations, that establish prerequisites, authorizations and other required permissions applicable to the filming. 
(6)  Where permitted filming includes advertising signs or other displays of commercial speech, the signs and/or displays must be removed upon the expiration of the permit. 
(7)  Notwithstanding any other part of this Code, any producer that performs filming without receiving a permit, violates the material terms of a permit, or is otherwise in violation of this entertainment filming ordinance, shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-8 of the Code. 
(8)  While it is the intent of the city to honor each permit, the issuance of such permit shall not grant the producer a constitutionally protected property interest. 
(Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-104. - Exemption from filming permit requirement—First amendment activity. 
The following types of filming are exempt from the permitting requirement of subsection 46-103(1) above. This provision does not exempt a producer from complying with other applicable Code provisions, laws, ordinances or regulations that require elements or other activities included in the filming to be permitted or approved by the appropriate governmental entity. 
(1)  Filming associated with any permitted or unpermitted rally, protest or demonstration, except when the same is staged for the sole purpose of being included in the filming's final product. 
(2)  Filming associated with an outdoor event that is authorized by a city-issued outdoor event permit, as defined in chapter 142 of the Code, except when the same is staged for the sole purpose of being included in the filming's final product. 
(Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-105. - Filming elements. 
(1)  An applicant shall indicate on the application each of the elements listed below that will be included in the filming. 
(2)  The final decision of whether to allow the element shall be made by the department of purview after consultation with the CAOE, and communicated to the applicant by the CAOE. Prior to denying permission to perform an element, representatives of the department of purview and CAOE shall consult with the producer in an attempt to find alternative ways to accommodate the producer's filming needs. 
(3)  This section applies to the activities listed below only when they occur on public property. Where the element requires approval from an additional governmental jurisdiction, the producer must obtain that approval as well. 
(4)  The elements are as follows: 
(a)  Night-time filming with the use of outdoor lighting where a residence exists within 150 feet from the location of an outdoor light; 
(b)  Filming in buildings that are owned by the city and not leased to a third party, or in buildings of which the city is a lessee; 
(c)  Use of public property that is owned or maintained by the department of watershed management; 
(d)  Use of a temporary structure that requires permitting by the office of buildings and/or the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department; 
(e)  Use of intellectual property belonging to the city; 
(f)  Closure of a street, lane and/or sidewalk; 
(g)  Use of pyrotechnics or other explosives; 
(h)  Smoke effects, water effects, or flame effects; 
(i)  Display of real or artificial fire arms, grenades, or other weapons that would cause the public to fear violence; 
(j)  Vehicle chases and/or vehicle crashes: 
(k)  Dangerous stunts that have a reasonable likelihood of causing substantial personal injury; 
(l)  Use of large or any other equipment that has a reasonable likelihood of causing damage to public property; 
(m)  Filming in a city park; and 
(n)  Use of wild animals controlled under federal, state, or county law and/or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-106. - Processing of permit applications. 
A producer that wishes to perform filming must submit to the CAOE a completed application and the application fee set forth in code section 46-110 below. Where the producer is an organization, corporation or other entity, the application must be signed and submitted by an individual authorized to bind the producer. The CAOE will process the applications and the director will make permit determinations in accordance with this article IV. 
(1)  The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  The filming project name; 
b.  The name and contact information of the applicant, including postal address, email address, and telephone number; 
c.  A valid photo identification of the applicant; 
d.  The name and contact information of the producer (if the applicant is not the producer); 
e.  The dates, times and locations of the filming for which a permit is being requested, and a general description of the filming activity that will occur at each location; 
f.  A description of any elements that may be performed during the filming, including the dates, times and locations of each; 
g.  A description of any aspects of the filming, other than the elements, that may require city services; 
h.  A description of any assistance the producer may need from the CAOE, and/or concerns that the producer wants the CAOE to be aware of; and 
i.  Where the producer is a student, an official letter or document from her/his school confirming that s/he is currently enrolled there. In addition, the student must appear in person at the CAOE and present her/his current student identification card and a valid driver's license. Where the student does not have a driver's license, s/he may present a different form of identification that includes her/his photo. 
(2)  When more than one application is received for filming at substantially the same place and time, and the director reasonably determines that the filmings cannot logistically and/or safely occur together, the earlier or earliest of the applications that is received by the CAOE in a substantially completed form, which includes submission of the requisite application fee, shall be given priority as to the time and place requested. The CAOE shall make reasonable efforts to consult with the other applicant(s) in an attempt to find alternative times and/or locations that are acceptable. 
(3)  There is no deadline by which a filming permit application must be submitted to the CAOE; however, where a filming permit application includes a request for a street closure, the street closure portion of the application will not be approved unless it is received at least five business days prior to the closure. 
(4)  The CAOE and the departments of purview shall compile and maintain rules and guidelines applicable to the use of public property for filming, including the elements that are part of the filming, and shall apply those rules and guidelines equally regardless of the subject matter of the filming and/or the content of the speech therein. 
(5)  In the event that permission to perform an element is denied pursuant to subsection 46-105(2) above, the CAOE will process the remainder of the permit and grant all other aspects of the filming for which the requirements have been met. 
(6)  The CAOE may deny an application only if the director reasonably determines that one or more of the below-listed conditions exists. Prior to denial, the CAOE shall make reasonable efforts to consult with the producer in an attempt to resolve issues of concern and/or find alternative ways to accommodate the producer's filming needs, as described in subsections 46-106(7), (8), (9) and (10) below. 
a.  The filming poses an unreasonable risk of personal injury or property damage to people or property not associated with the filming; 
b.  The filming poses an unreasonable risk of damage to public property that could not be quickly and/or fully remediated; 
c.  The date and time requested for a particular filming location conflicts with previously-issued permits or permissions for filming, outdoor events, or other activities; 
d.  Use of the filming location, or use of the location during the date or time requested, would unreasonably interfere with the operation of city functions; 
e.  Use of the filming location or the proposed activity at the location would violate a law, ordinance, statute or regulation, regardless of whether the illegal activity is part of the message or content of the filming. A permit shall not be denied based upon simulation of an illegal activity where the actual illegal activity is not being performed; 
f.  The producer owes an outstanding debt to the city; 
g.  The producer previously caused significant damage to public property and, at the time of submitting the application under consideration, failed to adequately repair the damage or pay in full the city's invoice for damage repair and restoration services; 
h.  The producer previously violated this entertainment filming ordinance on two or more occasions, including without limitation by violating a material condition and/or restriction of a permit; 
i.  On two or more occasions, the producer's entertainment industry work in the city violated a city ordinance or other applicable law; and 
j.  The applicant made a material misrepresentation or gave incorrect material information on the application. 
(7)  Prior to denying an application, if the CAOE determines that the requested filming includes one or more of the conditions described in subsections 46-106(6)a., b., c., or d. above, the CAOE shall employ reasonable efforts to identify alternative filming locations, times and/or dates that eliminate the unacceptable condition(s) and that are mutually acceptable to the producer and the city. The producer shall modify the application to incorporate any agreed-upon alternatives. 
(8)  Prior to denying an application, if the CAOE determines that the requested filming or related activity creates a violation as described in subsection 46-106(6)c. above, the CAOE shall allow the producer to revise the application so that the filming activities comply with applicable law. 
(9)  Prior to denying an application pursuant to subsections 46-106(6)f. or g. above, the CAOE shall notify the producer of the potential denial and allow her/him to remedy the conditions described in those subsections. The CAOE shall process the application after such repair, restoration or payment is complete, and may require the producer to obtain a refundable sanitation bond for the filming permit in an amount equivalent to the cost of the repair, restoration or debt. 
(10)  Prior to denying an application pursuant to subsections 46-106(6)h., i. or j. above, the CAOE shall provide the applicant an opportunity to present documents or other evidence that refutes the director's finding of previous permit violations, of previous violations of the law, or of misrepresentation or misinformation on the application, as applicable. 
(11)  Where the director has complied with subsections 46-106(7), (8), (9) and/or (10) above and reasonably determines that one or more of the conditions set forth in subsection 46-106(6) continues to exist and that the application should therefore be denied, the director shall issue a written communication to the applicant that includes a detailed explanation for the denial. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the director from also notifying the applicant orally. 
(12)  If the director denies an application, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to the chief of staff or her/his designee, provided that a written request for such appeal is made to the chief of staff within three business days after the applicant's receipt of the director's determination. The person considering the appeal must be impartial, and must have had no involvement in the director's decision. The appeal shall be heard or considered within three business days after the city receives the applicant's request, and shall be decided de novo. The person considering the appeal shall evaluate the application and the director's decision in accordance with the criteria of this article IV. 
(13)  The person considering the appeal may issue her/his decision verbally, and shall issue a written decision within three business days of receiving written evidence from the applicant and/or meeting with the applicant, whichever is later. The written decision shall be the final decision of the city regarding the application. The applicant or producer may appeal the decision by writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County pursuant to the procedures set forth by Georgia law. 
(14)  In no event shall the director's or any city employee's evaluation of whether to grant or deny the application, including any of the elements, include consideration of: a) the race, color, creed, religion, gender, age, disability, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, political affiliation or associational relationships of the applicant, producer or any person associated with the filming; or b) the message or content of the filming. 
(Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-107. - Modification, suspension or cancellation of a permit. 
(1)  After receiving a permit, the producer may request a material modification of the permit at any time by submitting to the CAOE a change request and change fee as set forth in code section 46-110. The CAOE's ability to process the change request shall be determined pursuant to the provisions established for processing applications, as set forth in subsections 46-106(2) and (3) above. The director's decision of whether to grant or deny the modification request shall be determined as set forth in subsections 46-106(4) through 46-106(14). Submission of a change request will not impact the validity of the permit already issued, except upon written request of the producer. 
(2)  Where a producer has obtained a permit and abides by the material requirements thereof, the permit shall prevent the city's stoppage of activities that are authorized by the permit, except as otherwise set forth in subsection 46-107(3) below or as a result of applicable law. 
(3)  In the event that the Atlanta Police Department, Atlanta Fire Rescue Department and/or other department of purview identifies a substantial public health or safety risk arising from or caused by the filming, and the producer is in material compliance with the permit, the following shall occur: 
(a)  Where the substantial risk is identified prior to the commencement of the filming, the director and applicable department of purview shall employ reasonable efforts to consult with the producer and identify permit changes that are mutually acceptable to the producer and the city, and that remedy the health/safety issue(s). Where such efforts are unsuccessful, the director shall modify the permit in a manner that minimizes disruption of the filming as determined at the director's reasonable discretion, and that eliminates the substantial risk as reasonably determined by the department of purview. 
(b)  Where the substantial risk is not imminent and is identified after the commencement of the filming, the director and applicable department of purview shall employ reasonable efforts to consult with the producer and identify permit changes that are mutually acceptable to the producer and the city, and that remedy the health/safety issue(s). Where such efforts are unsuccessful, the director shall modify the permit in a manner that minimizes disruption of the filming as determined at the director's reasonable discretion, and that eliminates the substantial risk as reasonably determined by the department of purview. 
(c)  Where the substantial risk is imminent as reasonably determined by the department of purview and is identified after the commencement of filming, said department may place a stop work order on the filming if it finds that the order will likely alleviate the substantial risk. The stop work order may be issued without advance notice where the department of purview deems that a delay of the order will jeopardize public health and safety, and shall be lifted as quickly as possible after the risk is eliminated. The department of purview shall notify the director of the stop work order within two hours of its issuance. The director and applicable department of purview shall employ reasonable efforts to consult with the producer and identify permit changes that are mutually acceptable to the producer and the city, that will minimize the length and impact of the stop work order as decided by the producer, and that remedy the health/safety issue(s) as determined by the department of purview. 
(d)  Changes made to the permit pursuant to this subsection 46-107(3) shall not require payment of a change fee. 
(4)  Where the director, or a department of purview in consultation with the director, determines that the producer is violating material term(s) of the permit, the director shall decide the appropriate remedial actions after consulting with the department of purview and the producer. If the director and/or department of purview finds that a substantial public health or safety risk is arising from or caused by the material violation, the department of purview in consultation with the director may place an immediate stop work order on the filming without prior notice to the producer, and consultation with the producer shall occur after the work stoppage. The consultation between the director, department of purview and producer shall evaluate the nature and severity of the violation, whether the violation was intentional, whether permit modifications should be made, whether the stop work order should be lifted (where applicable), and what other actions should be taken (if any). Where the violation creates a substantial public health and/or safety risk, the remedial actions decided by the director will not be deemed final until the department of purview reviews the remedial actions and confirms that they will eliminate the health and safety risks. 
(Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-108. - Responsibilities of a producer once a permit is obtained. 
(1)  A producer or producer's designee must have the permit on site at the time and location of the filming, and must also have on site any other permits required for that location by the CAOE or any other governmental agency. 
(2)  A producer must confine filming to the locations, times, guidelines and conditions specified in the permit and must abide by all other material terms of the permit. 
(3)  Permits are not transferable. 
(4)  A producer must clean and repair the filming location, and restore it to the condition it was in immediately prior to the filming, unless otherwise agreed upon in writing by the director and the producer. The CAOE will inspect the filming location after the filming is completed to ascertain whether this requirement has been met. Where a producer fails to fulfill this requirement, the director will bill the producer for the cleaning, repair and/or restoration costs borne by the city, and the producer must pay the invoice in full within 30 days of receipt. 
(5)  Permits shall require the producer to notify the CAOE within three hours or sooner of learning of any emergency event regarding or arising from the filming that involves the media, the police or fire departments or emergency medical services. 
(6)  A producer is responsible for: (a) knowing and complying with all city ordinances and other laws applicable to the filming and to the other activities arising from the producer's permit; and (b) requiring and using commercially reasonable efforts to enforce the requirement that any person working for or at the direction of the producer (including without limitation contractors) complies with all city ordinances and other laws applicable to the filming and to the other activities arising from the permit. Applicable city ordinances include without limitation the Atlanta Noise Ordinance, set forth in chapter 74, article IV of the Atlanta Code of Ordinances. 
(7)  The requirements of number (6) above shall include without limitation that the producer is responsible for obtaining any and all permissions, licenses or other required authorizations for use of intellectual property, including intellectual property which is on public property but is not owned by the city. 
(8)  Permits must prohibit a producer from acting as a representative or agent of the city, and from indicating city endorsement of the filming, except as otherwise agreed to in writing by the director. This provision shall not prohibit the producer's use of the city logo in the filming credits. 
(9)  The CAOE shall require that notification be given to residents and businesses within a three-block radius of a location for which a filming permit has been issued. The CAOE may provide the notification, may require the producer to provide the notification, or may utilize a different mechanism for providing notification. The notification must state that a filming permit has been issued, and must include the date(s), time(s), location(s) and activities that are authorized by the permit. Additionally, the CAOE shall require that notification be given to the councilmember representing the district in which the filming will occur. The CAOE shall determine the most effective means and timing of notification based upon factors such as the type of impact that the filming will have on the neighborhood, the time between receipt of the application and commencement of the filming, the producer's budget and previous communications from a neighborhood regarding notification preferences. 
(Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-109. - Other permit requirements. 
After a permit has been approved by the director, it will be issued once the following have occurred: 
(1)  The producer signs an indemnification provision on the permit whereby the producer agrees to indemnify the city and its officials and employees from all claims, losses and expenses, including attorneys' fees and costs, that may arise from the permit and any of the activities performed pursuant to the permit by, on behalf of, or at the direction of the producer, except to the extent that that claims, losses and/or expenses are caused by the negligence or intentional misconduct of the city, its officials and/or employees; 
(2)  The producer signs a provision agreeing to comply with all applicable environmental laws, including an agreement not to allow legally-prohibited contaminants from entering the sewage and stormwater drainage systems serving the area where the filming will occur. The producer must sign a separate indemnification clause, such as the one described in number (1) immediately above, that pertains specifically to environmental breaches and includes without limitation the fines and clean-up costs associated therewith; 
(3)  The producer obtains insurance coverage in an amount determined by the city's risk manager, covers the city as an additional insured on the policy, and provides proof of the coverage in a manner established by the city's risk manager. In no event shall the risk manager base any decisions regarding the filming on the criteria set forth in subsection 46-106(14) above; and 
(4)  The producer pays the permit fee and any other applicable fees set forth in section 46-110 below. 
(Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Sec. 46-110. - Fee schedule. 
The CAOE shall collect all applicable fees arising pursuant to this article. These fees are set forth below in this section 46-110, and in other sections of the Code pertaining to the cost of services or goods provided by other city departments. Where the CAOE receives funds that are attributable to services performed by another city department, such funds shall be paid to the department providing those services where prescribed by the Code. 
(1)  Nonrefundable application fee. A filming permit application must be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the amount set forth below. A filming permit application shall not be deemed complete until the application fee is received by the CAOE. 
a.  $100.00, except for students. 
b.  $25.00 for students. 
(2)  Filming permit fee. A filming permit authorizes all filming for a particular filming project during a calendar month, regardless of the number of filming locations. A filming permit is valid through the last day of the calendar month and may be renewed for additional calendar months. 
a.  Standard Permit Fee. The following fees apply when the completed filming permit application is submitted to the CAOE more than three business days prior to the effective date of the permit: 
(i)  $300.00 for original filming permit, except for students. 
(ii)  $300.00 for each renewal filming permit, except for students. 
(iii)  $150.00 for students, valid for length of filming project. Monthly renewals not required. 
b.  Rush permit fee. Where a completed filming permit application is submitted to the CAOE three or fewer business days prior to the effective date of the permit, the producer must pay the standard permit fee plus the rush fee set forth below in this subsection. Additionally, where a producer submits an application more than three business days prior to the effective date of the permit, the producer voluntarily may pay the standard permit fee plus the rush fee in order to have the application processed within three or fewer business days. 
(i)  $300.00, except for students. 
(ii)  $150.00 for students. 
c.  Material changes to filming permit. 
(i)  There is no charge for modifying a filming permit where the director reasonably determines that the modification is not material. For purposes of this article IV, "material" means that processing the requested change will require an expenditure of city staff time or services that is more than de minimus. 
(ii)  There is no charge for a material change to a filming permit where a completed change request is submitted to the CAOE more than three business days prior to the effective date of the permit. Where a material change is requested after the permit has taken effect, there will be no charge if the completed change request is submitted to the CAOE more than three business days prior to the implementation of the requested change. 
(iii)  Where a change request for a material change is submitted to the CAOE three or fewer business days prior to the effective date of the permit or the implementation date of the change, as described in subsection 46-110(2)c.(ii) above, the producer must pay the rush change fee set forth below in this subsection. Additionally, where a producer submits a change request more than three business days prior to the implementation of the requested change, the producer voluntarily may pay the rush fee in order to have the change request processed within three or fewer business days: 
(A)  $300.00, except for students. 
(B)  $150.00 for students. 
d.  Cancellation fee. 
(i)  Except as set forth in subsections 46-110(2)d.(ii) and (2)d.(iii) below, a filming permit fee is nonrefundable. 
(ii)  Where the producer submits a change request to the CAOE and the change results in cancellation of a filming permit for a particular calendar month, the producer may utilize the filming permit fee for the cancelled month to purchase a new filming permit for the same project for a different calendar month. Regardless of whether a new filming permit fee is owed, the CAOE shall determine whether a rush fee is applicable based upon the timing of the change request and the standards set forth in subsection 46-110(2)c. above. 
(iii)  A filming permit fee is refundable if cancellation is required because of extraordinary circumstances for which the producer is not responsible and which are not within the producer's control. Inclement weather, except for declared states of emergency, and common illness shall not be deemed extraordinary circumstances. 
(3)  On-site services fee. An on-site services fee is assessed for each public property location where filming occurs, as authorized by the filming permit, for each day that filming occurs at that site. Where a producer films at more than three locations in a day for the same filming project, s/he shall be charged an on-site services fee only for the first three locations. 
a.  Standard on-site services fee. The following on-site services fee applies when the completed filming application or change request seeking authorization to film at the site is submitted to the CAOE more than three business days prior to the day of filming: 
(i)  $100.00 per location per day except for students, not to exceed $300.00 per day. 
(ii)  No Charge for students. 
b.  Rush on-site service fee. When a completed filming application or change request seeking authorization to film at the site is submitted to the CAOE three or fewer business days prior to the requested day of filming, the producer must pay the standard on-site services fee plus the rush fee set forth below in this subsection. There is no daily maximum regarding this rush fee. 
(i)  $300.00, except for students. 
(ii)  $150.00 for students. 
c.  Cancellation fee. 
(i)  Except as set forth in subsections 46-110(3)c.(ii) and (3)c.(iii) below, an on-site services fee is nonrefundable. 
(ii)  Where the producer submits a change request to the CAOE that results in cancellation of requested on-site services for a particular day, the producer may utilize the on-site services fee for the cancelled day to pay for on-site services for the same project for a day that is within three calendar days of the cancelled day. If the change request is submitted three or fewer business days prior to the filming day requested in the original application or the filming day requested in the change request, whichever is earlier, a rush on-site service fee shall be owed. 
(iii)  An on-site services fee is refundable if cancellation is required because of extraordinary circumstances for which the producer is not responsible and which are not within the producer's control. Inclement weather, except for declared states of emergency, and common illness shall not be deemed extraordinary circumstances. 
(4)  Scholarship program. The CAOE may establish a scholarship program that encourages development of local talent in the filming industry. If and when established, this program will be operated by the CAOE. The CAOE is authorized to award scholarships that waive some or all of the filming and on-site services fees associated with a filming project, contingent upon the following: 
a.  The producer is not a student; 
b.  The producer has not previously performed a filming project for commercial release; 
c.  The producer resides within the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta; 
d.  The filming is performed entirely in the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta; 
e.  The filming project budget is less than $200,000.00; 
f.  The end product of the filming is not animation; 
g.  The end product of the filming is not a music video; and 
h.  At least 50 percent of the total filming project crew are members of an Atlanta union. 
(5)  Traffic control plans. 
a.  Entertainment industry work performed at certain locations will require a traffic control plan. The CAOE is authorized but not required to offer the service of preparing traffic control plans associated with entertainment industry work. The cost of having the CAOE prepare a traffic control plan is as follows: 
(i)  For non-students: 
(A)  Traffic control plan for lane and/or sidewalk closure(s) only: $150.00 
(B)  Traffic control plan for street closure(s) only: $250.00 
(C)  Traffic control plan for street closure(s) plus lane and/or sidewalk closure(s) (where the lane and/or sidewalk is not part of or abutting the street being closed): $300.00 
(ii)  For students: Any type of traffic control plan: $25.00 
b.  The CAOE's preparation of a traffic control plan will include submitting the plan to the Atlanta Police Department for review and to the office of transportation for approval, and editing the plan as needed to meet the requirements of the two reviewing departments, all at no additional charge to the producer. 
c.  The producer is not required to have the CAOE prepare the traffic control plan, and there will be no penalty against or differential treatment of any producer who has the plan created by a person or entity other than the CAOE. 
(6)  Street closures permits—Minimum notice. A full street closure will not be permitted unless the application or change request is submitted at least five business days prior to the closure. Rush fees may not be utilized for full street closure requests. 
(Ord. No. 2013-33(13-O-0641), § 3, 7-3-13) 
Secs. 46-111—46-199. - Reserved. 
Article V. - Downtown Arts and Entertainment District Ordinance 

Sec. 46-200. - Purpose and intent. 
The intent of the city in adopting this Downtown Arts and Entertainment District Ordinance is to: 
(1)  Define the boundaries of the downtown arts and entertainment district; 
(2)  Expand the economic base of the city, by providing additional employment opportunities and additional revenues to the city and the region by making the area of the district more attractive in ways that can increase tourism and conventions and assist in the development of specific plans that will allow for large scale sporting events, major conventions, and activities at major entertainment venues to consider the city when choosing their sites; 
(3)  Provide the basis for the continued and expanded support for initiatives that will cause the district to be considered as a destination for large scale sporting events, major conventions, and activities at major entertainment venues, in conformance with the goals and objectives of other city policies; 
(4)  Enhance the area encompassed by the district by through programs that will attract workers, residents and visitors to active public spaces and gathering places and create a pedestrian friendly environment; 
(5)  Develop programs to further enhance the pedestrian environment through the establishment of unique streetscape design guidelines providing additional signage opportunities. 
( Ord. No. 2017-36(16-O-1608), § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-17 ) 
Sec. 46-201. - Creation of the district. 
The Atlanta Arts and Entertainment District is established as an area of the city where it has been found that programs which will contribute to economic development through the development of a more active streetscape should be undertaken. The boundaries of the Atlanta Arts and Entertainment District shall be the area as shown upon the Atlanta Arts and Entertainment District map attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. 
( Ord. No. 2017-36(16-O-1608), § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-17 ) 
Sec. 46-202. - Relationship to other parts of the code 
The Atlanta Arts and Entertainment District created by this ordinance shall not define the boundaries of the Atlanta Arts and Entertainment Signage District created in the Zoning Code. 
( Ord. No. 2017-36(16-O-1608), § 1(Exh. A), 6-28-17 ) 
Chapter 50 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Functions and duties of office of emergency management, § 2-235. 
Land development code reference— Construction of family fallout shelters, § 8-2077. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1—50-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Office of emergency management, app. IV, § 60. 
State Law reference— Emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 

Sec. 50-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters or imminent threat thereof of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contaminations requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of such functions. 
(Code 1977, § 11-4002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-27. - Policy and purpose. 
Because of the possibility of the occurrence of emergencies or disasters resulting from manmade or natural causes or enemy attack and in order to ensure that preparations of the city will be adequate to deal with such emergencies or disasters and generally to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health and safety; to preserve the lives and property of the people of the city; and to carry out the functions, duties and responsibilities contained in the Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950 (PL 81-920) and the Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981 (O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.), it is found and declared to be necessary to: 
(1)  Create an office of emergency management. 
(2)  Authorize this office to take such steps as are necessary and appropriate to carry out this article so that all emergency management functions for the city are coordinated to the maximum practical extent with the comparable functions of the state and its political subdivisions, of the federal government including its various departments and agencies, of other states and localities and of private agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of the available manpower, resources and facilities in dealing with any emergency or disaster that may occur. 
(Code 1977, § 11-4001) 
Sec. 50-28. - Agency designated. 
The Atlanta-Fulton County emergency management agency is designated as the office of emergency management to carry out all emergency management functions for the city in accordance with the Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950 and the Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981 (O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1977, § 11-4003) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 50-29. - Appointment of director of emergency management. 
(a)  The office of emergency management shall be under the direction and control of a director of emergency management who shall be appointed by the governor upon nomination by the mayor and the chair of the Fulton County board of commissioners, in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(b)  The director of emergency management is also designated the disaster coordinator for the city with Fulton County. 
(Code 1977, § 11-4004) 
Sec. 50-30. - Policy development and implementation. 
(a)  The office of emergency management and the director of emergency management shall operate under policies established by the fire chief and police chief. The director of emergency management shall be directly responsible to the fire chief and police chief and shall serve as the director of emergency planning for the city, to include planning required for the management of resources and economic stabilization in an enemy attack; planning required for mitigation, response and recovery operations for natural disasters; and coordination of emergency planning with state and federal planning agencies. 
(b)  The director of emergency management shall serve as the senior liaison officer between the city, the state emergency management agency and state and federal military forces. 
(Code 1977, § 11-4005) 
Sec. 50-31. - Powers, duties of director. 
The director of emergency management is authorized and directed to: 
(1)  Represent the city in all matters pertaining to emergency management; 
(2)  Utilize all bureau and department heads and all municipal officers of the city in the preparation and implementation of emergency management plans and coordinate them into an effective plan of operation; 
(3)  Assist city officials in planning the organization of city departments for emergency operations; 
(4)  Develop and maintain emergency management plans, in conjunction with city departments, for emergency functions in consonance with state and federal emergency plans and implement these plans in any such emergency; 
(5)  Establish an emergency management plan for the continuity of city government in an enemy attack or other emergency; 
(6)  Maintain and, where feasible, improve public fallout shelters and the attack warning system; maintain a community shelter plan and a crisis relocation plan in readiness for publication on short notice; train fallout shelter managers and radiological monitoring personnel; take such other readiness steps toward preparedness against enemy attack as are prudent and practical; and institute equivalent readiness measures and planning against manmade and natural disasters; 
(7)  Maintain an adequate emergency communications system encompassing all city departments and other agencies and an emergency operations center; and 
(8)  Establish and maintain an organization of sufficient staff and operating agencies to implement approved emergency plans, set forth in sections 50-32 and 50-33. 
(Code 1977, § 11-4006) 
Sec. 50-32. - Organization and services. 
The emergency management organization shall consist of governmental and voluntary emergency services. The chief officer of a governmental service unit shall be the head of the department or bureau providing the service as an emergency management function. Directors of volunteer services shall be chosen by the director of emergency management. Services shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Governmental services: 

 
(2)  Volunteer and industry-provided services: 
a.  Communications 
b.  Emergency public information 
c.  Transportation 
(3)  Emergency management services: 
a.  Attack warning (city department of police implements) 
b.  Logistics (resources management) 
c.  Shelter planning 
d.  Training and education 
e.  Administration. 
(Code 1977, § 11-4008; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157), § 8, 4-26-17) 
Sec. 50-33. - Additional duties of director. 
The director of emergency management shall, with respect to emergency management services: 
(1)  Coordinate the operations and actions of all services in time of emergency and control all these operations to the extent authorized by applicable law; 
(2)  Maintain a permanent staff sufficient to carry out the duties and responsibilities of the department and ensure that the staff is professionally trained and fully qualified; 
(3)  Ensure that an adequate emergency operations center (EOC) is available and properly equipped as needed for the conduct of emergency operations; 
(4)  Through coordination with the state emergency management agency and federal emergency management agency, ensure that city plans and activities are consistent with state and federal guidelines; 
(5)  Prepare and periodically update the basic emergency operations plan, to include an annex (plan) for each service which shall be prepared and authenticated by the service chief; and 
(6)  Plan and implement preparedness measures in readiness for implementation. 
(Code 1977, § 11-4009) 
Sec. 50-34. - Budget, financial records. 
(a)  The director of emergency management shall be the chief executive officer and responsible administrator of the office of emergency management. 
(b)  The director of emergency management shall prepare all budgets to meet operating and administrative expenses and shall operate the office of emergency management in accordance with the approved budget appropriations of the city and Fulton County to include anticipated federal matching funds, as projected by state emergency management division, department of public defense, with staff pay based upon an approved emergency management staffing pattern and pay scales of the state merit system. 
(c)  Financial records, personnel and administration records and such other records as are desired shall be subject to audit at any time by designated city and/or county officials. An annual audit of the financial records shall be conducted by the city and/or county. 
(Code 1977, § 11-4010) 
Chapter 54 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Department of housing and community development, app. IV, §§ 1(f), 23 et seq. 
Cross reference— Urban enterprise zones, § 146-51 et seq. 
Land development code references— Planning, § 6-3001 et seq.; historical preservation programs, § 6-4041 et seq. 
Related laws reference— Community development, ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; urban redevelopment, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Affordable housing. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Affordable housing means housing units accessible to individuals and families at or below 50 percent of area median income. 
Statistics regarding area median income are published annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the City of Atlanta shall utilize these statistics. 
(2)  Mixed income housing. For the purposes of public subsidies, mixed income housing is housing that contains at least 33 percent affordable housing units. 
(3)  Extremely low income family. An extremely low income family is a family making less than 30 percent of area median income. 
(b)  The city formally adopts the following policies regarding the availability of affordable housing as goals: 
(1)  All public subsidies for affordable housing should targeted so that two-thirds of the subsidies reach extremely low income families. 
(2)  The city should utilize the definition of affordability as contained in section 54-1(a) as the standard definition for all housing-related public programs in which the city participates. 
(3)  All tax increment financings and tax allocation districts that contain a residential component should include 33 percent of affordable housing units. 
(4)  Utilization of housing enterprise zone tax abatement subsidies should include an obligation for the development of at least 33 percent of affordable housing units. 
(c)  Mandatory affordable housing for publicly subsidized multi-family residential property. Any multi-family residential property that receives a grant, incentive, or subsidy through a sale lease-back or other written agreement involving a development authority doing business in the City of Atlanta shall include affordable housing, as approved by the development authority from one of the two tiers set forth in the definition of affordable housing below, during the term of the grant, incentive or subsidy. The affordable housing units shall be similar in construction and appearance (e.g., square footage, type and brand of appliances, materials used for countertops, flooring, etc.) to the market rate units and shall not be in isolated areas in the development, but shall be interspersed among market rate units. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for such property until the applicant provides an executed affordable housing land use restriction agreement in substantially the form promulgated by the office of housing for recordation. 
As used herein, " Affordable housing" means: 
(1)  At least 15 percent of the total residential units shall be leased to households (excluding student households) having an income, as certified by the prospective tenant(s), at the time of execution of the applicable lease agreement that does not exceed 80 percent of the area median income ("AMI") for the family size having the same number of persons as the subject household for the Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta, Georgia Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD") Metro Fair Market Rent Area (as published by HUD as of the date of the tenant's application). The monthly rent amount (including utilities and mandatory fees) for each affordable housing unit shall be no more than 30 percent of the household's monthly gross income as published periodically by HUD; or 
(2)  At least ten percent of the total residential units shall be leased to households (excluding student households) having an income, as certified by the prospective tenant(s), at the time of execution of the applicable lease agreement that does not exceed 60 percent of the AMI for the family size having the same number of persons as the subject household for the Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta, Georgia HUD Metro Fair Market Rent Area (as published by HUD as of the date of the tenant's application). The monthly rent amount (including utilities and mandatory fees) for each affordable housing unit shall be no more than 30 percent of the household's monthly gross income as published periodically by HUD. 
(Ord. No. 2001-93, § 1, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2016-12(16-O-1163), § 1, 5-11-16 ) 
Sec. 54-2. - Affordable housing impact statements. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Affordable housing impact statement means a statement, attached to proposed housing stock impact legislation, that estimates and describes the impact the legislation would have, if enacted, on the affordable housing stock of the City of Atlanta. 
(2)  Housing stock impact legislation means any and all legislation-including ordinances and resolutions constituting housing policy that come before any committee of the Atlanta City Council that, if enacted, are estimated to have an impact on the affordable housing stock of the City of Atlanta: Land Use Elements to the City's Comprehensive Development Plan; acceptance of public and private grants including local, federal and state funding for the construction and/or rehabilitation of affordable housing units; abandoned and blighted property legislation; changes to building permit fees; millage rate increases for blighted properties; and changes to demolition policies. 
(b)  Once any resolution or ordinance that meets the definition of housing stock impact legislation receives a first reading in the Atlanta City Council or one of its committees, the Office of Housing and Community Development shall, within ten business days, produce an affordable housing impact statement. 
(c)  All affordable housing impact statements, once they are completed by the office of housing and community development, shall be attached to the respective legislative items to which they pertain, prior to final action being taken on legislation, such that when any stakeholder requests the legislative item from the municipal clerk, or accesses the final action legislative item electronically via the internet, the affordable housing impact statement shall be attached. 
(d)  Affordable housing impact statements shall include a quantitative, or numeric section, that shall provide numeric estimates of impacts, quantifying numbers of units impacted at certain levels of affordability over the 30-year period following the enactment of the legislation; and a narrative section to provide an explanation of the analyses that led to the estimates. Where the estimates are derived from existing grant applications or the basis of those estimates are otherwise straightforward, the narrative section shall state as such. Where the proposals being considered require the office of housing and community development to draw upon their experience and expertise to come up with a projected impact, the narrative section shall specify what assumptions were used in creating the estimates. If there is insufficient information such as to preclude any meaningful estimate from being made, the narrative section shall state as such. 
(e)  The quantitative, or numeric section, shall take the following form, where the office of housing and community development shall fill in the blanks with appropriate estimates: 
This legislation, if enacted, is estimated to have a projected impact upon the affordable housing stock of the City of Atlanta over the 30 year period following the enactment of the legislation by: 
Adding _____, preserving _____, or decreasing _____ units affordable at 30 percent or below of the Area Median Income (AMI); and 
Adding _____, preserving _____, or decreasing _____ units affordable between 30.01 and 50 percent of AMI; and 
Adding _____, preserving _____, or decreasing _____ units affordable between 50.01 and 80 percent of AMI; and 
Adding _____, preserving _____, or decreasing _____ units affordable above 80 percent of AMI. 
(f)  The city's office of the municipal clerk shall maintain a stand-alone binder or set of binders containing all affordable housing impact statements and annual reports prepared pursuant to this section. 
(g)  The office of housing and community development shall prepare an annual report to the community development/human services committee. The report shall provide the total cumulative estimated quantitative impact on the city's affordable housing stock of all public policy decisions of the City of Atlanta for the previous year for which affordable housing impact statements have been created, that will include: the total numbers of units that were added, subtracted, or preserved at each income bracket as specified in the affordable housing impact statements, across all affordable housing impact statements. The office of housing and community development shall identify any duplicative impacts for which the same impact was covered by more than one item of legislation. This report shall also identify any housing policies enacted over the previous year that will have an enabling effect on the creation of affordable housing but for which an affordable housing impact statement was not created. This report shall also provide additional findings regarding any housing units funded in whole or in part by public grant dollars, for which affordable housing impact statements have been prepared, within the 30 year period preceding the annual report: specifically, the report shall specify whether the units still exist, whether they are occupied, and whether the cost for those units is consistent with the affordability price points identified in the original grant application. If the required affordability period for specific units is less than 30 years, the annual report shall state as such. 
(h)  The office of housing shall provide a yearly report to the community development/human resources committee on any housing units funded in whole or in part by public grant dollars, for which affordable housing impact statements have been prepared, within the 30 year period preceding the annual report. The report shall specify whether the units still exist, whether they are occupied, and whether the cost for those units is consistent with the affordability price points identified in the original grant application. If the required affordability period for specific units is less than 30 years, the annual report shall state as such. 
( Ord. No. 2015-57(14-O-1614), § 1, 11-25-15, eff. 7-1-16 ; Ord. No. 2018-02(18-O-1026), §§ 1—7, 2-14-18 ) 
Sec. 54-3. - Housing commission. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the housing commission shall be: 
(1)  To review the housing policies of the city with an emphasis on affordable housing; and 
(2)  To review the city's permitting procedures related to the construction and rehabilitation of housing; and 
(3)  To explore creative methods of financing affordable housing; and 
(4)  To review housing policies, practices and procedures of other jurisdictions. 
(b)  Composition. The housing commission shall be comprised of the following 11 members: 
• One member from the Urban Residential Finance Authority (URFA) to be appointed by the mayor. 
• One member from the Atlanta Housing Authority to be appointed by mayor. 
• One member from the office of housing and community development to be appointed by the mayor. 
• One member shall be a resident in a City of Atlanta Housing program to be appointed by council members from districts 1,2,3,4, and post 1. 
• One member who is actively engaged as an advocate for low-income persons in connection with affordable housing to be appointed by council members from districts 5,6,7,8 and post 2. 
• One member from the Atlanta Continuum of Care to be appointed by council members from districts 9,10,11,12, and post 3. 
• One member from the for-profit development community to be appointed by the council president. 
• One member from the non-profit development community to be appointed by the council president. 
• One member from the mortgage lending community to be appointed by the council president. 
• One member from the Atlanta Beltline, Inc. 
• One member from the non-profit Georgia ACT. 
(c)  Meeting, reports, and recommendations. The housing commission shall meet at least once per quarter and shall produce a report on its work and shall make recommendations to the mayor and city council at least once annually. 
(d)  Terms of office. The terms of office shall be for a two-year period with the exception of the Mayoral and presidential appointees who will serve three-year period. 
(e)  Compensation. Each member of the commission, except those who are City of Atlanta employees, shall be paid $50.00 as compensation for each meeting of the commission the member attends, but in no event shall the total amount to be paid to any member exceed the sum of $250.00 in any one calendar year. 
( Ord. No. 2017-57(17-O-1569), § 1, 10-2-17 ) 
Sec. 54-4. - Beltline Affordable Housing Trust Fund Commission. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the Beltline Affordable Housing Trust Fund Commission ("commission") shall be to make recommendations to the Atlanta City Council for the expenditure of funds collected in the Beltline Affordable Workforce In Lieu Fee Housing Trust Fund ("Beltline Trust Fund"). 
(b)  Composition. The Beltline Affordable Housing Trust Fund Commission shall be comprised of the following nine members: 
• One member from the Atlanta Housing Authority to be appointed by the mayor. 
• One member shall be the director of the office of housing and community development or her designee to be appointed by the mayor. 
• One member from the Atlanta Development Authority d/b/a Invest Atlanta to be appointed by the mayor. 
• One member from the Atlanta Beltline Inc. to be appointed by the mayor. 
• One member shall be a resident of the Beltline Overlay District to be appointed by council members from districts 1,2,3,4, and post 1. 
• One member shall be a resident of the Beltline Overlay District who participates in a City of Atlanta Housing program to be appointed by Council Members from Districts 5,6,7,8 and post 2. 
• One member who is actively engaged as an advocate for low-income persons in connection with affordable housing to be appointed by council members from districts 9,10,11,12, and post 3. 
• One member from the for-profit development community to be appointed by the council president. 
• One member from the non-profit development community to be appointed by the council president. 
Appointees shall be submitted to the community development/ human services committee and confirmed by the Atlanta City Council. 
(c)  Staffing. The commission shall receive primary staff support and assistance from the city's office of housing and community development. Other city departments and offices shall provide support and assistance as specifically requested by the commission. 
(d)  Meeting, reports, and recommendations. The chair of the community development/ human services committee shall convene the first meeting of the commission. The members shall elect their own chairperson and other officers they deem appropriate. 
The commission shall meet at least twice per year. The office of housing and community development will provide the commission with an accounting of the funds in the Beltline Trust Fund, which Beltline Subarea the funds were collected from, and the number of units that may be produced and/or preserved from those funds once per year. The commission shall make recommendations for distribution of the funds towards: preservation, production, rehabilitation and/or restoration of affordable units, and which subarea the funds should be spent at least once annually. The office of housing and community development shall present to city council the recommendations of the commission and the city council shall either reject, modify, or approve the commission's recommendations. 
(e)  Terms of office. The terms of office shall be for a two-year period with the exception of the mayoral and presidential appointees who will serve three-year period. 
(f)  Compensation. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
( Ord. No. 2017-75(16-O-1593), § 3, 11-29-17 ) 
Sec. 54-5. - Westside Affordable Housing Trust Fund Commission. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the Westside Affordable Housing Trust Fund Commission ("commission") shall be to make recommendations to the Atlanta City Council for the expenditure of funds collected in the Westside Affordable Workforce In Lieu Fee Housing Trust Fund ("Westside Trust Fund"). 
(b)  Composition. The Westside Affordable Housing Trust Fund Commission shall be comprised of the following nine members: 
• One member from the Atlanta Housing Authority to be appointed by the mayor. 
• One member shall be the director of the office of housing and community development or his/her designee to be appointed by the mayor. 
• One member from the Atlanta Development Authority d/b/a Invest Atlanta to be appointed by the mayor. 
• One member shall be the Executive Director of the Westside Future Fund or his/her designee to be appointed by the Mayor. 
• One member shall be a resident of the Westside Overlay District to be appointed by council members from districts 1,2,3,4, and post 1. 
• One member shall be a resident of the Westside Overlay District who participates in a City of Atlanta Housing program to be appointed by council members from districts 5,6,7,8 and post 2. 
• One member who is actively engaged as an advocate for low-income persons in connection with affordable housing to be appointed by council members from districts 9,10,11,12, and post 3. 
• One member from the for-profit development community to be appointed by the council president. 
• One member from the non-profit development community to be appointed by the council president. 
Appointees shall be submitted to the community development/ human services committee and confirmed by the Atlanta City Council. 
(c)  Staffing. The commission shall receive primary staff support and assistance from the city's office of housing and community development. Other city departments and offices shall provide support and assistance as specifically requested by the commission. 
(d)  Meeting, reports, and recommendations. The chair of the community development/ human services committee shall convene the first meeting of the commission. The members shall elect their own chairperson and other officers they deem appropriate. 
The commission shall meet at least twice per year. The office of housing and community development will provide the commission with an accounting of the funds in the Westside Trust Fund, which Westside neighborhood the funds were collected from, and the number of units that may be produced and/or preserved from those funds once per year. The commission shall make recommendations for distribution of the funds towards: preservation, production, rehabilitation and/or restoration of affordable units, and which neighborhood the funds should be spent in at least once annually. The office of housing and community development shall present to city council the recommendations of the commission and the city council shall either reject, modify, or approve the commission's recommendations. 
(e)  Terms of office. The terms of office shall be for a two-year period with the exception of the mayoral and presidential appointees who will serve three-year period. 
(f)  Compensation. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
( Ord. No. 2017-74(17-O-1580), § 3, 11-29-17 ) 
Sec. 54-6. - Annual citywide housing inventory and affordability report. 
(a)  Once per year, the city's office of housing shall conduct an Annual Citywide Housing Inventory and Affordability Report. 
(b)  The report shall provide as close of an estimate as possible, based on real data, of the number of housing units in the City of Atlanta, including the total number of single-family homes, the total number of condominiums, and the number of apartment units. 
(c)  The report will also provide an estimate of how many of these units are affordable to Atlanta residents at 0 to 30 percent of the area median income; how many are affordable at 30 to 50 percent of the area median income; how many are affordable at 50 to 80 percent of the area median income; and how many are market rate. 
(d)  To arrive at the estimate of affordable housing units as required by subsection (c) in this section, the office of housing shall consider: 
(1)  How many housing choice vouchers or other vouchers, as issued by the Atlanta Housing Authority, are being used in the City of Atlanta; and 
(2)  How many affordable units are receiving a back-end rental subsidy through the City of Atlanta, the Atlanta Development Authority, or the Atlanta Housing Authority; and 
(3)  How many naturally occurring, or non-subsidized, affordable apartment homes, exist; and 
(4)  How many affordable single-family homes or condominiums exist, based on an approximation of monthly housing payments. The office of housing shall use their expertise to establish appropriate assumptions to reach this estimate, in conjunction with market data and other appropriate information. 
(e)  The office of housing shall present the Annual Citywide Housing Inventory and Affordability Report to the Community Development/Human Services Committee of the Atlanta City Council, and to the housing commission established per section 54-3 of Chapter 54 (Community Development), once per year. 
( Ord. No. 2017-86(17-O-1778), § 1, 12-13-17 ) 
Secs. 54-7—54-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FHA 221 HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Land development code references— Building regulations, § 8-2001 et seq.; housing code, § 8-2181 et seq. 

Sec. 54-26. - Technical committee. 
(a)  Constituted, purposes, meetings. There shall be constituted a technical committee which shall meet regularly at least twice each month on dates selected by members thereof and at such other times as may be necessary, at the call of the chair or vice-chair, when requested by at least two members of the committee, to consider applications for new construction in urban renewal project areas under this article, to advise applicants for building permits in urban renewal areas under this article where final plans and the effect these plans may have upon the applicant's contemplated construction or improvements, and other matters relating to new construction for displaced families where the urban renewal program under this article is concerned. Minutes of the meetings of this committee shall be kept. 
(b)  Membership. This committee shall consist of the director, bureau of buildings as chair, the planning engineer as vice-chair and the executive secretary of the housing authority, the city's agent for development of the urban renewal project areas. 
(c)  Attendance at meetings. The project planners for the urban renewal project areas affected shall be invited to attend these meetings and participate in discussions. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5012) 
Cross reference— Boards, councils, commissions and authorities, § 2-1851 et seq. 
Sec. 54-27. - Determination of phasing for construction of allocations devoted to project areas. 
The department of housing and community development, in coordination with the housing authority, will determine the phasing considered desirable for construction of FHA 221 housing allocations and what portions thereof, if any, should be devoted to urban renewal project areas and shall make recommendations accordingly to local FHA officials. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5003) 
Sec. 54-28. - Determination of locations of urban renewal projects. 
The department of housing and community development will study proposed locations for urban renewal projects and determine those considered most suitable from the city's standpoint for FHA 221 housing projects and shall coordinate thereon with local FHA officials. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5004) 
Sec. 54-29. - Rezoning recommendations. 
The zoning review board will make timely recommendations to the development committee for rezoning such areas as it considers appropriate in order to facilitate the FHA 221 housing program. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5005) 
Sec. 54-30. - Processing applications embracing subdivisions, requests for building permits. 
All FHA 221 project applications for five or more units on one tract or parcel of land will be considered a subdivision and will be processed through the department of housing and community development. Requests for building permits will be processed in the department of housing and community development by especially designated individuals who are thoroughly cognizant of requirements in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5006) 
Sec. 54-31. - Commitments by builders. 
At the time of the initial request for site approval for FHA 221 housing projects, builders and developers will be advised by the department of housing and community development of the requirements of this section and section 54-32. As a condition for approval of these projects, the department of housing will require written commitments from the builders and developers for: 
(1)  Preservation of adequate existing trees and provision for grass and other plant material on each lot to enhance the environmental living conditions of the area; 
(2)  Staggering of the setback within five feet variation and turning of plans to break monotony; 
(3)  Site plan to be developed by a qualified professional person in accordance with FHA MPR revision no. 56 lot improvement requirements; 
(4)  Designation in a preliminary plan, within the project boundaries for purchase by the city at cost, plus overhead, if so desired by the interested department, of appropriate open spaces for schools, parks, green areas or space for other environmental facilities deemed desirable for the neighborhood; and 
(5)  Minimum lot size considered appropriate, regardless of zoning requirements, where septic tanks are to be used. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5007) 
Sec. 54-32. - Minimum structural requirements. 
(a)  Duties of department. The department of housing and community development will ensure that the list of city minimum structural requirements for FHA 221 housing projects, as shown on the description of materials filed in the department of housing and community development, is made known to prospective builders at the time of the initial application for a building permit and will require, as a condition for issuance of a permit, inclusion of provisions for compliance with these minimum requirements in the builder's written plans and specifications and will exercise special care of enforcement of these requirements. 
(b)  Application of technical codes. Except as otherwise specified in this article, all houses built in the city under FHA mortgage insurance, section 221, National Housing Act, shall conform in all respects to the building, plumbing, electrical, heating and other codes and ordinances applicable to the construction of the houses. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5008) 
Land development code references— Building regulations, § 8-2001 et seq.; housing code minimum standards, § app. F, § 20. 
Sec. 54-33. - Varying specifications in description of materials. 
The specifications set forth in the description of materials for FHA 221 housing, a copy of which is on file in the department of housing and community development, may be varied where, in the opinion of the director, bureau of buildings, the materials substituted for those required by the description of materials are of comparable strength, durability and could be used with equal usefulness when compared with those specified in this section. The director, bureau of buildings may approve any of the provisions stipulated in the minimum property standards of title 2, section 1, as published by the FHA, which, in the opinion of the director, bureau of buildings, are consistent with recognized engineering procedures and methods of construction. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5009) 
Sec. 54-34. - Designation of changes in description of materials. 
In the description of materials for FHA 221 housing filed in the department of housing and community development, the following changes under the specific numbered items shall be made: 
(5)  Exterior walls. Number of coats: prime plus two. 
(8)  Finish flooring. First floor: grade: no. 2 common oak or better, two feet and longer lengths. 
(10)  Flooring framing. Where the grade is such that, in the opinion of the director, bureau of buildings, it is feasible to substitute a concrete slab on the ground for the floor joists, as specified in item (6) of the description of materials, a concrete slab on the ground may be used, provided it is not less than four inches thick and complies in all respects to the building code, is adequately waterproofed and is to receive a suitable asphalt tile or approved equal floor covering. 
(14)  Lath and plaster. Material: sheetrock thickness, three-eighths-inch recessed edge where studding or ceiling joists are 16 inches o.c., otherwise one-half inch. 
(15)  Decorating. Rubber base is acceptable, except in kitchen and bath. 
(16)  Interior doors and trim. Doors of suitable type required on closets (see trim 27); hollow core main entrance doors are acceptable, where adequately protected from weather. 
(18)  Entrances and exterior detail. Exterior millwork: C grade, if painted, is acceptable. 
(19)  Cabinets and interior detail. Base units: Add the phrase "or approved metal cabinets." 
(20)  Stairs. Eliminate requirement for disappearing stairs to attic, where adequate storage space is provided elsewhere. 
(21)  Special floors and wainscot. Wainscot: bath: change to read as follows: 
Wainscot four feet high and around tub and shower six feet high may be ceramic tile, aluminum tile, plastic tile or other approved equal material. Other portions of wall and ceiling shall be drywall or finished plaster. Floor shall be ceramic tile. 
(27)  Miscellaneous. 
a.  House size, bedroom size, storage area. An alternate to requirements for minimum house size, bedroom size and storage area as contained in the description of materials, at the option of the builder, is as follows: 
The total floor area shall be not less than 850 square feet; 810 square feet shall be livable area and 40 square feet, 100 square feet and 80 square feet respectively; carport required. 
b.  Walks and driveways. Driveway: four inches crushed stone and one inch asphalt mix is acceptable, if grade permits. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5010) 
Sec. 54-35. - Restriction on issuance of building permits. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Capital improvements consists of all other work, with the exception of incidental repairs. 
Incidental repairs includes labor, supplies and other items, which do not add to the value or appreciably prolong the life of the property, the expenditures being deductible under the United States and state revenue laws. For the purposes of this section, reroofing shall be considered incidental repairs. 
New construction consists of the erection of any structure; structure being defined in the city's building code. 
(b)  Generally. The director, bureau of buildings, shall not approve any application for a building permit or issue a permit for any proposed work in any urban renewal project area under this article, which has been duly designated by the city council, prior to the approval and adoption of final plans for that project area, when this work would consist of new construction or capital improvements, except as directed in this section. Upon receipt of an application, the director, bureau of buildings shall notify in writing the owner of the property, by certified mail, to appear before the technical committee established in this article at a given time and place. At the hearing the technical committee shall consider the building application to determine whether or not the new construction or capital improvements are consistent with redevelopment plans. If the construction or improvements are deemed to be consistent with the redevelopment plans, the committee shall record this finding and the director, bureau of buildings, shall issue a building permit if otherwise lawful. If this contemplated construction or improvement is deemed by the committee to be inconsistent with the redevelopment plans, the committee shall record this finding and advise the owner of the nature of these plans and the effect these redevelopment plans may have upon the owner's contemplated improvements. Upon written notice of the owner to the director, bureau of buildings, following the hearing that the owner still desires a permit for the new construction or capital improvements as set out in the application for a building permit theretofore filed, notwithstanding the findings and advice of the technical committee, the director, bureau of buildings, shall thereafter issue a building permit if otherwise lawful. 
(c)  Authority of housing authority. After approval and adoption of final plans by the city council of any urban renewal project area, the director, bureau of buildings shall not issue permits for new construction in this area until the requests have been referred to the housing authority for determination as to conformance with the redevelopment plans and compliance with any special conditions which may apply to the particular situation involved and until the director, bureau of buildings has received the approval of the housing authority. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5011) 
Secs. 54-36—54-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - URBAN HOMESTEADING PROGRAM[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Land development code references— Building regulations, § 8-2001 et seq.; housing code, § 8-2181 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-56. - Findings; initiation of program. 
(a)  It is found that there are many residential properties within the corporate limits of the city that have become vacant through various processes. Many of these structures or sites have been abandoned by the tenants or owners who, for various reasons, have no longer found them acceptable for either habitation, ownership or economic purposes. It is found and declared that some of these properties have been and continue to be elements contributing to the deterioration of neighborhoods and the depreciation of property values in the neighborhood in which they are located. This situation leads to what constitutes a serious and growing menace injurious to the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the city residents. It is further found and declared that the existence of these vacant dwellings contributes substantially and increasingly to the spread of disease and crime, constitutes economic and social liability, substantially impairs or arrests the sound growth of urban areas and exacerbates a growing urban slum condition. It is found that this form of blight is present in the inner city to a much greater degree than it is in the outer city, although the condition is found to exist throughout the city. Many of the residential properties that have become vacant are rehabitable. They are not totally without economic use and, if rehabilitated, could house citizens who need housing as a result of a variety of reasons, among which are displacement by eminent domain proceedings and a lack of housing starts due to general economic conditions. 
(b)  It is further found that many other urban centers throughout the United States have been confronted with problems similar to this and have developed systems of urban homesteading. These programs take various forms depending upon the applicable laws of the several states and local jurisdictions within which these programs are being carried out. Regardless of the laws governing the various programs of urban homesteading, the economic impact of rehabilitating homes alone is sufficient to justify a program of urban homesteading, notwithstanding the additional benefits procured through this program. Home ownership has been found to be beneficial to the maintenance of property. Expectation of home ownership has been found to be beneficial to the fruition of housing rehabilitation, and homes in private ownership that are rehabilitated increase the tax base of a local government. A decrease in the providing of certain public services, such as police and fire protection, is an additional and indirect benefit to be derived from the rehabilitation of housing. 
(c)  It is in consequence of these legislative findings stated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section that the city enters into this urban homesteading program, which is declared to be a governmental function undertaken in the public interest. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5021) 
Sec. 54-57. - Funding. 
No direct expenditures from the city's general fund revenues shall be incurred by the city in connection with the urban homesteading program. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5029) 
Sec. 54-58. - Urban homesteading application review board. 
(a)  The urban homesteading application review board is established and created to act in an advisory capacity to the city on the urban homesteading program and to approve applicants as urban homesteaders. 
(b)  The board shall be composed of five members. All members shall be residents of the city. The mayor shall appoint the five members of the board, who shall be selected from the following membership classifications and who shall be confirmed by the city council: 
(1)  One appointee shall be a member of the residential construction industry; 
(2)  One appointee shall be a member of the legal profession who specializes in or who is well acquainted with those areas of the law dealing with residential real estate; 
(3)  One appointee shall be a representative of that sector of the financial community which specializes in residential lending activities; and 
(4)  Two appointees shall be citizens of the city not otherwise eligible for appointment. 
(c)  All appointments shall be for a term of two years. Members of the board may be appointed for consecutive terms. 
(d)  The mayor shall recommend removal and replacement of a member of the board for nonperformance of duty. Any vacancy in the membership of the board shall be filled in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
(e)  The board shall meet upon the call of the commissioner of housing and community development, at least quarterly, to review applications for urban homesteading. Following its deliberations the board shall certify to the commissioner of housing and community development those applicants who qualify under the criteria set forth in this division as urban homesteaders. For each applicant, the board shall adopt findings of fact upon which it shall base its determination as to whether the applicant qualifies as an urban homesteader. These findings of fact shall constitute a part of the record of the board's deliberations. 
(f)  Each member of the board shall be paid $25.00 for each meeting of the board the member attends, but the total amount so paid any member shall not exceed the sum of $600.00 in any one calendar year. 
(g)  The mayor shall appoint a presiding officer from among the membership of the board, and the board shall elect such additional officers as it deems necessary to carry out its functions. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5024(a)) 
Cross reference— Boards, councils, commissions and authorities, § 2-1851 et seq. 
Sec. 54-59. - Inventory list. 
(a)  The city, acting through the department of housing and community development and working in conjunction with various other departments and bureaus of the government, is authorized to maintain an urban homesteading inventory of residential properties which may be received by the city through any means; provided, however, the residential properties to be maintained on this inventory shall be subject to inspection by the bureau of buildings and found to be redeemable for residential purposes. 
(b)  Any residential property meeting the criteria set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be eligible to be placed upon the urban homesteading inventory and disposed of as provided in this division. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5022) 
Sec. 54-60. - Determination of eligibility of property. 
(a)  Prior to the determination of eligibility of a residential property to be placed upon the urban homesteading inventory, the department of housing and community development shall cause a title examination to be made upon each property by an attorney competent in the area of real estate abstract work, for the purpose of ascertaining what liens and charges constituting encumbrances are in fact on the property. A copy of the title report shall become a part of the file regarding this property. If there are monetary encumbrances or title defects appearing against any property which cannot be economically disposed of or passed through to a prospective urban homesteader, the commissioner of housing and community development shall have the right to reject the property from becoming part of the urban homesteading inventory. If, in the opinion of the commissioner of housing and community development, the monetary and other encumbrances are not sufficient to deter a prospective urban homesteader from entering into an agreement to pay all encumbrances on the property, the property shall become part of the city urban homesteading inventory and may be diverted from that purpose only by action of the mayor. 
(b)  An additional criterion as to whether or not a property can be placed upon the urban homesteading inventory shall be an opinion of counsel doing the title search that the city either can or cannot pass free and unencumbered fee simple title to the property at a point in time no greater than three years from the date of the title search. If, in the opinion of counsel, fee simple unencumbered title cannot be so passed to an urban homesteader, the commissioner of housing and community development shall reject the property from becoming a part of the urban homesteading inventory. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5023) 
Sec. 54-61. - Qualifications of applicants; placement of applicants. 
(a)  The commissioner of housing and community development may process applicants for the urban homesteading program. The commissioner of housing and community development shall present to the urban homesteading application review board for approval all those applicants who meet or appear to meet the criteria for urban homesteading as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Every successful applicant for urban homesteading must: 
(1)  Be 18 years of age or older and demonstrate a degree of personal stability necessary for taking on the responsibility of urban homesteading; 
(2)  Possess the technical resources or financial resources or provide documentation to show that the applicant is able to obtain the financial resources or any combination of these resources necessary for completing the rehabilitation required to bring the condition of the urban homesteading structure up to city housing code requirements within the three-year period prescribed by the program; 
(3)  Be a natural person; 
(4)  Not have previously participated in an urban homesteading program in the city; and 
(5)  Be willing to commit in writing to reside in the structure as the applicant's principal place of residence for a minimum of three years, that being the homesteading period for the urban homesteading program. 
(c)  When an applicant has been approved as a qualified urban homesteader, the commissioner of housing and community development shall endeavor to place that person into a residential dwelling from the urban homesteading inventory. Placement of this person shall be made in the order in which applicants were approved by the urban homesteading application review board, except that a preferred place in the order of placement shall be given to those approved applicants who are residents of the city and to those approved applicants who have been displaced by governmental action on the part of the city or by other governmental action which resulted in the acquisition of their principal residences for a public project. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5024(b), (c)) 
Sec. 54-62. - Leasing procedure. 
(a)  When the urban homesteader and the commissioner of housing and community development agree on a suitable dwelling for the homesteader, the homesteader shall enter into either a lease agreement with the city or an urban homesteading agreement in combination with a deed of conditional conveyance. The forms of both types of documents will be prepared by the city attorney's office. The lease form or combination of urban homesteading agreement and deed of conditional conveyance, among other pertinent and legal data, shall: 
(1)  Contain provisions for the payment of monetary encumbrances existing on the property; 
(2)  Provide for a scheduled upward phasing of housing code compliance; 
(3)  Include a statement on the part of the homesteader that, excepting circumstances beyond the homesteader's control, the homesteader will reside in the dwelling as a principal residence for a minimum of three years from the effective date of the agreement with the city; 
(4)  Include a provision that the homesteader, during the term of the lease or combination of urban homesteading agreement and deed of conditional conveyance, obtain and maintain casualty insurance and owner's and occupier's liability insurance with a reputable insurance company licensed to do business in the state, which casualty insurance will include fire and extended coverage, vandalism and malicious mischief coverages. The amount of the casualty insurance shall be equal in amount to the value of the property, as determined by the city, and the liability insurance shall have minimum coverage in the amount of $25,000.00 per occurrence and $100,000.00 in the aggregate and name the city as coinsured; 
(5)  Contain a provision that all utility bills shall be the responsibility of the homesteader; and 
(6)  Provide that if its terms and conditions have not been met, upon proper notice and hearing to the urban homesteader, the lease or combination of urban homesteading agreement and deed of conditional conveyance shall be declared in default by the commissioner of housing and community development and terminated, subject to any subordination agreement. 
(b)  Any urban homesteader forced to abandon the homestead by circumstances beyond the homesteader's control shall have the authority, subject to the approval of the commissioner of housing and community development, to assign the homesteader's rights under the lease or combination of urban homesteading agreement and deed of conditional conveyance to any other eligible homesteader for any consideration that the homesteader can negotiate. Any property so assigned shall be reported to the commissioner of housing and community development by the urban homesteader. Should any property be so assigned, the new urban homesteader shall be bound by the terms and conditions of the lease or combination of urban homesteading agreement and deed of conditional conveyance for the balance of the term of the instrument. Any urban homesteader who has assigned the homesteader's rights under these instruments to another individual shall be deemed ineligible for any other urban homesteading structure. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5025) 
Sec. 54-63. - Modification. 
To the extent that the urban homesteading program, as expressed in the leases, modifies or amends housing code of the city, the program is authorized. However, the modification shall not exceed the following parameters: 
(1)  Actual or constructive possession of leased urban homesteading property must take place and property improvements must be started within a 60-day period from the date of entering into the lease. 
(2)  Six months from that date, the completion of plumbing, electrical, heating and roofing repairs are required so that the homesteader can move into the homesteading structure. 
(3)  At the end of a two-year period from the date of entering into the lease, all exterior repairs required on the homesteading structure are to be completed. 
(4)  At the end of the three years from the date of entering into the lease, all city housing code requirements on the homesteading structure are to be met before conveyance of deed and title can take place. 
(5)  For homesteading properties that are multifamily structures or that contain rental units, the urban homesteader is expected to occupy one unit at the end of the first six-month work period. When all of the interior work has been completed on the unit the homesteader intends to occupy, when all of the required exterior work on the entire structure has been completed and when all of the interior work on the unit which the homesteader intends to rent has been completed, an urban homesteader may enter into a lease agreement with an individual for a unit in the structure. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5026) 
Sec. 54-64. - Nontaxable status of property. 
During the period that an urban homesteading property is under lease, it shall be nontaxable property owned by the city, and no homesteader, during the period of this lease, shall be required to pay any ad valorem taxes thereon, except those accrued taxes arising by operation of law assessed against the property prior to the time of entering into the lease. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5027) 
Cross reference— Ad valorem taxes, § 146-26 et seq. 
Sec. 54-65. - Conveyance of title. 
At the end of the term of the lease of the urban homesteading property and provided there has been no default in the terms and conditions of the lease, the city shall convey the leased property, by warranty deed in fee simple, to the urban homesteader in possession of the property who is the named lessee under the lease or the assignees of the lease. Additionally, any homesteader shall be authorized to request the commissioner of housing and community development to convey an urban homestead to that urban homesteader at any time prior to the expiration of the term of the lease, provided the structure in which the homesteader is dwelling meets the criteria set forth in section 54-32 and provided that no conveyance of title shall be made prior to 12 months from the initial date of occupancy of the dwelling by the homesteader. All costs of the conveyance, including but not limited to attorneys' fees, recording costs, state revenue stamps, payment of any liens, including unpaid taxes, upon the property, and title insurance premiums, shall be borne by the urban homesteader. Should the urban homesteader fail and refuse to accept conveyance and fail to initiate steps to ensure conveyance, the lease the urban homesteader is holding shall be declared in default and the lease terminated. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5028) 
Secs. 54-66—54-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SECTION 810 PROGRAM 

Sec. 54-76. - Findings. 
(a)  It is found that there are many residential properties within the corporate limits of the city that have become vacant through various processes. Many of these structures or sites have become vacant by foreclosure or have been abandoned by owners who, for various reasons, have no longer found them acceptable for either habitation, ownership or economic purposes. Further, it is found and declared that some of these properties have been and continue to be elements contributing to the deterioration of neighborhoods and the depreciation of property values in the neighborhood in which they are located. This situation leads to what constitutes a serious and growing menace injurious to the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents of the city. It is further found and declared that the existence of such vacant dwellings contributes substantially and increasingly to the spread of disease and crime, constitutes economic and social liability, substantially impairs or arrests the sound growth of urban areas and exacerbates a growing urban slum condition. Further, it is found that this form of blight is present in the inner city to a much greater degree than it is in the outer city, although the condition is found to exist throughout the city. Many of the residential properties that have become vacant are rehabitable. They are not totally without economic use and, if rehabilitated, could house citizens who need housing as a result of a variety of reasons, among which are displacement by eminent domain proceedings and a lack of housing starts due to general economic conditions. 
(b)  It is further found that many other urban centers throughout the United States have been confronted with problems similar to this and have developed systems of urban homesteading. The economic impact of rehabilitating homes alone is sufficient to justify a program of urban homesteading, notwithstanding the additional benefits procured through such a program. Home ownership has been found to be beneficial to the maintenance of property. Expectation of home ownership has been found to be beneficial to the fruition of housing rehabilitation and homes in private ownership that are rehabilitated increase the tax base of a local government. A decrease in the providing of certain public services, such as police and fire protection, is an additional and indirect benefit to be derived from the rehabilitation of housing. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5030) 
Sec. 54-77. - City authorized as agent. 
The city is authorized to act as agent for the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development to process applications for rehabilitation loans on properties conveyed to the city pursuant to section 810 urban homesteading, as provided for in section 312(a)(1)(D) of the Federal Housing Act of 1964. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5038) 
Sec. 54-78. - Funding. 
No direct expenditures from the city's general fund revenues shall be incurred by the city in connection with the section 810 urban homesteading program. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5037) 
Sec. 54-79. - Urban homesteading application review board. 
The urban homesteading application review board established in section 54-28 shall act in an advisory capacity to the city on the section 810 urban homesteading program in approving applicants as urban homesteaders. It shall be the duty of the board to meet upon the call of the commissioner of housing and community development, at least quarterly, to review applications for urban homesteading. Following its deliberations the board shall certify to the commissioner of housing and community development those applicants who qualify under the criteria set forth in this division as urban homesteaders. For each applicant, the board shall adopt findings of fact upon which it shall base its determination as to whether the applicant qualifies as an urban homesteader. These findings of fact shall constitute a part of the record of the board's deliberations. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5033(a)) 
Sec. 54-80. - Inventory list. 
(a)  The city, acting through the department of housing and community development and working in conjunction with various other departments and bureaus of the government, is authorized to maintain a section 810 urban homestead inventory of residential properties which may be received by the city through the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to section 810 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974; provided, however, the residential properties to be maintained on this inventory shall be inspected by the bureau of housing production and found to be redeemable for residential purposes. 
(b)  Any residential property meeting the criteria set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be eligible to be placed upon the section 810 urban homesteading inventory and disposed of as provided in this division. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5031) 
Sec. 54-81. - Determination of eligibility of property. 
(a)  Prior to the determination of eligibility of residential properties to be placed upon the section 810 urban homesteading inventory, the department of housing and community development shall cause a title examination to be made upon each such property by an attorney competent in the area of real estate abstract work, for the purpose of ascertaining what liens and charges constituting encumbrances are in fact on the properties. A copy of the title report shall become a part of the file regarding such property. If there are monetary encumbrances or title defects appearing against any property which cannot be economically disposed of or passed through to a prospective urban homesteader, the commissioner of housing and community development shall have the right to reject the property from becoming part of the section 810 urban homesteading inventory. If, in the opinion of the commissioner of housing and community development, the monetary and other encumbrances are not sufficient to deter a prospective urban homesteader from entering into an agreement to pay all encumbrances on such property, the property shall become part of the city section 810 urban homesteading inventory. 
(b)  An additional criterion as to whether or not a property can be placed upon the section 810 urban homesteading inventory shall be an opinion of counsel doing the title search that the city either can or cannot pass free and unencumbered fee simple title to the property at a point in time no greater than three years from the date of the title search. If, in the opinion of such counsel, fee simple unencumbered title cannot be so passed to an urban homesteader, the commissioner of housing and community development may reject the property from becoming a part of the section 810 urban homesteading inventory. The term "fee simple unencumbered title" as used in this section, shall not be construed to be such title as would cause rejection of those residential properties which have previously had placed upon them easements and other encumbrances of record which would not affect subsequent marketability of any such properties. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5032) 
Sec. 54-82. - Qualifications of applicants; placement of applicants in housing. 
(a)  The commissioner of housing and community development is authorized to process applicants for the section 810 urban homesteading program. The commissioner of housing and community development shall present to the urban homesteading application review board for approval all those applicants who meet or appear to meet the criteria for urban homesteading as set forth in this division. 
(b)  All applicants for urban homesteading shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The applicant must be 18 years of age or older and must demonstrate a degree of personal stability necessary for taking on the responsibility of urban homesteading; 
(2)  The applicant must possess the technical resources or financial resources or must provide documentation to show that the applicant is able to obtain the financial resources or any combination of these resources necessary for completing the rehabilitation required to bring the condition of the urban homesteading structure up to city housing code requirements within 18 months after occupying the property; 
(3)  The applicant must be a natural person; 
(4)  The applicant must not have previously participated in an urban homesteading program in the city; 
(5)  The applicant must be willing to commit in writing to reside in the structure as the applicant's principal place of residence for a minimum of three years, that being the homesteading period for the section 810 urban homesteading program; 
(6)  No applicant shall be considered who is a city employee exercising any function or responsibility with regard to the section 810 urban homesteading program; and 
(7)  The applicant must be able to demonstrate a need for such housing. 
(c)  When an applicant has been approved as a qualified urban homesteader, the commissioner of housing and community development shall endeavor to place that person into a residential dwelling from the section 810 urban homesteading inventory. Placement of such persons shall be made in the order in which applicants were approved by the urban homesteading application review board, except that a preferred place in the order of placement shall be given to those approved applicants who are residents of the city and to those approved applicants who have been displaced by governmental action on the part of the city or by other governmental action which resulted in the acquisition of their principal residences for a public project. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5033(b)—(d)) 
Sec. 54-83. - Terms of agreement. 
(a)  When the section 810 urban homesteader and the commissioner of housing and community development agree on a suitable dwelling for the homesteader, the homesteader shall enter into an agreement with the city on a form prepared by the city attorney's office. The agreement shall contain provisions whereby the homesteader to whom such property is conveyed agrees that the homesteader: 
(1)  Use the property as a residence only; 
(2)  Not assign the homesteader's interest to a third party without the consent of the city; 
(3)  Not keep any explosives or highly inflammable substances on the premises, save only small quantities of combustibles such as cleaning fluid, gasoline, etc.; 
(4)  Pay all utility services; 
(5)  Be required to obtain and maintain comprehensive insurance on the premises in a face amount at least equal to the fair market value of the premises, as determined by the city, and also be required to obtain and maintain liability insurance in the sum of $25,000.00 per occurrence and $100,000.00 in the aggregate; 
(6)  If the urban homesteader should either file bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings or have bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings filed against the homesteader, the city may, at its election, retake possession of the premises and void the conveyance; 
(7)  Shall pay all applicable taxes due all appropriate taxing authorities imposed on the urban homesteading premises; and 
(8)  Shall secure the necessary building permits, as applicable. 
(b)  The urban homesteader shall assume such further obligations as shall be incorporated into a deed of conditional conveyance, prepared by the city attorney's office. The deed shall be subject to the terms and conditions that the homesteader shall: 
(1)  Occupy the property as a principal residence for a period of no less than three years; 
(2)  Make repairs required to meet minimum health and safety standards for occupancy prior to occupying the property; 
(3)  Make such repairs and improvements to the property as may be necessary to meet the applicable standards of the city's housing code for decent, safe and sanitary housing within 18 months after occupying the property; and 
(4)  Permit reasonable periodic inspections at reasonable times by employees of the city, the state or the United States government for the purpose of determining that the conditions set forth in this subsection have been met within the time periods prescribed in this subsection. 
(c)  Any urban homesteader forced to abandon the homestead by circumstances beyond the homesteader's control shall have the authority, subject to the approval of the commissioner of housing and community development, to assign the homesteader's rights under the agreement and deed of conditional conveyance to any other eligible homesteader for any consideration that the homesteader can negotiate. Any property so assigned shall be reported to the commissioner of housing and community development by the urban homesteader. Should any property be so assigned, the new urban homesteader shall be bound by the terms and conditions of the agreement and the deed of conditional conveyance for the balance of the terms of such instruments. Any urban homesteader who has assigned such homesteader's rights under such instruments to another individual shall be deemed ineligible for any other urban homesteading structure. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5034) 
Sec. 54-84. - Modifications. 
To the extent this division is inconsistent with the city's housing code, the housing code is amended to comply with this division; provided, however, that the modification shall not exceed the following parameters: 
(1)  Actual or constructive possession of leased urban homesteading property must take place and property improvements must be started within a 60-day period from the date of entering into the lease. 
(2)  Six months from that date, the completion of plumbing, electrical, heating and roofing repairs are required so that the homesteader can move into the homesteading structure. 
(3)  At the end of a one-year period from the date of entering into the lease, all exterior repairs required on the homesteading structure are to be completed. 
(4)  At the end of the 18 months from the date of entering into the lease, all city housing code requirements on the homesteading structure are to be met before conveyance of deed and title can take place. 
(5)  For homesteading properties that are multifamily structures or that contain rental units, the urban homesteader is expected to occupy one unit at the end of the first six months' work period. When all of the interior work has been completed on the unit the homesteader intends to occupy, when all of the required exterior work on the entire structure has been completed and when all of the interior work on the unit the homesteader intends to rent has been completed, an urban homesteader may enter into a lease agreement with an individual for a unit in the structure. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5035) 
Sec. 54-85. - Conveyance of property. 
Under this division, at the end of the term set forth in the deed of conditional conveyance and provided there has been no default in the terms and conditions of either the agreement between the city and the urban homesteader or the deed of conditional conveyance, the city shall convey to the urban homesteader the property referenced in the deed of conditional conveyance by a limited warranty deed in fee simple. All costs of the conveyance, including but not limited to attorneys' fees, recording costs, state revenue stamps, payment of any liens, including unpaid taxes, upon the property and title insurance premiums shall be borne by the urban homesteader. If the urban homesteader fails and refuses to accept conveyance and fails to initiate steps to ensure conveyance, the agreement and deed of conditional conveyance the urban homesteader is holding shall be declared in default and the estate created terminated. 
(Code 1977, § 8-5036) 
ARTICLE IV. - AFFORDABLE HOUSING HOMESTEADING PROGRAM 

Sec. 54-86. - Procedures. 
(a)  The director of real estate portfolio in consultation with the chief procurement officer or his or her designee will submit to the city's office of housing and community development in January of each year a list of potential surplus properties which are no longer useful or needed by the city. In determining whether city-owned real property is potentially surplus for the purposes of this article, the director of real estate portfolio will consider whether title to the real property is good, marketable and insurable. 
(b)  The office of housing and community development will have 60 days after receipt of the list from the director of real estate portfolio to review the list and determine whether any of the potential surplus properties on the list are feasible for development as owner-occupied affordable housing. The office of housing and community development will consider the following factors in making its determination: (1) whether the property is large enough and of an appropriate shape for the development of one or more housing units; (2) whether utilities such as water, gas, and electricity would be available to one or more new housing units at the site; (3) whether the current zoning or land use designation of the parcel allows for residential uses; and (4) such other factors as the office of housing and community development deems necessary or appropriate, including the availability of property near public transit. 
(c)  After the office of housing and community development identifies which potential surplus properties are feasible for development of owner-occupied affordable housing (the "affordable housing property list"), the office of housing and community development will submit an ordinance containing the requirements provided herein to the community development and human services committee. The ordinance will contain a finding that the properties on the affordable housing property list are surplus and will approve the properties to be advertised and disposed by request for proposals pursuant to chapter 2, article X, division 4, section 2-1189 and this article IV. 
(d)  Upon Atlanta City Council approval of the ordinance, the office of housing and community development will send a request to the chief procurement officer to issue a public notice for request for proposals from nonprofit and for-profit developers to produce or rehabilitate owner-occupied housing units on a maximum of five surplus properties per developer per year that will be sold below market value. The request for proposals will encourage proposals that use creative strategies to lower construction costs for single-family homes, including partnerships with job training agencies, innovative methods of construction, and smaller houses, with a preference to develop housing targeting households earning zero to 30 percent of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Atlanta-Sandy Springs Marietta Area Median Income (AMI). The request for proposals will provide a maximum 90 day period to respond. 
(e)  To become eligible to purchase a property, the nonprofit or for-profit developer must agree to develop owner-occupied affordable housing units on the property to be sold to households earning at or below 80 percent of the area median income (AMI) as calculated and published annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for the Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta metropolitan area, with a preference for projects targeting households earning zero to 30 percent of the AMI (the "Affordable Housing Covenant"). The affordable housing covenant will run for a term of 20 years. The affordable housing covenant will contain appropriate limits on homeowners gaining full equity from re-selling the owner-occupied units during the 20 year period. 
(f)  The city's law department shall prepare the affordable housing covenant and all appropriate documents to be filed in the land records of Fulton County or DeKalb County to accompany any sale or resale of properties pursuant to this section in a manner consistent with this ordinance. Upon execution of an appropriate covenant, the chief procurement officer or his or her designee shall sell any properties deemed feasible for affordable housing to a non-profit developer or for-profit developer. 
( Ord. No. 2017-65(17-O-1463), § 1, 11-6-17 ) 
Chapter 58 - CONSUMER PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 30; articles sold in parks to be sold at community prices, § 110-64. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; consumer protection generally, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1—58-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIRS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30; traffic and vehicles, ch. 150. 

Sec. 58-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle required to be registered with the state revenue commissioner. 
Person means an individual, partnership, association, corporation or other entity. 
Repairing motor vehicles means the diagnosis of malfunctions, maintenance, repair, removal or installation of an integral component part of an engine, driveline, chassis or body of a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5193) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-37. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who violates this article shall be subject to penalty under section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5196) 
Sec. 58-38. - Duties of person engaged in business. 
All persons engaged in the business of repairing motor vehicles shall: 
(1)  Upon request by the consumer, provide the consumer with a written estimated price for labor and parts necessary to perform a motor vehicle repair before such repair is performed; 
(2)  Upon request by the consumer before the repair is performed, return to the consumer any parts which have been replaced by the repair unless such parts are under warranty or exchanged. If a part is exchanged, evidence of exchange must be provided the consumer upon request; 
(3)  Prominently display a sign or provide written information which advises the consumer of the consumer's right to request a written estimate and return of parts; and 
(4)  Provide the consumer with a written notice which shall describe all repair work done and parts supplied, excepting a total charge of less than $10.00; the invoice shall be in such language as to be easily understood by the consumer. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5194) 
Sec. 58-39. - Overcharge. 
No person engaged in the business of repairing motor vehicles shall exceed the written estimated price given to the consumer pursuant to section 58-38 by more than ten percent if the written estimated price is above $250.00 or by more than 25 percent if the written estimated price is below $250.00 unless the consumer has given written or oral consent to such excess charges. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5195) 
Secs. 58-40—58-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CLOSEOUT AND SIMILAR SALES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Restrictions on going out of business sales, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-393. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fire and other altered goods sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means. 
Going out of business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock or goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including but not limited to the following sales: adjuster's, adjustment, alteration, assignee's bankrupt, benefit of administrator's, benefit of creditor's, benefit of trustees, building coming down, closing, creditor's committee, creditor's end, executor's final days, forced out, forced out of business, insolvent's last days, lease expires, liquidation, loss of lease, mortgage sale, receiver's, trustee's, quitting business. 
Goods means any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this article. 
Removal of business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move and resume business at a new location in the city or will then continue business from other existing locations in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5122) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-62. - Article supplemental. 
The sections of this article are intended to augment and be in addition to business licenses of this Code. Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises, businesses or practices than is imposed by chapter 30, article III of this Code, pertaining to business licenses, or other sections of this Code, this article shall control. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5121) 
Sec. 58-63. - Inventory restrictions. 
(a)  Bona fide orders. All goods included in the inventory of an applicant for a license under this article shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. 
(b)  Goods purchased for sale. This inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale regulated under this article. Any unusual purchase or additions to the stock of goods of the business affected by this article within 30 days before the filing of an application under this article shall be deemed to be of that character. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5127) 
Sec. 58-64. - Duties of licensee. 
A person licensed under this article shall: 
(1)  Adhere to inventory. Make no additions whatsoever, during the period of the licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for a license; 
(2)  Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising; 
(3)  Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto; 
(4)  Keep duplicate inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and present the duplicate to inspecting officials upon request; and 
(5)  Segregate noninventoried goods. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale and make this distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place of sale apprising the public of the status of those goods. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5130) 
Sec. 58-65. - Other prohibited activities. 
(a)  Sale of unaffected or undamaged goods. It shall be unlawful for any person conducting any sale, whether by auction or otherwise, of any goods, wares or merchandise, which are or have been or which are claimed to or have been sold or purchased on account of any fire, or which are or have been or are claimed to or have been the property of any bankrupt or person who has failed in business or has made a general assignment, or which are being sold or offered for sale in any other way than through the usual channels of trade, to sell or offer for sale therein any goods, wares or merchandise not so circumstanced or affected or damaged. 
(b)  Adding to goods. It shall also be unlawful for any person to add to, or to permit to be added to, or to bring into or permit to be brought into any store, warehouse or other building in the city, any goods for the purpose of adding to such goods, wares or merchandise so circumstanced or affected and on hand in any such store, warehouse or other building for the purpose of being sold at such sale. 
(Code 1977, § 17-2005) 
Secs. 58-66—58-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 58-81. - Required. 
A license issued by the chief financial officer shall be obtained by any person before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means to be one of the following: 
(1)  Going out of business sale; 
(2)  Removal of business sale; or 
(3)  Fire and other altered stock sale. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5123) 
Sec. 58-82. - Exemptions. 
This division shall not apply to or affect the following: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction or any person forced to vacate the premises because of eminent domain procedures or the threat of eminent domain. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction. 
(4)  Any publisher or newspaper, magazine or other publication that publishes in good faith any advertisement without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character or without knowledge that this article has not been complied with. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5124) 
Sec. 58-83. - Application. 
A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this article shall make a written application to the chief financial officer setting forth and containing the following information: 
(1)  The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale; 
(2)  The true name and address of the person from whom the applicant purchased the goods to be sold and the price therefor and if not purchased the manner of acquisition; 
(3)  A description of the place where the sale is to be held; 
(4)  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease and the effective date of the termination of the occupancy; 
(5)  The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted; 
(6)  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which it will be conducted; 
(7)  The means to be employed in advertising the sale, together with the proposed content of any advertisement; and 
(8)  A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at the sale as disclosed by the applicant's records. The inventory shall be attached to and become part of the required application. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5125) 
Sec. 58-84. - Issuance prerequisites. 
(a)  Established business. Any person who has not been the owner of a business advertised or described in the application for a license under this division for a period of at least 12 months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be granted a license under this division. 
(b)  Exception for survivors of deceased businessperson. Upon the death of a person doing business in this city, the person's heirs, devisees or legatees shall have the right to apply at any time for a license under this division. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5126) 
Sec. 58-85. - Fees. 
Any applicant for a license under this division shall submit to the chief financial officer with the application a license fee of $100.00 to cover a 30-day sale. Any applicant for a renewal license under this division shall submit to the chief financial officer with the renewal application a renewal license fee of $100.00 to cover an additional 30 days. The renewal license may be granted at the discretion of the chief financial officer. 
(Code 1977, § 19-14.017) 
Sec. 58-86. - Interval between sales. 
(a)  Any person who has held a sale, as regulated under this article, at the location stated in the application within one year last past from the date of the application shall not be granted a license. 
(b)  Whenever any person who has commenced a sale under this article at the location stated in the application shall determine within the licensing period that due to circumstances beyond the person's reasonable control the person will be unable to discontinue the person's business as originally intended, the licensee shall immediately cease all advertising and notices of such sale and shall document the pertinent facts and transmit them in writing to the chief financial officer. 
(c)  If the chief financial officer determines that the going out of business sale was undertaken in good faith and not completed due to circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the licensee, the chief financial officer may reinstate the gross receipts business license which was surrendered by the licensee to obtain a going out of business sale license. However, in such event the licensee shall forfeit any fee paid for the going out of business sale license and shall include all revenues received during the authorized term of the sale. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5131) 
Sec. 58-87. - Location of sale restricted. 
When a person applying for a license under this division operates more than one place of business, the license issued shall apply only to the one store or branch specified in the application, and no other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it or in any way participating in the licensed sale nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5232) 
Sec. 58-88. - Effect of issuance. 
A license shall be issued under this division on the following terms: 
(1)  Licensing period. The license shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days, Sundays and legal holidays excluded, following the issuance thereof. 
(2)  Renewal procedure. The chief financial officer shall renew a license for one period of time only in addition to the 30 days permitted in the original license and not to exceed 30 consecutive days, Sundays and holidays excluded, when the chief financial officer finds that: 
a.  Facts exist justifying the license renewal. 
b.  The licensee has filed an application for renewal. 
c.  The licensee has submitted with the application for renewal a revised inventory showing the items listed on the original inventory remaining unsold and not listing any goods not included in the original application and inventory. For the purpose of this subsection, any application for a license under this division covering any goods previously inventoried as required under this article shall be deemed to be an application for renewal, whether presented by the original applicant or by any other person. 
(3)  Nature of sale. The license shall authorize only the type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. 
(4)  Saleable goods. The license shall authorize the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. 
(5)  Surrender of general licenses. Upon being issued a license under this division for a going out of business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the chief financial officer all other business licenses the licensee may hold at the time applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a license under this division. 
(6)  Transferability. Any license provided for in this division shall not be assigned or transferable. 
(Code 1977, § 14-5129) 
Secs. 58-89—58-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PREDATORY LENDING PRACTICES 

Sec. 58-100. - Legislative findings. 
The City Council of the City of Atlanta, Georgia finds: 
(1)  That citizens from many lower and moderate income neighborhoods in Georgia have been unable to access legitimate financing for home purchases and renovations, allowing predatory lenders to thrive; and 
(2)  That these predatory lenders are charging exorbitant fees and interest rates and are persuading citizens to incur mortgage debt in excess of their needs or ability to pay often through fraudulent means; and 
(3)  These predatory lending practices appear to be targeting elderly and vulnerable borrowers; and 
(4)  That to protect the citizens of Atlanta and its neighborhoods from lending practices which strip hard earned equity from city residents and contribute to the problem of vacant and abandoned houses by making loans that families cannot afford to repay. 
(Ord. No. 2001-71, § 1, 9-25-01) 
Sec. 58-101. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of this article: 
(1)  To collect and make available to the public information necessary for city residents to protect themselves against predatory lending practices; and 
(2)  To prevent the lenders engaged in predatory lending and those persons providing referrals and services to those lenders from enjoying the privilege of doing business with our city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-71, § 1, 9-25-01) 
Sec. 58-102. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply throughout this article: 
Affiliate means any entity that controls, is controlled by, is under common control with, or makes loans to, including capital business loans, another entity, including any successors in interest or alter egos. For the purposes of this definition, "control" shall mean any entity that has control over another entity if: 
(1)  The entity directly or indirectly or acting through one or more other persons owns, controls, or has power to vote 25 percentum or more of any class of voting securities of another entity; or 
(2)  The entity controls in any manner the election of a majority of the directors or trustees of another entity. 
Annual percentage rate means the annual percentage rate for the loan calculated according to the provisions of the federal Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. § 1601 et seq.), and the regulations promulgated thereunder by the Federal Reserve Board (as said Act and regulations are amended from time to time). 
Business entity means any individual, domestic corporation, foreign corporation, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership, joint venture, or unincorporated association, including any parent company, subsidiary, exclusive distributor or company affiliated therewith, engaged in a business or commercial enterprise. 
City means the City of Atlanta. 
City agency means the City of Atlanta, its departments, boards and commissions. 
City-related agency means all authorities and quasi public corporations which either: 
(1)  Receive appropriations from the city; or 
(2)  Have entered into continuing contractual or cooperative relationships with the city; or 
(3)  Operate under legal authority granted to them by city ordinance. 
High cost lender means a business entity that, through itself and/or an affiliate has made, issued or arranged, within any 12-month period, high cost loans that comprise either: 
(1)  Five percent of the total annual number of loans made, issued or arranged; or 
(2)  Ten individual loans; whichever is less. 
The term "high cost lender" shall not include a business entity, or its affiliates, that has submitted to the city a plan to discontinue the practice of making high cost loans, if the plan ensures: 
(1)  The prompt disengagement from the practice of making, issuing, or arranging high cost loans by the business entity(s) and its affiliates; and 
(2)  The complete cessation of the making, issuing or arranging of high cost loans by the business entity and its affiliates within 90 days after the plan is submitted; provided that no more than one plan may be submitted on behalf of any business entity. 
High cost loan means a high cost loan is a loan that is secured by residential real property located within the city on which there is situated a dwelling for not more than four families or a condominium unit, or is secured by a cooperative unit within the city, if: 
(1)  The annual percentage rate of the loan equals or exceeds five percentage points over the weekly average yield on United States Treasury securities with a comparable duration to the term of the loan, as of the week immediately preceding the week in which the interest rate for the loan is established, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  If the terms of the loan offer any initial or introductory period, and the annual percentage rate is less than that which will apply after the end of such initial or introductory period, then the annual percentage rate that shall be taken into account for purposes of this paragraph shall be the rate which applies after the initial or introductory period; and 
b.  In the case of an interest rate which varies in accordance with an index, the loan shall be deemed a high cost loan if: 
1.  Potential or scheduled increases in the interest rate of the loan are not directly tied to future increases and decreases in a widely used federal or private market measurement that reflects the cost of borrowing money, such as the interest rate yield on United States Treasury securities, the federal funds rate, or the prime interest rate; or 
2.  The margin over such index at any point during the life of the loan exceeds five percentage points. 
(2)  The total points and fees exceeds three percent of the total loan amount. 
Points and fees means: 
(1)  All items required to be disclosed under sections 226.4(a) and 226.4(b) of Title 12 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended from time to time, except the interest rate or time-price differential; 
(2)  All charges for items listed under section 226.4(c)(7) of Title 12 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended from time to time, but only if the charges are not bona fide and reasonable in amount or the lender receives direct or indirect compensation in connection with the charge or the charge is paid to an affiliate of the lender; 
(3)  All compensation paid directly or indirectly (including but not limited to yield spread premiums) to a mortgage broker, including a broker that originates a loan in its own name in a table funded transaction, not otherwise included in subparagraph (1) or (2) of this paragraph; 
(4)  All premiums or other charges financed, directly or indirectly, in the loan for any credit life, credit disability, credit unemployment, accident, health, or loss-of-income insurance or any other line or subline of insurance which may become accepted as credit insurance by the insurance and lending industries or for any debt cancellation or suspension agreements or contracts (whether or not the debt cancellation or suspension agreement coverage is insurance under applicable law), or similar products; and 
(5)  The maximum prepayment fees or penalties that may be charged under the terms of the loan. 
Predatory lender means a business entity that, through itself and or an affiliate has made, issued or arranged, within any 12-month period, predatory loans that comprise either: 
(1)  Five percent of the total annual number of loans made, issued or arranged; or 
(2)  Ten individual loans; whichever is less. 
The term "predatory lender" shall not include a business entity, or its affiliates, that has submitted to the city a plan to discontinue the practice of making predatory loans, if the plan ensures: 
(1)  The prompt disengagement from the practice of making predatory loans by the financial institution and its affiliates, and 
(2)  The complete cessation of the making of predatory loans by the financial institution and its affiliates within 90 days after the plan is submitted; provided that no more than one plan may be submitted on behalf of any financial institution. 
Predatory loan means a threshold or high cost loan that was made under circumstances that involve any of the following acts or practices or that contain any of the following loan terms: 
(1)  Fraudulent or deceptive acts or practices, including fraudulent or deceptive marketing and sales efforts to sell high cost loans. 
(2)  "Loan flipping". "Flipping" a loan means the making of a threshold or high cost loan to a borrower that refinances an existing loan secured by residential property in the city when the new loan does not have a reasonable, tangible net benefit to the borrower considering all of the circumstances, including the terms of both the new and refinanced loans, the cost of the new loan, and the borrower's circumstances. Reduction of monthly payments alone shall not be considered a tangible net benefit to the borrower. 
(3)  "Balloon payments". A loan that contains a scheduled payment that is more than twice as large as the average of earlier scheduled payments or which contains a provision that gives the lender, in its sole discretion, the right to accelerate the indebtedness in the absence of the default of the borrower. 
(4)  "Negative amortization". A loan that contains a payment schedule with regular periodic payments that causes the principal balance to increase. 
(5)  "Points and fees." The direct or indirect financing of the following: 
a.  Any prepayment fees or penalties payable by the borrower in a refinancing transaction if the lender or an affiliate of the lender is the noteholder of the note being refinanced; 
b.  Any points and fees; or 
c.  Any other charges payable to third parties. 
(6)  "Increased interest rate". A loan that contains a provision that increases the interest rate after the occurrence of a default. Interest rate increases do not constitute a predatory loan practice in a variable rate loan where the increase is otherwise consistent with the provisions of the loan documents, provided that the event of default or the acceleration of the indebtedness does not trigger the change in the interest rate. 
(7)  "Advance payments". A loan which includes terms under which more than two periodic payments required under the loan are consolidated and paid in advance from the loan proceeds provided to the borrower other than a loan issued by or guaranteed by city agencies, city-related agencies, or another state or federal government agency. 
(8)  "Modification or deferral fees". A loan which includes terms under which the lender may charge a borrower any fees or other charges to modify, renew, extend, or amend a loan product or to defer any payment due under the terms of a loan product. 
(9)  "Mandatory arbitration". A loan that contains a mandatory arbitration clause that limits in any way the right of the borrower to seek relief through a court of law or equity. 
(10)  "Prepayment penalties". The lender has charged or contracted to charge any prepayment fee or penalty for the voluntary or involuntary prepayment of the home loan, or the lender has charged or contracted to charge any fee for informing any person of the balance due to pay off the home loan. 
(11)  "Financing of credit insurance". The lender has financed, directly or indirectly, premiums or other charges for any credit life, credit disability, credit unemployment insurance, accident, health, or loss-of-income insurance or any other line or sub-line of insurance which may become accepted as a credit insurance by the insurance and lending industries or for any debt cancellation or suspension agreements or contracts (whether or not the debt cancellation or suspension agreement coverage is insurance under applicable law), or similar products. Insurance premiums calculated and paid on a monthly basis shall not be considered financed by the lender; provided, however, that in no event shall the amount of coverage for any home loan exceed the amount necessary to satisfy the borrower's obligation on any given date during the life of such home loan. 
(12)  "Lending without home loan counseling" means making, issuing, or arranging a threshold or high-cost loan without first receiving notice from a counselor approved by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development that the borrower has received counseling on the advisability of the loan transaction and the appropriateness of the loan for the borrower based upon the information provided by borrower and lender to the counselor at the time counseling is provided to the borrower. 
(13)  "Lending without due regard to repayment" means that the lender does not reasonably believe at the time the loan is consummated that the borrower or borrowers who reside in the home (when considered individually or collectively) will be able to make the scheduled payments to repay the obligation based upon consideration of their current and expected income, current obligations, employment status, and other financial resources (other than the borrower's equity in the dwelling which secures repayment of the loan). A lender who follows the debt-to-income ratio listed in 38 C.F.R. Section 36.4337(c)(1) and as defined in 38 C.F.R. Section 36.4337(d), and follows the residual income guidelines established in 38 C.F.R. Section 36.4337(e) and VA-Form 26-6393 shall benefit from a rebuttable presumption that the lender made the loan with due regard to repayment ability. 
(14)  "Encouraging default." The lender recommends or encourages default on an existing loan or other debt prior to and in connection with the closing or planned closing of a loan that refinances all or any portion of such existing loan or debt. 
(15)  "Late fees." The lender charges late fees for the late payment of an installment due on a home loan, unless: 
a.  The fee does not exceed five percent of the past due installment; 
b.  The fee is not charged more than once as a result of a single late payment; and 
c.  The borrower has agreed to the imposition of the late fees in the home loan contract. 
(16)  Charging of points, fees or other charges in connection with a high-cost home loan if the proceeds of the high cost home loan are used to refinance an existing high-cost home loan held by the same lender or an affiliate of the lender. 
(17)  Refinancing of a special mortgage originated, subsidized or guaranteed by or through a state, tribal or local government, or nonprofit organization, which bears either a below-market interest rate, or has nonstandard payment terms beneficial to the borrower, such as payments that vary with income, are limited to a percentage of income, or where no payments are required under specified conditions, and where, as a result of the refinancing, the borrower will lose one or more of the benefits of the special mortgage. 
Threshold loan means a loan that is secured by residential real property located within the city on which there is situated a dwelling for not more than four families or a condominium unit, or is secured by a cooperative unit within the city, if the annual percentage rate of the loan equals or exceeds by at least four percentage points but less than five percentage points the weekly average yield on United States Treasury securities with a comparable duration to the term of the loan, as of the week immediately preceding the week in which the interest rate for the loan is established, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  If the terms of the loan offer any initial or introductory period, and the annual percentage rate is less than that which will apply after the end of such initial or introductory period, then the annual percentage rate that shall be taken into account for purposes of this paragraph shall be the rate which applies after the initial or introductory period; and 
(2)  In the case of an interest rate which varies in accordance with an index, a loan shall be deemed a threshold loan if: 
a.  Potential or scheduled increases in the interest rate of the loan are not directly tied to future increases and decreases in a widely used federal or private market measurement that reflects the cost of borrowing money, such as the interest rate yield on United States Treasury securities, the federal funds rate, or the prime interest rate; or 
b.  The margin over such index at any point during the life of the loan exceeds five percentage points. 
(Ord. No. 2001-71, § 1, 9-25-01) 
Chapter 62 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Bonding agents, § 30-551 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 98. 
Related laws references— Courts generally, ch. 4; city court, § 4-36 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Bond clerk division; duties and authorities of bond clerk. 
(a)  There shall be created a division known as the bond clerk division within the violations bureau of the municipal court. The appointment of the head of the division, known as bond clerk, shall be made by the judges. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the bond clerk to collect and enforce all collections of appearance and certiorari bonds given by persons either to appear or to abide final judgment in all courts. 
(c)  The chief of corrections shall not accept cash bonds on any offenses under the jurisdiction of the Atlanta Municipal Court except as set forth in section 62-31 (b), (c), (d) and (f) of this chapter. For the bail requirements of offenses under the jurisdiction of the Atlanta Municipal Court, the corrections chief shall implement the provisions of section 62-31 (a), (b), (c), (d) and (f). The chief of corrections or designated representative shall accept all appearance bonds on standard forms provided by the department of corrections, and shall deliver to the proper court the coupon stubs of these bonds. The chief of corrections shall deposit with the revenue collection administrator all sums taken on bonds, which sums shall be kept in an account and fund to be designated by the chief financial officer. 
(d)  The bond clerk shall keep and record all bonds received from the chief of corrections in a ledger known as the bond ledger and shall file the bonds by court date. If a case is bound over to a state court, the bond clerk shall release any bond relating to that case to the solicitor of the municipal court or the solicitor's assistant upon presentation of the receipt thereof. 
(e)  The clerk of the municipal court shall advise the bond clerk in writing of the action taken by the court on each case. 
(f)  The bond clerk, upon written notice from the clerk of the court, shall adjust records accordingly. If a trial is reset, the bond clerk's bonds and records are to be corrected to show the new trial date, etc. For a forfeiture and the issuance of an execution, the bond clerk is to collect the face value of the bond within ten days from the date of the execution. The bond clerk shall in no way have the authority to extend the ten-day payment period nor shall the trial judge, except in extreme cases, have the authority once a bond has been forfeited and an execution issued thereon to change the date or the time of payment of the bond. Upon failure of the surety to pay the face value of a bond after executions have been issued and within the prescribed time, the bond clerk shall notify the chief judge, and the chief judge shall in turn notify the chief of corrections of the failure of a surety to remit the value of the bond. The chief of corrections is to take the action of suspending the permit of a bondsperson as prescribed in this Code. 
(g)  The bond clerk shall collect all forfeited bonds of the court for which executions have been issued and shall deposit any collections with the revenue collection administrator's office daily with a written, detailed report to the municipal revenue collector's office of these collections. 
(h)  Where applicable, the bond clerk shall refund all bonds upon appearance of the principal at the time set for trial and the completion of the trial of the principal or upon the dismissal of the offense for which the bond was set. Any bond so refunded shall be refunded by direct payment to the principal or by mailing it to the principal within ten days of the completion of trial or the dismissal of the charge; provided, however, that when a bond is consummated by check, the bond clerk shall have a maximum of 20 days within which to make the refund. The 20-day period shall begin with the date of the bond or the date of the check, whichever is later. The bond clerk at the election of the principal may remit part of the bond to the particular court involved in payment of the fine and remit the balance of the cash bond to the principal. Nothing in this section shall in any way limit or prohibit the bond clerk from refunding any forfeited bond when the prisoner is produced prior to the issuance of an execution. 
(i)  Within 24 hours after a surety has surrendered its principal, this surety must give notice of this surrender to the bond clerk. 
(j)  All bonds shall be securely kept by the bond clerk, upon a bond being satisfied. The bond clerk shall mark the bond satisfied and enter it in the bond book. 
(k)  The bond clerk, at the end of each calendar month, shall make a full and detailed report in triplicate on the status of all bonds, and a detailed explanation is to be given in the report as to the reason the bond has not been collected. A copy of the report is to be submitted to the court, to the chief of corrections and to the chief financial officer. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1043; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 4, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2018-03(18-O-1045), § 1, 2-6-18 ) 
Secs. 62-2—62-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, art. 4. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-26. - Seal. 
(a)  The municipal court of Atlanta, referred to in this article as the municipal court, shall have a seal which shall contain the words "The Municipal Court of Atlanta, Georgia" and in the center the word "Seal." 
(b)  The seal shall be kept by the clerk of the court. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1001) 
Sec. 62-27. - Judges. 
There shall be a chief judge of the municipal court. There shall be such number of associate judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The term "municipal judge" shall include any person authorized by the Charter and applicable related law to try cases in the municipal court. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1002) 
Charter reference— Municipal court judges generally, § 4-104 et seq. 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-781 et seq. 
Sec. 62-27.1. - [Number of municipal court judges; effective date.] 
Effective September 21, 2009, the number of municipal court judges shall be ten. 
(Ord. No. 2011-12(08-O-1760), § 1, 9-30-09) 
Sec. 62-28. - Solicitor and assistant. 
(a)  There shall be a solicitor who shall be known as the solicitor of the municipal court. 
(b)  The duties of the solicitor of the municipal court shall be to: 
(1)  Prosecute all cases on behalf of the city that are tried in the court; 
(2)  Prosecute all commitment hearings that are held in the court; 
(3)  Perform all appellate work, including work taken either by way of appeal or certiorari, resulting from either cases tried or commitment hearings in the court; 
(4)  Advise police officers on individual cases, general procedure and legal developments relating to case preparation; and 
(5)  Perform such other duties as are or may be required by law or by ordinance. 
(c)  There shall be one assistant solicitor of the municipal court. 
(d)  The duties of the assistant solicitor shall be the same as those of the solicitor of the municipal court, plus any additional judicial duties that the solicitor, with the consent of the city council, may prescribe. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1003) 
Charter reference— Solicitor, § 4-110. 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-781 et seq. 
Sec. 62-29. - Public defender and assistant. 
(a)  There shall be a public defender, who shall be known as the public defender of the municipal court. 
(b)  The duties of the public defender of the municipal court shall be the representation of, and the provision of legal services to, indigent defendants who are tried in the municipal court and the representation of, and provision of legal services to, indigent defendants who appear before the municipal court for commitment purposes, including all necessary pretrial preparation and interviews. In addition, the public defender is authorized to: provide legal services to indigent defendants who are detained in City of Atlanta detention facilities; provide assistance with jail discharge planning; assist with coordination of social services for defendants; and apply for grant funding on behalf of the city to support these efforts, pursuant to the city's Procurement Code. 
(c)  There shall be one assistant public defender of the municipal court, whose starting salary shall be equal to the starting salary of the assistant solicitor. 
(d)  The duties of the assistant public defender shall be the same as those of the public defender plus any additional judicial duties that the public defender, with the consent of the city council, may prescribe. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1004; Ord. No. 2018-03(18-O-1045), § 2, 2-6-18 ; Ord. No. 2018-30(18-O-1400), § 1, 7-11-18 ) 
Charter reference— Public defender, § 4-111. 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-781 et seq. 
Sec. 62-30. - Judges, solicitor and public defender pro hac vice. 
(a)  There shall be ten judges pro hac vice of the municipal court who shall perform the same duties as the associate judges of the municipal court. 
(b)  There shall be two solicitors pro hac vice who shall perform the same duties of the assistant solicitor of the municipal court. These persons shall be paid a per diem fixed by the city council from the appropriate salary account. 
(c)  There shall be one public defender pro hac vice who shall perform the same duties as the assistant public defender. This person shall be paid a per diem fixed by the city council from the appropriate salary account. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1005) 
Sec. 62-31. - Bail established under certain circumstances. 
(a)  For offenses under the jurisdiction of the Atlanta Municipal Court, except as set forth in subsections 62-31 (b), (c), (d) and (f) below, the chief of corrections or the chief's designated representative shall release the accused from the Atlanta City Detention Center on their own recognizance or signature, without the requirement of posting any financial obligation prior to release. The chief of corrections or his designee shall release all such persons from custody immediately after booking. All such persons shall be provided with a written directive regarding the time and date that they must appear before the municipal court. 
(b)  For any offense containing an element of violence or threatened violence against a person, the defendant is to be detained until the initial appearance hearing, which shall be held as soon as practicable, but in no event later than 48 hours after the time of the arrest, or 72 hours after the time of arrest where the arrest occurs pursuant to a warrant. For purposes of this subsection 62-31(b), the following shall be deemed an "offense containing an element of violence or threatened violence:" 
(1)  City ordinance 106-81.1: Disorderly conduct- Act of violence toward another 
(2)  City ordinance 106-81.3: Disorderly conduct - Fighting 
(3)  City ordinance 106-81.7: Disorderly conduct- Physical obstruction of another 
(4)  O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391: Driving under the influence 
(5)  An offense which is bailable only before a judge of Georgia superior court 
(6)  Other offenses which the corrections chief reasonably believes involve violence or the threat of violence to a person 
(7)  Any citation that includes "DV" (domestic violence) written by the arresting officer at any location on the ticket regardless of the offense charged 
(8)  Idling and loitering for illicit sex 
(9)  A defendant who is currently serving probation or parole, regardless of the current offense 
(c)  If a person who has been released on a recognizance or signature bond under this ordinance is later arrested and thereafter booked into the Atlanta City Detention Center for an offense under the jurisdiction of the municipal court prior to the disposition of the earlier charge, the chief of corrections or the chiefs designee shall bring that person to the initial appearance hearing to be held as soon as practicable, but in no event later than 48 hours after arrest, or 72 hours after the time of arrest where the arrest occurs pursuant to a warrant. 
(d)  If a person who has been released on a recognizance or signature bond under this ordinance is later arrested and detained on a warrant for failure to appear in the municipal court during the pendency of the earlier charge, the chief of corrections or his designee shall bring that person to the initial appearance hearing to be held as soon as practicable, but in no later than 48 hours after arrest, or 72 hours after the time of arrest where the arrest occurs pursuant to a warrant. 
(e)  In cases where the municipal court conducts an initial appearance hearing pursuant to subsections (b), (c), or (d) above, and requires a cash bond or other secured financial obligation as a condition of pre-trial release, the court's written determination shall include a finding regarding the defendant's present ability to pay the financial condition set. The municipal court shall not establish a financial condition for pre-trial release that results in a defendant being detained solely because he or she does not have enough money to meet the financial requirement. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of a municipal court judge to impose any nonfinancial condition of release in accordance with existing law. 
(f)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the acceptance of bond set by an extra jurisdictional court. 
(g)  The chief judge of the municipal court is authorized to promulgate rules necessary for the administration of this section. 
(h)  Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority granted to the judges of the Atlanta Municipal Court by Georgia law. 
( Ord. No. 2018-03(18-O-1045), § 3, 2-6-18 ) 
Sec. 62-32. - Appointment of judges to sign warrants after normal hours. 
The chief judge of the municipal court shall designate, on a rotating basis, a municipal judge who shall be available to sign warrants upon sworn affidavits each day after the close of regular business and on weekends. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1010) 
Sec. 62-33. - Court counselor. 
There shall be a court counselor who shall be known as the court counselor of the municipal court. The duties of the court counselor shall be to represent the building, fire prevention, treasury, and licensing bureaus in the municipal court, and in any appeals from those trials in the superior court on certiorari. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1006) 
Sec. 62-34. - Clerk. 
(a)  There shall be a clerk of the court who shall be known as the clerk of the municipal court. 
(b)  The duties of the clerk of the municipal court are to: 
(1)  Maintain a system of records; 
(2)  Be the custodian of the seal of the court with the authority to certify copies of all official records of the court; 
(3)  Maintain the proper books of accounts, including receipts and disbursements, which the court may maintain; and 
(4)  Perform such other duties as the chief judge may impose. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1007) 
Charter reference— Clerk/administration of municipal court, § 4-113. 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-781 et seq. 
Sec. 62-35. - Jurisdiction; imposition of punishment. 
Every person accused of violating any section of this Code or any ordinance of the city, or any state offense that may properly be adjudicated in municipal court pursuant to state law shall be tried in the municipal court, unless referred by the chief judge of municipal court to city court for jury trial. Upon a finding of guilty, the municipal court may impose such punishment as is provided for by this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1061; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 6, 1-10-05) 
Charter reference— Jurisdiction of municipal court, § 4-102. 
State Law reference— Limitations on sentences, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; miscellaneous municipal court jurisdictional provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 
Sec. 62-36. - Indigents. 
The chief judge of the municipal court shall have the power to devise reasonable tests for the determination of indigency of defendants who appear before the municipal court. All professed indigents must sign a pauper's affidavit before they may be assisted by the public defender or the public defender's staff. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1008) 
Sec. 62-37. - Disposition of fines and forfeitures. 
All fines and forfeitures received through the municipal court shall be forwarded to the chief financial officer. The chief financial officer and not the clerk of the municipal court shall transmit funds to the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund in accordance with the requirements of law. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1031) 
Sec. 62-38. - Fees for copies of records and certification. 
(a)  The clerk of the municipal court is authorized to make charges for the copying of records of the municipal court and issuing certificates therefor as provided in chapter 2, article XIV of this Code. 
(b)  Fees so collected shall be accounted for by the clerk of the municipal court and shall be paid into the city treasury through the medium of a miscellaneous receipt. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1086) 
Sec. 62-39. - Assessment of costs and jail fees against prosecutors in dismissal for want of probable cause. 
(a)  A municipal court judge may, in the discretion of the judge, assess costs and jail fees against the person who initiated the prosecution when, at a criminal proceeding for a violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city, the action is dismissed for want of probable cause or for want of prosecution. This subsection shall not apply to law enforcement personnel or any other city employee acting in an official capacity. 
(b)  Assessment costs and jail fees imposed by a municipal court judge in this article shall not exceed $300.00. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1087) 
Sec. 62-40. - Assessment of additional costs for benefit of peace officers' annuity and benefit fund. 
(a)  There shall be assessed by the judges of the municipal court in all cases tried by these judges for the violation of any state statute or this Code or other city ordinance, as a part of the costs thereof and in addition to all other costs, assessments and fines for such offenses as may be levied by the judges, the following sums of money: 
(1)  For any fine or bond forfeiture of more than $4.00 but not more than $25.00, the sum of $3.00. 
(2)  For any fine or bond forfeiture of more than $25.00 but not more than $50.00, the sum of $4.00. 
(3)  For any fine or bond forfeiture of more than $50.00 but not more than $100.00, the sum of $5.00. 
(4)  For any fine or bond forfeiture of more than $100.00, five percent of such fine or bond forfeiture. 
(b)  The clerk of the municipal court shall maintain accurate and full accounts of all these sums collected. The records shall show that the extra sums collected as called for in subsection (a) of this section are collected for the purpose of being turned over to the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund of the state, as required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60, and that the city is required to act as agent for that organization in collecting this sum. 
(c)  All these sums shall be remitted to the chief financial officer by the court effecting these collections so that they may in turn be forwarded to the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund as required by law. 
(d)  All records of the court assessing and collecting these funds shall be kept open for inspection and audit by the representatives of the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1079) 
State Law reference— Levy of additional costs for peace officer's annuity and benefit fund, § 47-17-60. 
Sec. 62-41. - Authority to sentence to work on streets or public works, in police station or jail. 
(a)  When any person is convicted of any offense against this Code or other laws and ordinances of the city, it shall be discretionary with the municipal judge to punish this offender by ordering the offender to work on the streets or public works of the city or in the police station house or jail, under the supervision of the proper officers. 
(b)  The judge passing sentence or any of the judge's agents shall furnish to the chief of corrections or any duly authorized agents a listing of all offenders delivered to the city prison and shall furnish the commissioner of corrections or authorized agent the full details of the sentence imposed on this offender. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1080; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Charter reference— Authority to provide for working out jail sentences, § 1-102(c)(33). 
Cross reference— General penalty for ordinance violations, § 1-8; correctional services, § 98-136 et seq. 
State Law reference— Working ordinance violators, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-30-8, 36-32-5. 
Sec. 62-42. - Sentences for convictions of more than one offense. 
If a person shall be convicted of more than one offense and sentenced to imprisonment, these sentences shall be severally executed, the one after the other; provided, however, the municipal court judge may, in the judge's discretion, direct that these sentences run concurrently. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1081) 
Cross reference— General penalty for ordinance violations, § 1-8. 
Sec. 62-43. - Collection of fines, cash collateral; reports on disposition of cases. 
(a)  Where applicable pursuant to sections 62-1(c) and 62-31 of this chapter, the chief of corrections or the chief's designated representative shall collect all bond collateral for defendants on rates that may be prescribed by a judge of the municipal court, with a proper report to be given to the proper court. 
(b)  The chief judge of the municipal court or designated representative shall collect all fines assessed by the chief judge or any associate judges. The chief judge of the municipal court shall further report all fines so collected to the police chief or the police chief's designated representative and to forward with this report all collections. 
(c)  The chief of corrections or the chief's designated representative shall report daily all collections to the chief financial officer and daily to deposit all cash and other payments with the revenue collection administrator's office. 
(d)  Each judge and associate judge of the municipal court shall note on each charge or written accusation the disposition, except those on which collateral has been collected or those which have been collected by the violations bureau. 
(e)  Reserved 
(f)  The clerk of the municipal court shall render a monthly report of the number of cases on hand at the beginning of the month, the number of cases received during the month, the number of cases disposed of, the nature of the disposition and the cases remaining on hand at the end of the month. Any case remaining in effect for 60 or more days is to be set out separately, showing the number of times the case has been postponed and the reason for postponement. A copy of the monthly report is to be filed with the chief judge of the municipal court, the police chief and the chief financial officer. 
(g)  Any officer named in this section violating this section or any official aiding or abetting this violation shall be deemed guilty of a breach of duty and shall be subject to removal from office. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1082; Ord. No. 2018-03(18-O-1045), § 4, 2-6-18 ) 
Sec. 62-44. - Execution to collect fine. 
Execution may issue if any fine is imposed by municipal court, to be levied upon the goods, chattels, lands, and tenements of the defendant fined, if the fine is not paid as required by law, which execution shall bear teste in the name of the mayor, and shall be signed officially by the clerk of court or a deputy clerk thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1083; Ord. No. 2012-22(12-O-0398), § 1, 5-30-12) 
Sec. 62-45. - Pretrial release program. 
There shall be a pretrial release agency of the municipal court. The director of the pretrial release agency shall report to the chief judge of the municipal court or the judge's designee. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1011) 
Sec. 62-46. - Pretrial diversion fee. 
In every case that a defendant is allowed to participate in any pretrial diversion program under the supervision of the solicitor of the municipal court, there shall be imposed a fee as a condition of completion of the pretrial diversion program. Such a fee shall be in an amount not to exceed $300.00. Any fee may be waived or amended upon determination as to undue hardship, inability to pay and any other extenuating factors that prohibit collection of the fee. All fees collected shall be paid into the general fund of the city and shall be applied to defray the cost of the administration of the program. 
(Ord. No. 2002-24, § 1, 4-5-02; Ord. No. 2010-06(10-O-0307), § 1, 3-9-10) 
Sec. 62-47. - Authority to sentence to home confinement. 
(a)  When any person is convicted of any offense against this Code or other laws and ordinances of the city, it shall be discretionary with the municipal judge to punish this offender by ordering the offender to home confinement, under the supervision of the proper officers. 
(b)  The judge passing sentence or any of the judge's agents shall furnish to the Commissioner of the Department of Corrections or any duly authorized agents a listing of all offenders who have been sentenced in accordance with this section by delivering said list to the Municipal Jail and shall furnish the Commissioner of Corrections or authorized agent the full details of the sentence imposed on this offender. 
(Ord. No. 2009-19(09-O-0798), § 2, 5-26-09) 
Secs. 62-48—62-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COURT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 62-56. - Rules of practice. 
In general, the municipal court shall be controlled by the rules of practice governing the superior court, so far as they are applicable to the municipal courts, and by a sound construction of the Charter and related laws and this Code and ordinances of the city. The rules of evidence and examination of witnesses shall be the same as in the superior courts, so far as these rules are applicable to the case on trial. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1070) 
Sec. 62-57. - Correct docketing required. 
All cases in the municipal court must be docketed in the correct name of the accused and shall correctly describe the offense charged. The docketing of a defendant under a false or assumed name or under a false charge shall be sufficient ground for the removal of any officer guilty thereof who has any knowledge of the true name or the true charge. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1075) 
Sec. 62-58. - Trying person under fictitious name; accepting plea of guilty in the accused's absence. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the municipal judge to try a person under a feigned name, if the municipal judge has reason to believe a fraud is being practiced on the court and the public, by the use thereof and concealment of the true name. 
(b)  Upon the request of an accused who has made in writing, a knowing, intelligent and voluntary waiver of his right to be present, the municipal judge may entertain a plea of guilty in the absence of the accused. 
(c)  Violation of this section by the municipal judge shall be sufficient cause for removal from office. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1076; Ord. No. 2005-12, § 1, 2-28-05) 
Sec. 62-59. - Stenographic report of testimony required for trial of member of department of police. 
If any member of the department of police is arraigned before the municipal judge on a charge of violating any state law or any section of this Code or any city ordinance, the police chief is required to have the testimony adduced at the trial stenographically reported. A copy of the evidence shall be furnished to the police chief. The taking down and reporting of these proceedings shall be done by a stenographer employed by the department of police at no additional expense to the city. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1077) 
Sec. 62-60. - Issuance of summons. 
Any member of the department of police, the solicitor of the municipal court and the assistant solicitor, in all cases where a complaint is made or information is obtained of any violation of any of this Code or other laws or ordinances of the city, shall issue a summons, directed to the accused, requiring the accused to appear before the municipal court to answer this charge. The summons shall designate the time and place of trial and shall be signed by the member of the department of police, solicitor or assistant solicitor issuing it and a copy thereof shall be served upon the accused either personally or by leaving the copy at the accused's place of residence. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1062) 
Charter reference— Service of process, § 4-111. 
Sec. 62-61. - Issuance of warrants upon complaint. 
Any person witnessing a violation of this Code or a city ordinance by another person may appear before a judge of a municipal court, the solicitor or the solicitor's assistant and there swear out a complaint for the violation. Upon the signing of this complaint, under oath by the complainant, a warrant may be issued by the municipal court judge directed to the alleged violator to be and appear in the court to answer the charges as contained in the complaint. However, if the prosecution is abandoned before trial, the officer who issued the warrant shall enter a judgment against the prosecutor for costs in the amount of $25.00 and enforce it by an execution in the name of the city or by an attachment for contempt. The term "prosecutor" shall not include the city solicitor or the solicitor's assistant. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1063) 
Charter reference— Service of process, § 4-114(c). 
Sec. 62-62. - Service of summons by revenue collection administrator. 
The revenue collection administrator is authorized and empowered to serve a summons requiring a person to appear and answer before the municipal court, the same as police officers, the solicitor and assistant solicitor are so authorized. This service shall be as legal and binding upon the party receiving it as though the party were served by a member of the department of police. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1064) 
Charter reference— Service of process, § 4-114(c). 
Sec. 62-63. - Failing to appear to answer summons. 
It shall be unlawful for any defendant lawfully summoned to answer charges in the municipal court to either fail, neglect or refuse to appear at the time and place specified in the summons or fail to provide a satisfactory explanation for this absence. The trial may be continued to such time as the municipal court may direct, and the court shall issue an order requiring the police chief, or other members of the department of police to arrest the defendant and bring the defendant before the court to answer both the initial charges and the charge for failing to appear at trial. The chief of corrections shall keep the defendant in custody until the defendant is brought before the court, unless the defendant posts bond for appearance, as provided by law. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1065; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 62-64. - Rights of accused. 
In addition to all rights secured by other laws, any person charged with an offense against this Code or other ordinances of the city shall be informed by summons in writing served on such person of the nature of the cause of the accusation; shall have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in such person's behalf; shall have a speedy trial before the municipal judge; shall be confronted with the witnesses against such person and have the privilege of cross examination, as in the superior courts of the state; and shall have the privilege of defending, by counsel or by such person or both, as to such person shall seem proper. No person shall be condemned, fined or punished without full opportunity of being heard in such person's own defense. Additionally, any proven indigent shall be ensured the opportunity of being defended by the public defender or an assistant public defender. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1066) 
Sec. 62-65. - Issuance of subpoenas. 
Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the municipal court to establish any fact, the clerk of the municipal court shall issue a subpoena directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case, which shall be served as other process by the police chief or other police officers. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1067) 
Charter reference— Service of process by police, § 4-114(c). 
Sec. 62-66. - Witness failing or refusing to obey subpoena. 
If any person lawfully summoned as a witness before the municipal court shall either fail, neglect or refuse to attend the trial for which the person has been summoned or fail to provide a satisfactory explanation for this absence, the person may be cited for contempt and be fined in a sum not to exceed $50.00. If the cause is continued because of the absence of this person, the court may issue attachment against the person requiring the person to show cause on the day appointed for trial why the person should not be cited for contempt. The police chief or other police officer shall, by virtue of the attachment, arrest the person and keep the person in custody until the person is brought before the court, unless the person posts bond for appearance, as provided by law. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1068) 
Charter reference— Contempt powers of court, § 4-102(5). 
State Law reference— Municipal court judges to have powers of magistrates, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; contempt powers of magistrates, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-2(7). 
Sec. 62-67. - Interference with witnesses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any case pending or about to be made in the municipal court, by threats, intimidation, persuasion, payment, gift or promise of money or other things of value or by any other means whatever used toward a witness or any other person, to: 
(1)  Prevent or attempt to prevent a witness from appearing or from testifying to the whole truth; 
(2)  Induce or attempt to induce any witness to testify falsely or to change testimony; 
(3)  Interfere or attempt to interfere in any way with any witness; or 
(4)  In any way suppress or conceal or attempt to suppress or conceal any testimony in that case for the purpose of controlling or influencing the result thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1069) 
State Law reference— Threatening or influencing witnesses, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-93. 
Sec. 62-68. - Continuances generally. 
Where the ends of justice may require, all cases in the municipal court may be continued. However, in ruling upon requests for continuances, the judge shall use sound discretion in applying the general rules governing continuances. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1071) 
Sec. 62-69. - Motions for continuances. 
All motions in the municipal court for the continuance of any case when the defendant is at liberty on bond shall be made by the defendant, the defendant's attorney at law or the defendant's attorney in fact in the court having jurisdiction and at the time the defendant is scheduled for trial. Whether a motion to continue a case shall be entertained except in open court and on the day set for a trial shall be left to the sound discretion of the judge. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1072) 
Sec. 62-70. - Procedure where evidence indicates person other than defendant has violated ordinance. 
If on the trial of any case in the municipal court it appears that any other person besides the one on trial has violated a law or ordinance of the city, that person may then and there be tried, unless the case is continued for legal cause. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1073) 
Sec. 62-71. - Contempt. 
Any person who, during a sitting of the municipal court, shall be guilty of a contempt of court or who refuses to abide by an order of the court or sentence shall be punished as provided in state law for contempt against the superior courts of this state. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1073) 
State Law reference— Municipal court judges to have powers of magistrates, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; contempt powers of magistrates, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-2(7). 
Secs. 62-72—62-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BAIL AND OTHER BONDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for forfeiture and collection of appearance bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-4. 

Sec. 62-81. - Authority to take and accept bond. 
The chief of corrections or the chief's designated representative is authorized to receive appearance bonds of defendants and witnesses, in the form of recognizance, signature, property, or cash or written bonds of professional bondspersons, or otherwise, pursuant to the provisions of sections 62-1(c) and 62-31 of this chapter to secure the attendance of defendants and witnesses in municipal court. If a particular defendant is charged with two or more offenses and bond is deemed necessary, a separate bond may be set for each offense. The bond shall remain in full force and effect until the disposition of the case and until the defendant is surrendered, or until otherwise directed by the municipal court or other court of law. The mayor may require professional bondspersons to deposit with the chief financial officer a sufficient fund to protect the interests of the city. The chief of corrections or the chief's designated representatives and the chief judge and associate judges of the municipal court shall promptly forward all bonds to the clerk of the court. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1032; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2018-03(18-O-1045), § 5, 2-6-18 ) 
Sec. 62-82. - Appointment of bond hearing judge. 
When bonds are forfeited for nonappearance in the municipal court, the case entered on the bond for the purpose of establishing judgment in favor of the city against the principal and security in the bond shall be tried before a municipal judge designated by the chief judge as a bond hearing judge. The chief judge may make such designation on a rotating basis. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1039) 
Sec. 62-83. - Bond signed by surety through agent acting under power of attorney. 
If an officer or employee of the department of corrections or clerk of the municipal court is charged with the duty of accepting and passing on the legality of an appearance or other bond, such officer or clerk may accept a bond signed by a surety through an agent acting under the power of attorney, whether the surety is a surety company or person, if the power is properly executed by the surety. However, the bond shall not be accepted, though the power of attorney is properly executed, if the officer or clerk passing upon the adequacy of the bond is not satisfied that the agent has authority to act for the alleged principal, and no power of attorney executed by a surety company shall be accepted by an officer unless this company has complied with the rules and regulations of the city and laws of the state. The bond shall not be accepted by the officer or clerk unless the person appearing before the officer or clerk, requesting to sign the bond, is an agent having the power of attorney to bind the surety, whether the surety is a company, corporation, firm, partnership, association or individual, and such person shall exhibit the power of attorney authorizing such person to bind the surety before being allowed to execute the bond. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1033) 
Sec. 62-84. - Imprisonment or detention in default of bond. 
If either parties or witnesses in the municipal court shall fail or refuse to give bond and security or bond, as required of them, the persons so failing or refusing may be confined in the station house or jail or be kept under a guard to ensure their presence at trial or to testify, as the case may be. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1034) 
Sec. 62-85. - Forfeiture of bond for failure to appear. 
(a)  Any person charged in the municipal court with the violation of a section of this Code or an ordinance or an offense against the city who has posted a bond, including a recognizance or signature bond, for a personal appearance at a designated time and place and who fails to appear at this time shall forfeit the bond upon the call of the case for trial, and the court shall so declare in open court. 
(b)  Forfeiture of a bond, including a recognizance or signature bond, shall not be a bar to a subsequent prosecution of the accused for the violation. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1035; Ord. No. 2018-03(18-O-1045), § 6, 2-6-18 ) 
Sec. 62-86. - Bond forfeiture order to show cause. 
(a)  Upon failure of a person charged with a penal offense to appear before the municipal court at any time fixed for such person's hearing, the court may proceed to forfeit the bond or recognizance. 
(b)  If the court proceeds with forfeiture, the judge shall, upon the failure to appear, order an execution hearing for a date not sooner than 60 days but not later than 90 days after the failure to appear. Within 72 hours of the failure to appear, notice of the execution hearing shall be given by first class mail by the clerk of the municipal court to the principal and to each surety at the addresses given on the bond or by personal service to the surety at its home office or to its designated registered agent. Notice shall be served in the form of a scire facias, setting the date of the hearing. 
(c)  If at the execution hearing it is determined that judgment should be entered, the judge shall so order. 
(d)  Where applicable, on application filed within 60 days from payment of judgment, the court shall order remission under the following conditions: 
(1)  Provided the bond amount has been paid within 60 days after judgment and the delay has not prevented the proper prosecution of the principal, the court, on motion at a hearing upon proper notice having been given to the prosecuting attorney, shall direct a remission of 95 percent of the bond if the surety apprehended and surrendered the defendant or if the apprehension or surrender of the defendant was substantially procured by the surety or caused by the surety. Should the surety produce the principal within two years of the failure to appear, the surety shall be entitled to a refund of 50 percent of the bond payment; and 
(2)  The prosecuting attorney must be given at least 20 days' notice before a hearing is held on the application for remission and must be furnished with copy of the application along with the affidavits and other documentation and evidence supporting such application. Remission shall be granted on the condition of the payment of costs by the surety. 
(e)  A copy of the order shall be served upon the principal and surety if they can be found in the city, by the clerk of the municipal court or designated representative, at least 20 days before the time therein set for hearing. 
(Code 1977, §§ 3-1036, 3-1037; Ord. No. 2018-03(18-O-1045), § 7, 2-6-18 ) 
Sec. 62-87. - Judgment on bond, issuance and collection of executions; effect of noncompliance. 
(a)  Authority. If no sufficient cause is shown, the municipal judge or other officer presiding shall proceed to enter judgment against the principal and surety, under sections 62-85 and 62-86, for the amount of bond, including a recognizance or signature bond as applicable, and execution shall be issued for the amount of this judgment and placed in the hands of the municipal revenue collector, who shall proceed to collect it by levy and sale as in the case of tax executions. However, judgment shall not be entered against either principal or surety until service shall have been perfected. 
(b)  Suspension of bondsperson's permit for noncompliance. Upon failure of any bondsperson to comply with this section or section 62-86 within ten days of the issuance of the execution, the permit and right of the bondsperson shall automatically and without further action be suspended. 
(c)  Effect of suspension. The chief judge of any court under the jurisdiction of the city or the bond administrator shall immediately notify the chief of corrections in writing of the failure of any bondsperson or individual to comply with this section, and upon receipt of this notice the commissioner of corrections shall not permit this bondsperson or individual to visit persons incarcerated in the city jail. No bondsperson or individual shall have the right contemplated in this article to write further bonds for prisoners held by the city until this bondsperson's permit or individual's right has been reinstated by the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1038; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2018-03(18-O-1045), § 8, 2-6-18 ) 
Sec. 62-88. - Discharge of surety by surrender of principal; notice of surrender. 
Any surety upon a bail bond may surrender the principal at any time to the officer on duty at the station house, who shall confine the principal until the principal has been discharged by order of the municipal court or by giving other and good security. This delivery of the principal shall discharge the surety of all further liability upon this bond, and the court shall after final judgment relieve the surety of the penalty of the bond upon the surrender of the principal. The chief of corrections or designated representative shall promptly advise the bond administrator and the particular court involved of any principal surrendered. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1041; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 62-89. - Effect of original bond upon subsequent arrest on different offense. 
If a person has been arrested and has posted bond to appear at the trial for the offense charged, a fee or charge having been paid to a professional bondsperson for this bond, and if this person is subsequently arrested for a different offense while out on bail, this subsequent arrest shall not operate as a discharge of the bail on the original offense if the person gives bond on the subsequent different offense. Upon this occurring, no professional bondsperson shall be entitled to collect an additional fee or make an additional charge for providing a bond on the original offense, the original bond remaining in effect upon the posting of bond on the subsequent different offense. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1042) 
Secs. 62-90—62-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROBATION 

Sec. 62-101. - Officers and employees of probation office. 
All officers and employees of the probation office shall be under the supervision and direction of the chief judge of the municipal court. As to all employees of the office coming under the general employees civil service act, the chief judge shall be deemed the appointing authority. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1111) 
Sec. 62-102. - Continuation of case; defendant's failure to appear. 
In all cases brought before the municipal judge, the municipal judge, in the judge's discretion, shall have the right to continue the case to some fixed day for further consideration and final determination and, pending this final decision, the defendant shall be permitted to go on the defendant's own recognizance, but the defendant's name, residence, business and such other information as may be desired shall be secured by the probation officer and a permanent record made thereof. If, before the date set for hearing, it appears that these offenses have been repeated, the municipal judge shall be notified thereof and the entire information placed in the municipal judge's hands, and the defendant shall be further notified of the time fixed for final hearing and to appear and abide the sentence. On the failure of the defendant to appear and abide the sentence of the court, the defendant shall be dealt with as for a contempt and subject to arrest, not only to serve the sentence imposed in this case but also for such additional sentence as the municipal judge may impose as the result of the contempt. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1112) 
Sec. 62-103. - Additional continuances. 
The chief probation officer shall place a record in the hands of the municipal judge upon the arrival of the date initially set for hearing by the judge. It shall be in the discretion of the municipal judge to continue the case further or to have the defendant appear on the date named and abide the sentence imposed. If the municipal judge decides further to postpone the case, the defendant shall be notified of the date and time and shall appear and abide the sentence at that postponed time, subject to be dealt with as for a contempt, as provided in section 62-102. If the municipal judge decides to postpone the case indefinitely, the defendant shall be so advised and shall not be required to appear unless the municipal judge fixes a further time for a hearing or disposition of the case, when the defendant shall receive notice thereof and shall appear and abide the sentence of the court. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1113) 
Sec. 62-104. - Investigations; rules for defendants; records. 
(a)  Under this division, the chief probation officer, in exercising police powers, shall make personal investigation of each case; the conditions surrounding the individual and the family; the character, habits and the like, past and present, of the individual and family; and shall as well make a close and constant investigation of the conduct of the defendant, pending the probation provided, and see that the municipal judge is informed of this conduct, habits, labor and the like during this period. 
(b)  The chief probation officer shall establish rules under which defendants are required to report to the chief probation officer at stated intervals, but the chief probation officer shall not rely upon these reports entirely. 
(c)  The chief probation officer shall personally make investigations in such manner as may be deemed advisable and as often as necessary, to keep advised of the defendant's conduct, habits, employment and condition. 
(d)  The chief probation officer shall keep an accurate record of these reports as may be made to the chief probation office and such conditions as the chief probation office may ascertain personally for the information of the municipal judge and as a matter of permanent record. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1114) 
Secs. 62-105—62-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY COURT[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-03, § 7, repealed div. 1, §§ 62-126, 62-127, div. 2, §§ 62-141—62-144, pertaining to the violations bureau, in their entirety. Section 8 of said ordinance provided for the amendment of § 62-128 to read as herein set out. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 62-126, 62-127. - Reserved. 
Sec. 62-128. - Payment for attendance at court during off hours. 
If any sheriff, deputy sheriff or member of any municipal or county police force shall be required by writ of subpoena to attend the municipal court or city court as a witness in behalf of the city or state during any hours except the regular duty hours to which the officer is assigned, such officer shall be paid the sum of $25.00 per day for such attendance. The claim for such witness fees shall be endorsed on the subpoena showing the dates of attendance and stating that attendance was required during the hours other than the regular duty hours to which the claimant was assigned, and the claimant shall verify this statement. The dates of attendance shall be certified by the solicitor of the municipal court, and the amount due shall be paid from funds allocated to the court for the payment of expenses of operating such court and the enforcement of the laws of the state relating to and regulating traffic. However, no such officer may claim or receive more than one witness fee per day for attendance in any court or before the grand jury, regardless of the number of subpoenas which such officer may have received, requiring the officer to appear in such court or before the grand jury in any one day. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3019; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 8, 1-10-05) 
Secs. 62-129—140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— See editors note art. III this chapter. 

Secs. 62-141—62-144. - Reserved. 
Chapter 66 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— City council, § 2-36 et seq.; mayor, § 2-176 et seq.; limitations on campaign contributions for municipal office, § 2-824; sale of alcoholic beverages on election days authorized, § 10-210; candidate addressing police employees at police facilities, § 98-46; city employees required to resign prior to filing candidacy for office of mayor, president of city council, or office of councilperson, § 114-2. 
State Law reference— Elections generally, O.C.G.A. § 21-1-1 et seq.; Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Superintendent. 
The municipal clerk is designated election superintendent in the city with all rights, powers and duties as provided by the Georgia Election Code, as now or hereafter amended (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.) and shall conduct all elections of the city in accordance with the Georgia Election Code, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1977, §§ 1-2002, 1-3001; Ord. No. 2009-67(09-O-1888), § 1, 11-11-09) 
Editor's note— Section 66-1 has been revised to conform to charter §§ 5-101, 5-106 as amended 1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469. 
Sec. 66-2. - Precinct boundary lines and polling places. 
The precincts polling places and maps showing precinct boundary lines within the City of Atlanta shall be designated, changed or created in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 21-2-260 to 21-2-270. 
The precincts and polling places within the City of Atlanta in both Fulton and DeKalb Counties are specifically described in a document entitled "City of Atlanta Precincts and Polling Places, (as of November 20, 2017)." The city wide council districts boundary lines with corresponding precinct designations and boundary lines are specifically shown on a map titled "City of Atlanta Council Districts and Voting Precincts Map," dated December 04, 2017. Both are on file in the office of the municipal clerk, and are incorporated in this chapter and adopted by reference as the official "City of Atlanta Council Districts and Voting Precincts Map." 
(Code 1977, § 1-3002; Ord. No. 2001-81, § 1, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 2009-67(09-O-1888), § 1, 11-11-09; Ord. No. 2013-39(13-O-1194), § 1, 8-28-13 ; Ord. No. 2017-84(17-O-1774), § 1, 12-13-17 ) 
State Law reference— Precincts and polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-160 et seq. 
Sec. 66-3. - Qualification period and qualification fees for general and special elections. 
(a)  The qualification period for a city general or special election shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132. General election and special election shall be as defined by the Georgia Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.). 
(b)  Qualification fees shall be fixed as provided in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131. 
(c)  Specific dates for qualification and the amount of qualification fees, shall be adopted by ordinance or resolution and shall be published in the official organs of Fulton and DeKalb Counties and in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipal corporation, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3007; Ord. No. 2009-67(09-O-1888), § 1, 11-11-09) 
Editor's note— Section 66-3 has been revised so as to eliminate conflict with O.C.G.A. § 21-3-91. See charter §§ 5-101, 5-106, as amended 1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469. 
Sec. 66-4. - Nomination by petition. 
In addition to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132, a candidate for municipal office may qualify by filing a nomination petition as provided by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-170. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3004; Ord. No. 2009-67(09-O-1888), § 1, 11-11-09) 
Editor's note— Section 66-4 has been revised so as to eliminate conflict with O.C.G.A. § 21-3-91. See charter §§ 5-101, 5-106, as amended 1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469. 
State Law reference— Nominating petitions, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-91. 
Sec. 66-5. - Compensation of workers. 
The election commissioner or manager in chief, commissioners or associate managers and clerks shall be compensated as provided by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-71 and any other applicable state law. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3003; Ord. No. 2009-67(09-O-1888), § 1, 11-11-09) 
Editor's note— Section 66-5 has been revised so as to eliminate conflict with O.C.G.A. § 21-3-370. See charter §§ 5-101, 5-106 as amended 1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469. 
Sec. 66-6. - Challenging right of elector to vote. 
Challenges to the right of a person to vote in an election are covered by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-230. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3005; Ord. No. 2009-67(09-O-1888), § 1, 11-11-09) 
Editor's note— Section 66-6 has been altered to correct the statutory reference. 
Sec. 66-7. - Contesting election results. 
Procedures for hearings on petitions to contest election results and appeals relating thereto are governed by O.C.G.A. §§ 21-2-520 to 21-2-529 and any other applicable state law. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3006; Ord. No. 2009-67(09-O-1888), § 1, 11-11-09) 
Editor's note— Section 66-7 has been revised so as to eliminate conflict with O.C.G.A. § 21-3-420 et seq. See charter §§ 5-101, 5-106, as amended as 1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469. 
Secs. 66-8—66-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Recall elections, § 5-301. 
Cross reference— Petitions to initiate legislation, § 2-40. 

Sec. 66-36. - Initiative. 
Whenever 15 percent of the registered voters, as disclosed by the registration lists of the last preceding general municipal election, shall request in a petition filed in the office of the municipal clerk the submission of an ordinance or resolution, the substance of which is incorporated in the petition, for adoption by vote of the people, an election shall be called therefor within 30 days after it has been read by the council, and the election shall be held within 90 days after the date of the call. If at the election the resolution or ordinance receives a majority of the votes cast, it shall become operative and cannot be thereafter repealed except by an election similarly called. However, if the council adopts the resolution or ordinance for which a petition is filed, no election shall be called. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3021) 
Sec. 66-37. - Referendum. 
(a)  Whenever 15 percent of the registered voters, as disclosed by registration lists of the last preceding general municipal election, shall request, in a petition filed with the municipal clerk, amendments to the Charter or amendments to or repeals of ordinances or resolutions which may have already been adopted by the council, the amendments or repeals shall thereafter be submitted to the qualified voters of the city. Such petition shall specifically set forth the exact language of the proposed amendment or repeal. The council shall determine the validity of such petition within 50 days of its filing. If such petition is determined valid, within one week the council shall issue the call for a special election for the purpose of submitting such amendment or repeal to the registered electors of the city for their approval or rejection. The council shall set the date of the special election as provided in O.C.G.A. § 21-3-53. The council shall cause a notice of the date of the election to be published in a newspaper of general circulation once a week for two weeks immediately preceding such date. The voting on questions submitted to the people at the special election provided for in this section in what is known as the initiative and referendum shall be held in the same manner as the general election, under the same methods, and the result thereof shall be canvassed in the same manner and declared and reported to the council for confirmation. If the majority of the votes are cast against the ordinance or resolution, it shall be thereby repealed and revoked and shall not thereafter be of any effect nor shall it thereafter be adopted by the council until resubmitted to and adopted by the qualified voters of the city in the same manner as originally submitted. If a majority of the votes are cast in the affirmative, the ordinance or resolution shall stand and be effective in the same manner as other ordinances or resolutions of the city. If the council determines that the petition is not valid, it shall publish in detail, in a newspaper of general circulation in the week immediately following the date on which the petition is declared to be not valid, the reasons why such petition is not valid. 
(b)  The sponsor of a petition authorized by this section shall obtain copies of all official petitions from the municipal clerk. The municipal clerk shall approve all petitions as to form. The municipal clerk shall provide a place on each form for the person collecting signatures to provide such person's name, street address, city, county, state, ZIP code and telephone number and to swear that such person is a resident of the city and that the signatures were collected inside the boundaries of the city. The collection of signatures for the petition shall begin on the day the municipal clerk provides official copies to the sponsor of the petition. A petition authorized by this section shall not be accepted by the council for verification if more than 60 days have elapsed since the date the sponsor of the petition first obtained copies of the petition from the municipal clerk. 
(c)  The council shall be authorized to submit to the qualified voters of the city at any election any ordinance or resolution which it may deem proper. If a majority of voters shall vote for this ordinance or resolution, it shall be adopted. If a majority of the votes so cast are against the resolution or ordinance, it shall be defeated and shall not thereafter be adopted by the council until resubmitted to and adopted by the qualified voters of the city. If it receives a majority vote of the people and becomes effective, it can only be repealed by a majority vote of the qualified voters at a special election. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3022) 
State Law reference— Charter amendments, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 
Sec. 66-38. - Recall elections. 
Any person holding an elective office of the city shall be subject to removal from office at a recall election in the manner provided by the Recall Act of 1989, O.C.G.A. § 21-4-1 et seq. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3011) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 5-301. 
Chapter 70 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 78; law enforcement, ch. 98. 
Land development code reference— Impact fee for emergency services, § 19-1001 et seq. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; 911 emergency telephone service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq.; emergency medical services, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. 
(Ord. No. 2011-49(11-O-1323), § 1, 11-16-11) 
Sec. 70-2. - Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the city's chief financial officer at the times and in the manner provided by Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(Ord. No. 2011-49(11-O-1323), § 2, 11-16-11) 
Sec. 70-3. - Administrative provisions. 
The clerk of the city is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of this ordinance and amendments thereto in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), by December 31, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 2011-49(11-O-1323), § 3, 11-16-11) 
Sec. 70-4. - Depositing of funds; use of funds. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by the city from charges imposed by this ordinance shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(d)(2) and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction. All such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Ord. No. 2011-49(11-O-1323), § 4, 11-16-11) 
Sec. 70-5. - Effective date. 
As required by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), this ordinance shall become effective January 1, 2012. 
(Ord. No. 2011-49(11-O-1323), § 5, 11-16-11) 
Secs. 70-6—70-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, approved May 29, 2013, effective September 15, 2013, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 70-26—70-35, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to burglar or robbery alarm systems. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 70-26. - Purpose/applicability. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to encourage alarm users and alarm companies to properly use and maintain alarm systems and to reduce or eliminate false alarms, which unduly divert emergency services from responding to actual criminal activity and other emergencies. This article governs systems intended to summon emergency response, requires registration, and provides for civil penalties for violations. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any governmental agency, board, authority or entity. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to alarm systems installed, operated or maintained pursuant to chapter 78 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13) 
Sec. 70-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the City of Atlanta to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this article. 
Alarm company means any business, whether operated by an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity, which is in the business of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring alarm systems at an alarm site. 
Alarm permit means a permit issued by the City of Atlanta allowing the operating of an alarm system within the City of Atlanta. 
Alarm system means any mechanized and/or electronic device or set of devices intended to detect and signal the occurrence of activity requiring the immediate need for emergency services at the premises in which such device or set of devices is installed. For purposes of this article, alarm system does not mean any such device or set of devices installed operated or maintained pursuant to chapter 78 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances. 
Alarm user means, with respect to any premises, any person, corporation, partnership, or proprietorship or other entity, who owns, leases, an alarm system or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
Alarm user awareness class means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms. 
Automatic dialer or auto-dialer means any electrical, electronic, mechanical or other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message when activated over a telephone line, radio or other communication system requesting emergency dispatch. 
Cancellation means the process where response is terminated when the alarm company (designated by the alarm user) notifies the emergency communications center that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to the Atlanta Police Department or the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of civil penalty, and no such penalty will be assessed. 
Duress alarm means a silent alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life-threatening situation or crime in progress requiring law enforcement response. 
Emergency communication center means the City of Atlanta 911 Center. 
Emergency dispatch means Atlanta Police Department and/or Atlanta Fire Rescue Department dispatch. 
Emergency response means Atlanta Police Department and/or Atlanta Fire Rescue Department response. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system to summon emergency personnel which occurs as a result of mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, unless the request for response was cancelled by the alarm user or his/her agent before the Atlanta Police Department or the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department arrives at the alarm site. An alarm is false within the meaning of this article when, upon inspection by the Atlanta Police Department or the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, other such crime was committed, attempted, or occurred in or on the premises, which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system, or no fire occurred which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm, which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by violent conditions of nature, nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user or alarm system. In addition, an alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the user's alarm company, or designee, to test the system and the alarm company upon receiving such permission does not request emergency dispatch. 
Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or user. 
Permit year means a 12-month period beginning on the day and month on which an alarm permit is issued. 
Runaway alarm means an alarm system that produces repeated alarm signals that do not appear to be caused by separate human action. Either the Atlanta Police Department or the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department may in its respective discretion discontinue responses to alarm signals from what appears to be a runaway alarm. 
SIA Control Panel Standard CP-OI means the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-OI Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or other nationally recognized testing organizations, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA P-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction". 
Verify means an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting the Atlanta Police Department or the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department for dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this section, telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting emergency dispatch. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13) 
Sec. 70-28. - Alarm permits. 
(a)  Permit required. Effective August 15, 2013, no alarm system shall be used unless the alarm user first obtains a permit for such alarm system from the City of Atlanta. There will be no charge for the permit. Each alarm permit shall be assigned a unique permit number, and the user shall provide the permit number to the alarm company to facilitate emergency dispatch. 
(b)  Registration/Renewal. 
(1)  Each alarm user has the duty to obtain and complete a permit application on a form provided by the City of Atlanta. 
(2)  After the initial issuance of a permit under this article, application for renewal shall be made annually by the anniversary of the date of initial issuance. 
(3)  Alarm permits issued pursuant to this article shall automatically expire on the day following the anniversary date of initial issuance. 
(4)  The operation of a previously permitted alarm system following the expiration of an alarm permit and the failure of the alarm user to renew their alarm permit by the date required, shall be a violation of this article and shall be enforced through the assessment of a civil penalty in the amount of $50.00. 
(5)  Failure to renew warning: there shall be no civil penalty assessed in accordance with section 70-28(b)(4) upon the issuance of the first notice of the failure to renew. Instead, the first notice of a failure to renew shall constitute a warning. Should an alarm user continue to operate their alarm system and fail to renew their alarm permit following the issuance of the failure to renew warning, the alarm user shall be assessed a civil penalty in accordance with section 70-28(b)(4), which shall be payable consistent with the remaining provisions of this article. 
(c)  Non-transferability; new registration required. Alarm permits are not transferable. Upon transfer of the possession of premises at which an alarm system is maintained, the new alarm user shall register for an alarm permit within 30 days of obtaining possession of the property. 
(d)  Reporting updated information. When information required on the alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide correct information to the City of Atlanta within 30 days of the change. 
(e)  Multiple alarm systems. If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more separate structures having different addresses and/or tenants, a separate permit shall be required for each structure and/or tenant. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13; Ord. No. 2015-14(15-O-1106), § 1, 3-25-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-35(16-O-1520) , § 1, 10-12-16; Ord. No. 2017-58(17-O-1581), § 1, 10-2-17 ) 
Sec. 70-29. - Government immunity. 
Registration of an alarm system is not intended, to, nor does it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response by the City of Atlanta, the Atlanta Police Department, the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department or other governmental department or agency. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to an alarm dispatch request is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By registering an alarm system, the alarm user acknowledges that emergency response may be based on factors such as availability of emergency units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions and/or staffing levels. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13) 
Sec. 70-30. - Duties of an alarm user. 
An alarm user shall be required to: 
(a)  Register and obtain an alarm permit; 
(b)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce or eliminate false alarms; 
(c)  Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within 30 minutes upon notification of the need to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system; to provide right of entry to the premises, or to provide alternative security for the premises; 
(d)  Ensure that an alarm is not manually activated by the alarm user or any other person for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report; 
(e)  Upon obtaining a permit number, provide that number to the alarm company; and 
(f)  Obtain a new permit if there is a change of address or ownership of a business or residence or if there is updated information. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13) 
Sec. 70-31. - Responsibilities of an alarm company. 
(a)  An alarm company should: 
(1)  Obtain and maintain required state and local license(s) and/or permits. 
(2)  Maintain current contact information, including user permit numbers, which shall be provided to the emergency communications center at the time of a request for law enforcement response. 
(3)  Ninety days after the effective date of this section alarm companies should use control panels meeting Security Industry Association (SIA) Control Panel Standard CP-OI on all new installations. 
(4)  Prior to activation of the alarm system, the alarm company should provide verbal and written instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm system to the alarm user and provide written information on how to obtain service from the alarm company. 
(b)  An alarm company performing monitoring services should: 
(1)  Attempt to verify, by calling the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting emergency dispatch. Telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid, except in the case of a panic or robbery-in-progress alarm, or in cases where a crime or fire-in-progress has been verified by video and/or audible means. 
(2)  Communicate a cancellation to the emergency communications center as soon as possible following a determination that response is unnecessary. 
(3)  Communicate any available information about the location of the alarm. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13) 
Sec. 70-32. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for a person to: 
(1)  Operate an alarm system without a permit issued by the City of Atlanta in accordance with this article; 
(2)  Activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning emergency response when no unauthorized entry, robbery, other such crime was committed, attempted, or occurred in or on the premises, when no fire has occurred, or otherwise to cause a false alarm. 
(3)  Install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than ten minutes. 
(4)  Install, maintain, or use an automatic dial protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message to the emergency communications center. 
(5)  The occurrence of excessive false alarms as described in section 70-33(d) of this article. 
(b)  Violations of this article are punishable by the assessment of civil penalty (ies) as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13) 
Sec. 70-33. - Enforcement of provisions. 
(a)  Civil penalty. Any violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be civil in nature and shall not constitute a criminal infraction. 
(b)  Payment. Civil penalties shall be paid within 30 days from the date of the invoice. All civil penalties collected shall be deposited into the City of Atlanta General Fund. 
(c)  Late fee. The failure of an alarm user to make payment of any civil penalties assessed under this article within 30 days from the date of the notice shall result in the imposition of a 50 percent late fee except that the penalty and late fee combined shall not exceed $1,000.00. 
(d)  Excessive false alarms. It is hereby found and determined that two or more false alarms annually is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance, and shall be a violation of this article. Civil penalties for false alarms within any 365-day period (rolling year) shall be assessed against an alarm user as follows: 
(1)  For the first false alarm, a warning shall be given, but no civil penalty shall be imposed. 
(2)  For the second false alarm, a warning shall be given, but no civil penalty shall be imposed. 
(3)  For the third false alarm, the person or entity shall be charged a $50.00 civil penalty; however, no civil penalty imposed if the alarm user attends the alarm user awareness class in accordance with Code Section 70-34. 
(4)  For the fourth false alarm, the person or entity shall be charged a $100.00 civil penalty. 
(5)  For the fifth and sixth false alarms, the person or entity shall be charged a $200.00 civil penalty. 
(6)  For all successive false alarms, the person or entity shall be charged a $500.00 civil penalty. 
(e)  Other civil penalties. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, a violation of any other provision thereof, including, but not limited to the provision of this article prohibiting the operation of an alarm system without a permit issued by the City of Atlanta, shall be enforced through the assessment of civil penalty(ies) in the amount of $75.00. However, no civil penalty shall be assessed for a violation of the provision of this article prohibiting the operation of an alarm system without a permit before February 1, 2014. 
(f)  Failure to pay civil penalties/late fees. Following the imposition of any late fees pursuant to this section, the City of Atlanta reserves the right to forward any alarm user's outstanding penalties and late fees to a collection agency should an alarm user fail to make payment within 90 days from the date of the notice of the late fee. Collection fees may be added by the collection agency to the balance owed to the extent allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13; Ord. No. 2015-14(15-O-1106), § 2, 3-25-15 ; Ord. No. 2017-58(17-O-1581), § 1, 10-2-17 ) 
Sec. 70-34. - Alarm user awareness class. 
(a)  Alarm user awareness class. The City of Atlanta may create and implement an alarm user awareness class and may request the assistance of the area alarm companies to assist in developing and implementing the class. If created, the class shall inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarms and instruct alarm users how to help reduce false alarms. 
(b)  Alarm user awareness class in lieu of payment. An alarm user may have the option of attending an alarm user awareness class in lieu of paying the prescribed civil penalty for a third false alarm. This option may only be exercised once annually. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13; Ord. No. 2017-58(17-O-1581), § 1, 10-2-17 ) 
Sec. 70-35. - Administrative appeal/procedures. 
(a)  Assessment of civil penalties imposed as a result of a violation of this article may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal within 14 days of the date of notification of the assessment of such civil penalties. 
(b)  The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of penalties or other enforcement decisions. 
(c)  In any appeal filed in accordance with this section, the appellant shall be afforded an opportunity for an evidentiary hearing under judicial forms of procedure, after notice of the assessment of such penalties is served in person or by mail. 
(d)  The notice of assessment of civil penalty shall include: 
(1)  A statement regarding the time, place, and nature of the hearing; 
(2)  A statement of the legal authority under which, and venue wherein the hearing is to be held. 
(3)  A reference to the particular provision of this article allegedly violated. 
(4)  A short and plain statement of the matters asserted including civil penalties assessed. 
(e)  An appellant shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence on all issues involved. 
(f)  In any appeal filed in accordance with this section, a record shall be kept, which shall include: 
(1)  The notice of assessment of civil penalty. 
(2)  A record of the oral testimony plus all other evidence received or considered except that oral proceedings or any part thereof shall be transcribed only upon request. 
(3)  Any decision, opinion, or report by the court or presiding hearing officer. 
(g)  Assessment of civil penalties imposed as a result of a violation of the provision of this article prohibiting the operation of an alarm system without a permit, or other civil penalties imposed against persons not holding alarm permits, may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the municipal court in accordance with this section. 
(h)  Assessment of civil penalties against alarm permit holders may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal in accordance with this section. 
(1)  In lieu of the municipal court, any appeal filed in accordance with this subsection may be held before any Atlanta Police Department representative who has been selected and appointed by the chief of police for such purpose. 
(2)  Before appointing a hearing officer, the chief of police shall determine that the person under consideration is qualified by reason of training, experience, and competence. 
(3)  Notice of whether appeals filed under this subsection shall be before the municipal court or by a hearing representative shall be filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk of the City of Atlanta no less than 30 days prior to the effective date of the change of hearing location. 
(i)  The court or the officer presiding over an appeal pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall review an appeal from the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decisions using a preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a determination that the preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decision, the court or hearing officer shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil penalties or reverse any other enforcement decision where warranted. 
(j)  The court or the officer presiding over an appeal shall render a decision within ten business days of the hearing, and shall give written notification of the decision. 
(k)  The decision of the court or presiding hearing officer is subject to review via certiorari to superior court. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13) 
Sec. 70-36. - Confidentiality. 
To the extent allowed by law, information contained and gathered through the alarm registration process will be held in confidence by the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23(12-O-0375), § 1, 5-29-13, eff. 9-15-13) 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. 2013-23(12-O-0375) states: "During the period of time between the approval of the amendments in this ordinance and September 15, 2013, the City of Atlanta shall conduct a campaign to educate the citizens of the City of Atlanta of the effects of thereof. A component of this campaign shall include outreach to the City's Neighborhood Planning Units (NPUs), but shall. not be limited thereto." 
Chapter 74 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Clean city commission, § 2-1876 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 86; indoor air, § 86-31 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 130; sewage disposal, § 154-196 et seq.; tree protection, § 158-26 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Cost recovery for reparation of damage due to hazardous material. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section the term "hazardous material" means and includes all chemicals, materials or substances that may be so defined by the Secretary of Transportation of the United States under the provisions of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act, 49 USC 1801—1812 (Public Safety Law 93-633). 
(b)  If any damage to city property or discharge of hazardous materials from the shipping package or container or the threat of such discharge occurs which results from the transport, storage, holding, detention, delivery for transport or acceptance for transport of hazardous materials in this city, the city may recover from any shipper, carrier, bailor, bailee or any other person responsible for such storage, transport, holding, detention, delivery or acceptance all costs, including direct as well as indirect, incurred by the city in the prevention, abatement or removal of any such discharge or threatened discharge, including reasonable attorney's fees or costs incurred with respect to recovery. 
(c)  The mayor is authorized to direct the bringing of any legal action necessary and desirable to enforce this section. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4028) 
State Law reference— Costs of oil spill response, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-500 et seq. 
Secs. 74-2—74-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION, AND POLLUTION CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-48, § 1, adopted Aug. 20, 2004, repealed art. II, §§ 74-36—74-45, in its entirety. Section 3 of said ordinance provided for the inclusion of a new art. II to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 2001-72, § 1, adopted Oct. 9, 2001. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 1, approved July 27, 2010, amended the title of Art. II to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Land Development Code reference— Building regulations, § 8-2001 et seq. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4 et seq. 

Sec. 74-36. - Title, authority and findings. 
(a)  Title. This article will be known as the "City of Atlanta Soil Erosion, Sedimentation, and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(b)  Authority. This article is enacted to implement the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1, et seq., as amended in the 2009 Session of the Georgia General Assembly. 
(c)  Findings. The Council of the City of Atlanta finds that soil erosion and sediment deposition onto lands and into waters within the watersheds of the city are occurring as a result of a need for improvement in the application of proper soil erosion and sedimentation control practices in land clearing, soil movement, and construction activities and that such erosion and sediment deposition result in pollution of state waters and damage to domestic, agricultural, recreational., fish and wildlife, and other resources uses. It is therefore declared to be the policy of the city and the intent of this article to strengthen and extend the present erosion and sedimentation control activities and programs of the city and to provide for the establishment and implementation of a city-wide comprehensive soil erosion and sedimentation control program to conserve and protect the land, water, air and other resources of the city. The city further declares its intention through this article to meet or exceed, where permitted, the requirements of state and federal law regarding the regulation of land-disturbing activities. 
(Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 2, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-37. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
(1)  Approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the City of Atlanta or the Fulton or DeKalb Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(2)  Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of sound conservation and engineering practices, and vegetative measures to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(3)  Board means the Georgia Board of Natural Resources. 
(4)  Certified personnel or certified person means a person who holds current certification issued by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC) for completion of appropriate courses as determined by the Commission. 
(5)  City means the City of Atlanta, which is a local issuing authority as defined herein. 
(6)  Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
(7)  Commissioner means the Commissioner of the Department of Watershed Management, or a designee. 
(7.5)  CPESC means a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
(8)  Cut means a portion or area of land surface from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation (i.e. the volume between the original ground surface and the excavated surface), and also known as excavation. 
(9)  Department means the Department of Watershed Management, or its successor agency. 
(10)  Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
(11)  Director means the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
(12)  District means the Fulton or DeKalb Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(13)  Disturbed area means the total area on which land-disturbing activities are to take place. 
(14)  Division means the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
(15)  Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
(16)  Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
(17)  Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan." 
(18)  Fill means a portion or area of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been or will be added (i.e. the volume above the original ground). 
(19)  Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100% of the soil surface is uniformly covered in pennanent vegetation with a density of 70% or greater, or landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
(20)  Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
(21)  Late-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including. but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in section 74-38(e). 
(22)  Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
(23)  Local issuing authority means the City of Atlanta acting through its Department of Watershed Management, which has been certified by the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. and the rules for erosion and sediment control issued by the division set out in Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. 391-3-7-.09. 
(24)  Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia means the guide published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, and amendments to the manual approved by the Commission., as specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b), adopted by reference in section 74-40(a) of the Atlanta City Code, and commonly referred to as the "Green Book." The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is currently available from the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (http://www.gaswcc.org). 
(25)  Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., referenced in Article VII Chapter 74 section 314(b) of the Atlanta City Code, which addresses environmental and development-related matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
(26)  Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
(27)  Notice or official notice means a written communication by the city to the owner, operator, or person conducting land-disturbing activity, including a notice to comply pursuant to section 74-42(d), a stop work order pursuant to sections 74-42(b), 74-42(c), 74-42(e), or 74-42(f), or a fine pursuant to section 74-42(g). Notice shall be deemed official when it meets one of the following requirements: 
(1)  Communicated in writing to the owner or operator via U.S. mail; 
(2)  Hand-delivered to the owner, operator, or person conducting land-disturbing activity; or 
(3)  Posted in a conspicuous location on the site. 
(28)  Notice of intent (N0I) means a notification filed with the state to obtain coverage under the NPDES State General Permit for stormwater discharges from a construction site. 
(29)  Notice of termination (NOT) means a notification filed with the state to terminate coverage under the NPDES State General Permit for stormwater discharges from a construction site. 
(30)  Operator means the party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of' those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
(31)  Original ground surface means the existing ground surface before any grading, excavation, or filling. 
(32)  Owner or property owner means any person having individual or joint or common title to property in any form defined by the laws of the State of Georgia as an estate or interest, whether legal or equitable and however acquired, in real property. 
(33)  Permanent vegetation means planted trees, shrubs. grasses, perennial vines, a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the Atlanta region and planted at the appropriate time of year, or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of perennial vegetation appropriate for the Atlanta region. 
(34)  Permit or land-disturbing activity permit (or LDA permit) means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. Such authorization shall be deemed included in the building permit issued pursuant to Appendix A, section 103.1 of the City of Atlanta Land Development Code. If a building permit is not required, such authorization may be provided by a department-approved plan and subject to any required fees, bonds, or NOIs. 
(35)  Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
(36)  Project means the entire proposed development regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
(37)  Properly designed means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications or BMP design requirements contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (Green Book). 
(38)  Riparian buffer means the area of land lying adjacent to a wetland or stream in which development is prohibited or limited as more particularly set out in Article VII Chapter 74 section 303 of the Atlanta City Code, or applicable state or federal law. 
(39)  Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
(40)  Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
(41)  Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
(42)  Site means the real property on which land-disturbing activities occur regardless of the size of the disturbed area. 
(43)  Stabilization or stabilize means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
(44)  State General Permit or National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means the authorization for the discharge of stormwater runoff from construction activities. This term shall mean the NPDES permit currently in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
(45)  State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
(46)  State water buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to a state waters or trout stream as more particularly set out in section 74-43(c)(15) and 74-43(c)(16). 
(47)  Structure means that which is built, placed, or constructed, as more particularly set out in Part 8, Chapter 2, Article B section 8-2083 of the City of Atlanta Land Development Code. The term "structure" includes impervious surfaces as defined by Article VII Chapter 74 section 74-302(15) of the Atlanta City Code, temporary buildings or appurtenances, and pipes or utility lines. 
(48)  Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means methods for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(49)  Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
(50)  Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil using one or more of the following measures found in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
(51)  Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed, and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
(52)  Wetlands means those areas, delineated in accordance with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual, 1987 as amended, that under normal conditions contain hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrologic conditions reflecting temporary or permanent inundation or saturation by surface or ground water. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas and typically support a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 3, 7-27-10; Ord. No. 2016-48(16-O-1642) , §§ 1—4, 12-14-16) 
Sec. 74-38. - Applicability of article; exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70, "Mineral Resources and Caves Act;" 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan or development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, 
(a)  Construction of any such residence (single-family) shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 74-43 of this article. 
(b)  For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a. trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. 
(c)  The minimum requirements of section 74-43 of this article and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the city; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs. goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry., including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds. 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing; or other activities otherwise prohibited in a state waters buffer, as established in section 74-43(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices. 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
(8)  Any project involving less than 5,000 square feet of disturbed area; provided, however, 
(a)  Construction of any such project shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 74-43 of this article; 
(b)  This exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters (perennial stream), and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events (ephemeral stream) and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than 5,000 square feet, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9), or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1 except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the city, and the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a LDA permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same fines or penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if an LDA permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same fines or penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 4, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-39. - Application and permit process. 
(a)  General. A permit is required for any land-disturbing activity in the City of Atlanta unless exempt in accordance with section 74-38, above. The property owner, developer and designated planters and engineers shall review die general development plans and detailed plans of the city that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city and shall design the proposed development in compliance with these regulations. Land disturbing activity permits shall be applied for as part of a building, permit in compliance with this article and Part 8 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person required to apply for an LDA permit shall conduct any land-disturbing activity requiring an approved erosion and sediment control plan within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a LDA permit from the city to perform such activity; 
(2)  The application for a land-disturbing activity permit shall be submitted to the bureau of buildings and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 74-40 of this article. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of subsection 74-43 of this article. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. The application shall include the owner's name, street address, mailing address if different from street address (a post office box alone shall not satisfy this requirement), and other contact information such as phone numbers and e-mail addresses. 
(3)  Immediately upon approval of an application and plan for an LDA permit, the city shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of' the erosion and sedimentation control plan, if such review and approval or disapproval is required. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the city. No LDA permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsection 74-43(c)(13), (15) and (16), and bonding, if required, as per subsection 74-39(b)(5) have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the city and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the city to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(4)  If an LDA permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous city-issued permits, this article, section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the city may deny the LDA permit application. 
(5)  Performance bonds required. For land-disturbing activities on sites with a disturbed area of one acre or greater, or on which there is cut, fill, or a combination of both in an amount greater than 500 cubic yards, the applicant shall post a performance bond in accordance with the following requirements: 
(i)  The bond amount shall be $3,000.00 minimum, and prorated at $3,000.00 per disturbed acre for any amount or fraction greater than one acre; 
(ii)  The performance bond shall be issued by a bonding company licensed and registered in Georgia; 
(iii)  The performance bond shall ensure that all affected areas will be stabilized through structural measures, vegetative measures, or both to provide effective soil erosion and sediment control; 
(iv)  The terms of the bond shall extend from the beginning of the project until one year following its completion. The performance bond shall be written to the benefit of the City of Atlanta and shall obligate the bonding company to correct any violations of this article for a period of one year following cessation of land-disturbing activities or final sign-off pursuant to section 74-43(f); 
(v)  Failure to maintain or renew the performance bond, should it expire prior to final sign-off, shall be a violation of this article, and shall be a separate violation for each day of such failure, and shall be grounds for suspending or revoking the LDA permit. 
(6)  If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the LDA permit after issuance, the city may call the bond in accordance with section 74-42(h). 
(c)  LDA permits. 
(1)  LDA permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the city of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)  No LDA permit shall be issued by the city unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the city has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsection 74-43(c)(13), (15), (16), or other ordinances are obtained, bonding requirements. if necessary as per subsection 74-39(b)(5) are met, and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city are met; provided, however, such approval by the district will not be required if the city and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the city to approve the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. If the LDA permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate LDA permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The LDA permit may be suspended, revoked. or modified by the city, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the permittee, owner, or a successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan, or that the permittee, owner, or a successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of an LDA permit or owner shall notify any successor in title as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the LDA permit. 
(5)  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the tax collector or tax commissioner of the county in which the property for which the permit is requested lies and by the official responsible for the collection for municipal taxes for the city, if applicable, certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(6)  No permit shall be issued or permit modification or revision be approved for construction within a larger common plan of development or sale if there is a pending enforcement action pursuant section 74-42 or the state general permit, except to allow corrective or remedial measures. 
(7)  Notice of intent and notice of termination. NOIs and NOTs required to be submitted to the EPD District Office under the State General Permit shall be submitted concurrently to the City of Atlanta. 
(8)  A copy of the permit shall be posted on the site at all times as set out in Appendix A, Chapter 1 section 102.2(c) of the City of Atlanta Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 5, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-40. - Plan requirements. 
(a)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 74-43 of this article. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, city ordinances, and state laws. 
(b)  Data required for site plan. 
(1)  Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or a narrative shall be written on the site plan, in the general notes section, or in the erosion and sediment control notes section of the plan. 
(2)  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
(3)  Name, street address, and phone number of the property owner. 
(4)  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
(5)  Total size of site, project, or phase under construction, and total size of disturbed area in both square feet and acres. 
(6)  Construction activity schedule showing the sequence of major activities involving land-disturbing activity to be completed in chronological order, including, but not limited to, anticipated starting and completion dates for the project, initial installation of BMPs, clearing arid grubbing activities, grading, utility installation, and temporary and final stabilization in accordance with section 74-43(f). Include the following statement in bold letters: "The installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with laud-disturbing activities." 
(7)  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems' storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
(8)  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting, dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan shall show applicable options for year-round seeding in accordance with Chapter 6 Section II, Vegetative Measures, of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(9)  Detailed drawings for all structural erosion control practices. Detailed drawings shall either follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, or shall adhere to more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. 
(10)  In accordance with section 74-41(a), the following maintenance statement in bold letters: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source." 
(c)  Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a certified design professional. The certified plans shall contain: 
(1)  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
(2)  Vicinity maps showing location of project or site, and existing streets and drainage paths within one mile of the project. 
(3)  Boundary line survey. 
(4)  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
(5)  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
(6)  Adjacent areas and features including, but not limited to, streams, lakes, wetlands, and residential areas, which may be affected by the proposed land-disturbing activity. 
(7)  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
(8)  State waters buffers required by section 74-43(c)(15) and 74-43(c)(16), and the riparian buffers required by Article VII Chapter 74 sections 303(a), 303(b), 303(c), and 303(d). 
(9)  Where applicable, the 2,000 foot Chattahoochee River Corridor as required by O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. and set out in Article VII Chapter 74 section 314(b), and the allowable limits of impervious surface and land-disturbing activities as specified in accordance with the certificate issued under O.C.G.A. § 12-5-445. 
(10)  The specified horizontal state waters buffer along designated trout streams (the Chattahoochee River within the city) required by subsection 74-43(c)(16). 
(11)  Locations of BMPs using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(12)  Detailed maintenance requirements for each BMP. 
(13)  Information required by the applicable Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist, as may be amended, established by the Commission (currently available at http://www.gaswcc.org) for projects which disturb one acre or more. 
(d)  Revisions. Revisions or amendments to an approved erosion and sedimentation control plan that may affect a BMP with a hydraulic component shall be certified by a design professional, and subsequently approved by the Department of Watershed Management. 
(e)  A copy of the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be kept at the site during all land-disturbing activities. 
(Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 6, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-41. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which LDA permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion control, the owner or operator shall install additional erosion and sedimentation control measures to control or treat the sediment source. The city shall regulate primary, secondary, and tertiary permittee's as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittee's shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of' best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittee's shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittee's shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of BMPs where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. 
(b)  Notice. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, LDA permit conditions, or the provisions of this article, an official notice or stop work order shall be served upon that person. The official notice or stop work order shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified in the notice, he or she shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(c)  Right of entry. The city shall conduct such investigations it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose, to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private. for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. This includes the right to enter a property when the city has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
(e)  The districts or the commission or both may periodically review the actions of the city. The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to the city for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the city's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission may notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of the city, Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of the city's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the city If such review indicates that the city has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the city in writing. The city shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the city does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the city as an issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 7, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-42. - Stop work, penalties, and fines. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. No person shall conduct land-disturbing activity that requires an LDA permit in accordance with section 74-39 of this article, and no person shall conduct land-disturbing activity that requires a building permit in accordance with Appendix A, section 103.1 of the City of Atlanta Land Development Code without first obtaining said permit, respectively. Conducting land-disturbing activity without a required permit shall be a violation of this Code. A person that conducts land-disturbing activity in violation of this subsection shall be subject to revocation of its business license, work permit, or other authorization for the conducting of business and associated activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city, and shall be subject to an assessment of double the applicable fees in accordance with Atlanta City Code Appendix A, Building Code Amendments, section 104.2(d). 
(b)  Land-disturbing activity stop-work orders; effect. When a land-disturbing activity stop-work order is issued by the city, such stop-work order shall be a final order of the city, shall be effective immediately, and shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site, except for necessary corrective action or mitigation, and shall be in effect until such corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Performing land-disturbing activities on a site while subject to a land-disturbing activity stop-work order shall be a violation of this article. 
(c)  Project-wide stop-work orders; effect. When a project wide stop-work order is issued by the city, such stop-work order shall be a final order of the city, shall be effective immediately and shall apply to all activity on the site, including but not limited to land-disturbing activity, construction, architecture, landscape, electric, plumbing, and any other work at the site, except for necessary corrective action or mitigation, and shall be in effect until such corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Performing activities on a site while subject to a project wide stop-work order shall be a violation of this article. 
(d)  Notice to comply for first violation of article. Except as otherwise provided in this section, for the first violation of the provisions of this article, the city shall issue an official, written notice to the owner, operator, or violator. The owner, operator, or violator shall have three days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within three days, the city shall issue a land-disturbing activity stop-work order. If the violation is not corrected within three days from the issuance of the land-disturbing activity stop-work order, the city shall issue a project wide stop-work order. 
(e)  Additional violations of article; when stop-work. For a second and for each subsequent violation of the provisions of this article, the city may issue an immediate land-disturbing activity stop-work order. If the violation is not corrected within three days from the issuance of the land-disturbing activity stop-work order, the city may issue a project wide stop-work order. 
(f)  Stop-work orders not requiring warning. A stop-work order shall be issued immediately by the city for any of the following, which are violations of this Code: 
(1)  Commencing any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing activity permit without first obtaining a permit pursuant to section 74-42(a); or 
(2)  Commencing any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing activity permit without first conducting a pre-construction meeting with the city pursuant to section 74-43(e); or 
(3)  If the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state pursuant to section 74-43(c)(18); or 
(4)  If significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the city, have been or are being discharged into state waters pursuant to section 74-43(b)(2); or 
(5)  Commencing any land-disturbing activity in either the state waters buffer or the riparian buffer that requires either a state buffer variance or an authorized encroachment in accordance with Article VII Chapter 74 section 306 without first obtaining the required variance or authorized encroachment, pursuant to sections 74-43(c)(15), 74-43(c)(16), or 74-43(d); or 
(6)  Best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained pursuant to section 74-43(b)(1). 
(g)  Fines and illegal buffer encroachments. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any LDA permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the city or director issued as provided in this ordinance shall be liable for a fine not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, the city's municipal courts have been authorized by the General Assembly to impose a fine not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(2)  Any person who violates section 74-43(c)(15) or section 74-43(c)(16) by performing land-disturbing activities or placing fill or structures within a state waters buffer or a riparian buffer without a state buffer variance or an authorized encroachment in accordance with Article VII Chapter 74 section 306 shall, in addition to any fine or stop-work order, remove such encroachment and temporarily stabilize any disturbed area in accordance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, the unauthorized placement of fill or structures within a state waters buffer or a riparian buffer shall constitute a nuisance per se and shall be unlawful. The Solicitor or City attorney is authorized to file such actions as may be necessary to remedy the unauthorized placement of fill or structures within a state waters buffer or riparian buffer, including a petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or any other appropriate legal action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate an unlawful use or activity. 
(3)  Buffer Restoration and Revegetation Plan Required. Any person in violation of section 74-42(h)(2), above, shall submit a Buffer Restoration and Revegetation Plan to the city in accordance with the City of Atlanta Buffer Revegetation Guidelines, referenced in Article VII Chapter 74 section 306(d)(3), and in accordance with the approved Buffer Restoration and Revegetation Plan, the violator shall restore the buffer with native riparian vegetation. Final sign-off of the land-disturbing activity in accordance with section 74-43(f) shall be contingent upon implementing the Buffer Restoration and Revegetation Plan. 
(4)  Any fine imposed pursuant to subsections (1) or (2) of this section shall be in addition to any stop-work order issued by the city or the director under his or her authority. 
(h)  Bond forfeiture. If after official notice, the owner or operator fails to bring the site into compliance with this Article, he or she shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other fines or penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited the performance bond set out in section 74-39(b)(5). Upon notice by the city that the bond is forfeited, the bonding company shall bring the site into compliance in accordance with section 74-39(b)(5)(iv). Alternatively, the city may remediate and stabilize the site to bring it into compliance, arid the bonding company shall be responsible for the associated costs up to the amount of the bond. 
(i)  Liens. Any costs incurred by the city in accordance with section 74-42(h) that are not covered by the performance bond shall be assessed against the property on which the land-disturbing activity occurred and shall constitute a lien on the property if such costs are not paid within 60 days of receipt of notice of such costs. Notice shall be deemed effective within five days of the city mailing or delivering by courier or express mail written notice addressed to the property owner(s) as ownership appears on the tax records of Fulton or DeKalb County. 
(j)  Compliance meetings. In addition to any enforcement mechanism or fine imposed pursuant to section 74-42, the commissioner may invite the owner or operator to a compliance meeting to review the determination that a violation of this article has occurred, and the consequent remedial action(s) to be taken. If the owner or operator and the commissioner can agree to appropriate remedial and preventive measures. such measures and a reasonable compliance schedule shall be incorporated as a supplemental condition of the permit. If an agreement is not reached through this process, the commissioner may institute other enforcement actions in accordance with this ordinance to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article or other laws or regulations. 
(k)  Show cause hearing. The commissioner may order an owner or operator that causes or contributes to violations of this article to appear before the commissioner and show cause why enforcement actions should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the owner or operator and shall specify the date, time, and location of the hearing., the reasons for this hearing, and proposed enforcement actions. 
(l)  Consent agreements. The commissioner may enter into a consent order or establish an agreement with the owner or operator responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include the specific action(s) to be taken by the owner or operator to correct the noncompliance within a time frame specified in the order. Failure of an owner or operator to abide by a consent agreement shall be grounds for further and additional enforcement. 
(m)  Assessment of damages. When erosion or sedimentation from a land-disturbing activity causes damage or any other impairment to city facilities or property, the commissioner shall assess the expenses incurred by the city to repair damage to the city facilities or property, and any other expenses or damages incurred by the city. The commissioner shall file a claim with the owner, operator, or any other person causing said damages seeking reimbursement for any and all expenses or damages suffered by the city. If the claim is ignored or denied, the commissioner shall notify the city attorney to take such measures as shall be appropriate to recover for any expense or other damages -suffered by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 8, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-43. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not excluded by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsection 74-43 of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMP's. 
(1)  Best management practices (BMPs) consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia shall be utilized in accordance with all land-disturbing activities to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, BMPs shall be utilized for the duration of all land-disturbing activities, and shall be properly designed, installed, and maintained in accordance with the :Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. Maintenance of all BMPs, whether temporary or permanent, shall be, at all times, the responsibility of the property owner or operator. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of BMPs shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the commissioner or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a state general permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing activity permit issued by the city or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving, waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction. is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of this Article for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. Compliance with any state requirements are additional requirements of any LDA permit issued by the city pursuant to this article. 
(c)  The city adopts by reference the rules and regulations, ordinances, and resolutions adopted by the board pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1. et seq., as amended, for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities, which require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, as well as the following: 
(1)  BMPs and tree protection fences shall be installed along site boundaries prior to stripping of vegetation, grading, and other land-disturbing activities to minimize erosion and prevent sedimentation; 
(2)  Cut or fill shall be minimized; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of soil exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; provided, however, the following shall apply: 
(a)  Disturbed areas shall be stabilized using temporary vegetation and. mulch within 14 days of land-disturbing activity, and permanent vegetation shall be used within 30 days of land-disturbing activity; 
(b)  Disturbed areas related to utility construction shall be stabilized by the close of each business day; and 
(c)  Slopes greater than 2.5:1 (two and one-half feet horizontal to one foot vertical) shall be permanently stabilized as soon as practicable using erosion control matting and blankets pursuant to the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, in combination with permanent vegetation; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until final stabilization in accordance with section 74-43(f) has occurred. BMPs for sediment storage in accordance with this section shall be installed prior to and for the duration of all land-disturbing activities; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cut or fill shall not endanger adjoining property; any change in grade shall conform to the following requirements: 
(a)  No fill shall exceed a 2:1 (two feet horizontal and one foot vertical) slope; and 
(b)  No cut shall exceed a 2:1 (two feet horizontal and one foot vertical) slope; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of temporary bridges or culverts unless this requirement is waived by the city; 
(14)  Erosion and sedimentation control plans shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 74-43(b)(2) of this article; 
(15)  State waters buffer required by O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6: Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No person shall conduct land-disturbing activities within a state waters buffer, and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction-site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved in accordance with section 74-43(f), a state waters buffer may be thinned or trimmed by hand of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim by hand vegetation in a state waters buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The state waters buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
(1)  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
(2)  Stream crossings for sewer lines; 
(16)  State Waters trout stream buffer required by O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6: There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally froze the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a state waters trout stream buffer and said buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction-site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a state waters trout stream buffer may be thinned or trimmed by hand of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim by hand vegetation in a state waters trout stream buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; 
b.  The state waters trout stream buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angel, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; 
(17)  The project shall be posted with a sign approved by the commissioner and visible both to the street and site workers to notify the public of the erosion and sedimentation control ordinance and city's soil erosion hotline telephone number; 
(18)  Land-disturbing activities shall not pose an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state. Imminent threats to public health or waters of the state include, but are not limited to, tracking sediment onto a public or private street, encroaching into a state waters buffer, or sedimentation of the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(19)  Topsoil, if present, shall be stockpiled and reused on the site to the maximum extent practicable; and 
(20)  Sedimentation of a watercourse in connection with a land-disturbing activity shall be remediated in accordance with a remedial plan prepared by a design professional and approved by the department. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, sedimentation of a watercourse in connection with a land-disturbing activity shall constitute a nuisance per se and shall be unlawful. The solicitor or city attorney is authorized to file such actions as may be necessary to remedy the sedimentation of a watercourse in connection with a land-disturbing activity, including a petition for a restraining order. injunction, abatement, or any other appropriate legal action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate an unlawful use or activity. 
(d)  No person shall conduct land-disturbing activity within a riparian buffer without first obtaining an authorized encroachment in accordance with Article VII Chapter 74 of the Atlanta City Code. 
(e)  No land-disturbing activity shall commence prior to a pre-construction meeting between the city and the person or persons responsible for the installation and maintenance of the erosion and sedimentation control measures. Such meeting shall be held on the site where the land-disturbing activity is to occur. 
(f)  Final stabilization and final sign-off. Following the completion or cessation of land-disturbing activities at a site, all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures shall be uniformly covered (100 percent of the soil within the disturbed area) with permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures, including, but not limited to, rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches, or geotextiles. A final sign-off by the department of watershed management shall be required for all projects involving land-disturbing activities, and said sign-off shall occur prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the recording of any final plat. 
(Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 9, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-44. - Validity and liability. 
(a)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(b)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which an LDA permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the LDA permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved there under or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 10, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-45. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedy. In the event of any suspension, revocation or modification of any LDA permit, the permit holder shall receive written notice of such action and shall be given the opportunity to show cause why such suspension, revocation or modification should be withdrawn by the city. The city acting by and through its commissioner of watershed management shall review the LDA permit application, the reasons submitted by the permit holder for determining such permit holder not be in violation, and shall issue a decision in writing, if' such decision to suspend, revoke or modify the LDA permit is affirmed, setting forth the reasons for doing so. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by such decision, after exhausting his or her administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal to the Superior Court of the county wherein which such land-disturbing activity occurred or is proposed to occur, for review of such written decision. 
(c)  Review process. The review process for new LDA permits, as well as that for suspension, modification, and revocation of LDA permits described in this section, will be conducted by the city, unless the district has not reached an agreement with the city which would authorize the city to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. In the absence of such authorization, review will be conducted by the district. 
(Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 11, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-46. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection, or in any land-disturbing activities shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have, as a minimum, one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 12, 7-27-10) 
Sec. 74-47. - Fees. 
(a)  Where inspections, plan reviews or other administrative or regulatory services are required to ensure compliance with this ordinance, fees shall be collected in accordance with the schedule of fees and charges established by the council from time to time, copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the municipal clerk and the Commissioner. 
(b)  Land-disturbing activity fee. In addition to any other fee charged in this Code of Ordinances, there is assessed a fee of $40.00 per disturbed acre payable to the City of Atlanta upon application to perform land-disturbing activities. This fee is adopted pursuant to Ordinance 04-O-1209 as required by the State of Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), and the Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. This fee shall be collected as a separate and distinct charge for the purposes of administering the implementation of the state general permit, which has been delegated to the city as a local issuing authority pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2004-48, § 3, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-43(10-O-0808), § 13, 7-27-10) 
Secs. 74-48—74-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-56, § 1, adopted Sept. 15, 2004, repealed art. III, §§ 74-101—74-112, in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to grading and stormwater management as enacted by Code 1977; as amended. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 

Secs. 74-101—74-128. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, approved Oct. 16, 2017, repealed the former art. IV., §§ 74-129—74-142, and enacted a new art. IV as set out herein. The former art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2004-51, § 1, 8-20-04; Ord. No. 2010-17(10-O-0790), § 1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 2012-17(12-O-0502), § 1, 5-16-12; Ord. No. 2013-03(12-O-0774), §§ 1, 2(Attach. A), 1-31-13. 

Sec. 74-129. - Title; purpose. 
(a)  This article shall be known and may be referred to as the "Atlanta Noise Ordinance." 
(b)  This section is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of City of Atlanta through the control of noise. It is the intent of this section to establish standards that will reduce excessive community noises, which are harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and to the community in the enjoyment of life and property and in the conduct of business. 
( Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, 10-16-17 ) 
Sec. 74-131. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  Restrictions of 300 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
(1)  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the building, structure or vehicle, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
(2)  Human-produced sounds. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the place, building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
(3)  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
(4)  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or social event to produce noise in such a manner that such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet or more from the building or structure from which the noise is emanating or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12 midnight on Friday and Saturday. For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in paragraphs a. or b. above. 
(b)  Restrictions of 100 feet for 11:00 p.m. through 7 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(1)  Mechanical sound-making devices. It is unlawful for any person or persons to play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound and/or noise at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building, structure, or motor vehicle or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(2)  Human-produced sound. It is unlawful for any person or persons to yell, shout, hoot, whistle, or sing on the public streets or sidewalks or on private property so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the place on public streets and sidewalks, or in the case of private real property, beyond the property limits, on which the person is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(3)  Commercial advertising. It is unlawful for any person or persons to use, operate, or permit to be used or operated any radio receiving device, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is cast upon the public streets or other public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or which serves to attract the attention of the public to any building, structure or vehicle in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, any noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the source of the sound cast upon the public streets or other public property or from the building, structure, or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, in which it is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(4)  Party noise. It is unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or event to produce noise in such a manner so as to such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the building or structure from which the party noise is emanating or in the case of real property, beyond the property limits, on which the party or social event is located, whichever is farthest, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. For the purposes of this subsection, a "person in charge of a party or other social event" shall mean any adult person who resides in or on the premises involved in such party or social event and is present at such party or social event. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean the same sounds, or any combination thereof, as described in paragraphs a. or b. above. 
(c)  Restrictions for areas within apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes, or other such residential dwelling units. Except for persons within commercial enterprises that have an adjoining property line or boundary with a residential dwelling unit, it is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any noise in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any other person a distance of five feet beyond the adjoining property line wall or boundary of any apartment, condominium, townhouse, duplex, or other such residential dwelling units with adjoining points of contact. For the purposes of this subsection, "noise" shall mean human-produced sounds of yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing, or mechanically-produced sounds made by radio-receiving device, television, stereo, musical instrument, phonograph sound amplifier or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing, or amplifying of sound, or any combination thereof. For the purposes of this subsection, "property line or boundary" shall mean an imaginary line drawn through the points of contact of (1) adjoining apartments, condominiums, townhouses, duplexes or other such residential dwelling units with adjoining points owned, rented, or leased by different persons; or (2) adjoining common areas or adjoining exterior walls. Said property line or boundary includes all points of a plane formed by projecting the property line or boundary including the ceiling, the floor, and the walls. 
( Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, 10-16-17 ) 
Sec. 74-132. - Exclusions. 
The prohibitions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  The generation of noise by public safety vehicles, emergency signaling devices, or authorized public safety personnel performing their public functions. 
(b)  Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building, or from any automobile alarm, provided such alarm shall terminate its operation within 15 minutes of its activation. 
(c)  The generation of noise in the performance of any work or action necessary to deliver essential services including, but not limited to, water or sewer projects, and other related public works projects; repairing gas, electric, telephone, and/or public transportation facilities; removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way; or abating emergency conditions threating the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(d)  Noise from snow blowers, snow throwers, and snowplows. 
(e)  Noise generated from celebrations, outdoor festivals, and/or municipally sponsored or approved events which were approved by contract, permit or otherwise. 
(f)  Noises resulting from the operation of the Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. 
(g)  Any noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration, for which a permit for temporary variance has been granted pursuant to this article, and which conforms to the conditions and limits stated in the variance and reasonably related activities. 
(h)  Noises resulting from any event sponsored by, associated with, or approved by a recognized institution of learning. 
(i)  Noises that result from or arise out of or stem from the occurrence of a professional sporting event or organized sports league. 
(j)  Noises and/or sounds caused to be made by manufacturing, governmental, or commercial entities in the normal course of their business. 
(k)  Any noise arising out of construction, maintenance, repair or renovation activities related to the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) bus or rail system, or the city's streetcar system, or other mass transit systems. 
(1)  MARTA and/or the city will develop and implement procedures by which NPUs affected by construction or planned maintenance activities will be notified prior to the commencement of work. 
(2)  MARTA and/or the city will develop and implement procedures by which any complaints of excessive noise created by construction or planned maintenance activities and reported by citizens to MARTA are available for review by interested citizens or members of the city council. 
(3)  MARTA and/or the city will develop and implement procedures by which contractors conducting planned maintenance or implementing new construction on the MARTA bus or rail system, or the city's streetcar system, or other mass transit systems will be monitored so as to ensure that all work is performed in a manner that will result in the creation of the least amount of noise disturbance. 
( Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, 10-16-17 ) 
Sec. 74-133. - Time restrictions on landscape maintenance motorized devices. 
It is unlawful for any person to use or operate any noise-generating, motorized landscape maintenance devices, including but not limited to leaf blowers, lawn mowers, or chainsaws, any single-family residential, two-family residential, multi-family residential, or mixed-use zoning district or in areas within 300 feet of any single-family residential, two-family residential, multi-family residential, or mixed-use zoning district from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
( Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, 10-16-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-34(18-O-1414), § 1, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 74-134. - Construction noise; loading and unloading activity. 
(a)  Construction noise that does not otherwise qualify under any of the exclusions listed in 74-132 shall comply with the following: between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on a weekday or between 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on a weekend day or legal holiday, construction noise of any type including but not limited to, noise caused by the erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, as well as the operation of any earth-moving equipment, crane, saw, drill, pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, hoist, automatic nailer or stapler, or any similar equipment, shall not be plainly audible within any single-family residential, two-family residential, or multi-family residential zoning district more than 100 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noise emanates; provided that between the hours of 7:00 a.m. (or 9:00 a.m. on a weekend day or legal holiday) and 7:00 p.m., the prohibitions of this article shall not apply to construction noise. 
(b)  Noise related to the standing of trucks or other vehicles on a street for the purpose of loading or unloading, and noise related to such loading or unloading that does not otherwise qualify under any of the exclusions listed in 74-132 shall comply with the following: between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day, shall not be plainly audible within any single-family residential, two-family residential, multi-family residential, or mixed-use zoning district more than 100 feet beyond the source from which the noise emanates; provided that between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., the prohibitions of this article shall not apply to noise as described in this subsection. The restrictions described in this subsection shall not apply to noise generated by the standing of any interstate bus on a street for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers. 
( Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, 10-16-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-34(18-O-1414), § 2, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 74-135. - Conditions for permits for temporary variance; notice of approval or denial; hearings and appeals. 
(a)  Any person who owns the real property from which a noise source emanates or operates any noise source may, with the permission of the owner, apply with a designee of the commissioner of the department of city planning for a temporary variance from one or more of the provisions of this article, unless such noise source is specifically exempted according to the provisions of section 74-132. This application, and the procedures for completing this process, shall be posted on the City of Atlanta's website. Failure to supply the information required thereby be cause for rejection of the application. Applications for a permit of temporary variance shall supply information including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The nature and location of the noise source for which such application is made; 
(2)  The reason for which the permit of temporary variance is requested, including the hardship that will result to the applicant, his/her client, or the public if the permit of temporary variance is not granted; 
(3)  The section or sections of this article for which the permit of temporary variance shall apply; 
(4)  A description of interim noise control measures to be taken for the applicant to minimize noise and the impacts occurring from the noise for which the variance is sought; and 
(5)  A specific schedule of the noise control measures that shall be taken to bring the source into compliance with this article within a reasonable time; and 
(6)  An affidavit stating that notice has been provided to the department of city planning for transmission to the NPU and the councilmembers (district and at-large) for the council district and council post where the variance is to be operational. 
(b)  The applicant shall pay a fee of $25.00 to cover expenses resulting from the processing of the application for a permit of temporary variance. 
(c)  Any permit of temporary variance shall be effective no longer than 14 days. Any person holding a permit of temporary variance may request an extension of time through the process for applying for a new permit of temporary variance according to the provisions of this section. 
(d)  The designee of the commissioner of the department of city planning shall notify the applicant in writing of his or her determination on the application within 14 days after receipt of the application. This notification shall inform the applicant of whether a permit for temporary variance has been approved or denied; and, if approved, shall set forth the location, dates and times of temporary variance. 
(e)  The permit of temporary variance may be revoked by the designee of the commissioner of the department of city planning if the terms of the permit of temporary variance are violated. 
(f)  In the event a permit for temporary variance shall be denied, or revoked, the aggrieved applicant shall have the right to a hearing before the commissioner of the department of city planning, or a hearing officer appointed by the commissioner of the department of city planning for that purpose, provided that the request for such hearing is made to the department of city planning within five days after receipt of the notice. Notices that are given only by mail shall be presumed to have been received three days after the mailing. Notices given in person, hand-delivered to the address of the applicant or sent by facsimile transmission or electronic mail shall be presumed to have been delivered on the date given or sent. 
(1)  Hearings contesting the matters in the notice shall be held before the commissioner of the department of city planning or the hearing officer, shall be informal, and shall be scheduled within five business days after receipt of the request for a hearing by the department of city planning. The hearing may be continued at the request of the applicant or to allow the attendance of any necessary party or witness, but only from day to day. The determination on such hearing shall be made at the conclusion of the hearing, and the commissioner of the department of city planning or the designee shall issue a written determination within one business day thereafter, which determination shall affirm or reverse the original decision. 
(2)  The hearing under this section shall be de novo and shall be informal. Such hearing shall evaluate the original decision and the application in accordance with the criteria of this article. 
(3)  The written determination of the commissioner of the department of city planning or the designee upon the conclusion of the hearing as provided in this section shall be the final decision of the city in the matter, and such a determination shall be subject to review by the Superior Court of Fulton County via a writ of certiorari. 
( Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, 10-16-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-34(18-O-1414), § 3, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 74-136. - Commercial entities near single-family residential, two-family residential, and multi-family residential zoning districts; commercial entities near mixed-use zoning districts. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section concerning noises and/or sounds caused to be made by commercial entities in the normal course of their business, the provisions and prohibitions of section 74-131, "Prohibited Conduct," subparagraph (a), concerning "Restrictions of 300 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday" and its subparts 1. through 3. shall apply to noises and/or sounds generated by a commercial entity that are plainly audible within any single-family residential, two-family residential, or multi-family residential zoning district more than 300 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section concerning noises and/or sounds caused to be made by commercial entities in the normal course of their business, the provisions and prohibitions of section 74-131, "Prohibited Conduct," subparagraph (b), concerning "Restrictions of 100 feet for 11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday," and its subparts 1. through 3. shall apply to noises and/or sounds generated by a commercial entity that are plainly audible within any single-family residential, two-family residential, or multi-family residential zoning district more than 100 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section concerning noises and/or sounds caused to be made by commercial entities in the normal course of their business, the provisions and prohibitions of section 74-131, "Prohibited Conduct," subparagraph (a), concerning "Restrictions of 300 feet for 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday" and its subparts 1. through 3. shall apply to noises and/or sounds generated by a commercial entity that are plainly audible within any mixed-use zoning district more than 500 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section concerning noises and/or sounds caused to be made by commercial entities in the normal course of their business, the provisions and prohibitions of section 74-131, "Prohibited Conduct," subparagraph (b), concerning "Restrictions of 100 feet for 11:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday," and its subparts 1. through 3. shall apply to noises and/or sounds generated by a commercial entity that are plainly audible within any mixed-use zoning district more than 300 feet beyond the property boundary of the property from which the noises and/or sounds emanate. 
( Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, 10-16-17 ; Ord. No. 2018-34(18-O-1414), § 4, 8-29-18 ) 
Sec. 74-137. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided by section 1-8. 
(b)  Each day during which any violation occurs shall constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense. 
( Ord. No. 2017-59(17-O-1555), § 2, 10-16-17 ) 
Secs. 74-138—74-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NUISANCES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 106. 
Land development code reference— Nuisance in or around buildings, § 17-9013. 

Sec. 74-161. - Jurisdiction to abate. 
(a)  Summary abatement. Any judge of the municipal court or the mayor or designee shall have the power to order the removal and abatement, without hearing, of those things which are declared either by the common or by the statute law to be nuisances, or which are nuisances per se and from their nature indisputably are so. 
(b)  Service of notice to abate. Any requirement of service of notice to abate a nuisance, which may be summarily abated, may be complied with by the mailing of such notice by registered mail to the last-known address of the person so to be notified. 
(c)  Service on complaint to abate a nuisance. On the hearing of any complaint before a judge of the municipal court concerning a nuisance and removal and abatement, reasonable notice by personal service shall be given to the parties interested, the owner or occupant of the premises where the alleged nuisance is taking place, or upon the person causing the nuisance, of the time and place of the hearing upon the complaint. 
(d)  Persons authorized to perform the removal or abatement of nuisances. After a nuisance has been ordered to be abated or removed, as provided in this section, it may be removed or otherwise abated by any employee designated by the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 17-9001) 
Sec. 74-162. - Collection by execution of cost of abatement of nuisance. 
Where any person ordered to do any work for the purpose of abating a nuisance has failed or refused to do that work, and the work has been done by the employees of the city, the cost thereof may be collected by execution against that person and that person's property. Each execution shall be prepared by the department charged with the duty of abating or removing the nuisance, shall be signed by the clerk of the council and shall be delivered to the revenue collection administrator, ex officio marshal, for collection as other executions are collected. 
(Code 1977, § 17-9002) 
Sec. 74-163. - Refusal to comply with an order to abate a nuisance. 
The failure or refusal of a person ordered to abate a nuisance after a hearing, or upon a summary abatement, shall, in addition to subjecting the person to punishment for contempt if the order is issued by the judge of the municipal court, constitute an offense which, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each day's failure or refusal to comply with the order, after the expiration of the time allowed in which to remove or abate the nuisance, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 17-9003) 
Sec. 74-164. - Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, vehicles, similar devices. 
It shall be a nuisance per se and shall be unlawful for any person to have in that person's possession or under that person's control upon any premises owned or occupied by that person, which premises are frequented by or accessible to children for playing or other purposes, the following items: 
(1)  Any icebox, refrigerator or similar device, abandoned or not being put to the use for which it was intended, which is equipped with any lock or locking device by which the door on such icebox, refrigerator or similar device, when closed, cannot be opened from the inside, or which impedes or makes more difficult the opening of the door from the inside thereof; or 
(2)  Any motor vehicle, abandoned or not being put to the use for which it was intended, which is equipped with any lock or locking device by which the windows or doors on the vehicle, when closed, cannot be opened from the inside, or which impedes or makes more difficult the opening of the door from the inside thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 17-9004) 
State Law reference— Abandoned containers, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100. 
Sec. 74-165. - Disposal of fecal matter, dead animals, tainted meat, waste, similar matter. 
It shall constitute a nuisance per se and shall be unlawful to place or throw or cause another to place or throw, in or upon any street, or public or private property of another, any dead bird or animal, tainted meat, decayed fruits or vegetables, human or other excrement. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the discharge of human excrement into the sewer system of the city, or the placing of the objects named in this section in suitable containers at curbside for garbage pickup. 
(Code 1977, § 17-9005) 
Sec. 74-166. - Obstruction of natural flow of water. 
Any person who shall, by the erection of a dam or other obstruction, prevent the natural flow of water, causing it to collect in pools upon any lot or in any street or alley, or who shall allow any such dam or obstruction to continue on any property owned or controlled by such person, after knowledge of its existence, or who shall do or cause to be done any work the effect of which will be to cause the damming up or collection of water in pools, shall be guilty of the offense of maintaining a nuisance, and such action shall be unlawful; provided, however, that this section shall not prevent persons owning or controlling property from filling up such lots as they may desire, if sufficient drainage is provided across such lots for such natural flow; provided, further, that this section shall not prevent such change of the grade of any street as may be for the public interest. 
(Code 1977, § 17-9008) 
Sec. 74-167. - Pollution of water. 
It shall constitute a nuisance and shall be unlawful for any person to commit the following acts: 
(1)  To keep a slaughterhouse, pen or stockyard on any real estate within the city which drains into the public water supply. 
(2)  To knowingly dispose of waste or rubbish directly into an open or flowing body of water. 
(Code 1977, § 17-9009) 
Cross reference— Water, § 154-51 et seq. 
Sec. 74-168. - Storage of odorous commodities. 
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance to keep uncured hides or other odorous commodities to the annoyance of any citizen or to keep such within 300 yards of the dwelling or place of business of any citizen of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17-9010) 
Sec. 74-169. - Obnoxious gases or odors. 
It shall constitute a nuisance and shall be unlawful for any person to burn in any furnace, grate, boiler, fireplace or upon any open land within the limits of the city any substance containing rubber, zinc, lead, sulfuric acid or any other substance which emits poisonous or obnoxious gases, fumes or smoke. This section shall not be construed so as to prohibit the burning of those substances within an enclosed structure and provided those gases, fumes or smoke are not allowed to escape from the enclosure in which those substances are burned in a state which would pollute the air or is harmful or injurious to the health and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17-9011) 
Sec. 74-170. - Wells, cisterns, pits, holes. 
(a)  The maintaining upon the premises by the owner or any person occupying such premises of wells, cisterns, pits and other holes in the earth where such are not securely covered or enclosed shall constitute a nuisance, and it shall be the duty of all persons owning or occupying those premises within the city to keep those wells, cisterns, pits and other holes in the earth on such premises securely covered or enclosed, so as to prevent injury therefrom to the person or property of others. Any person suffering or allowing those openings to be or remain open, unenclosed or otherwise so exposed as to be dangerous to the person or property of others, after being notified by an officer of the city to remedy that condition, shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(b)  Old and unused wells shall be filled by the owners or agents in charge of the property upon which the wells are located. It shall be the duty of the director, bureau of sanitary services to see that this is done as follows: Written notice shall be served personally upon the owner or agent to fill any such well, and upon the failure of any person notified to do so, the person shall be summoned before the judge of the municipal court and upon conviction for such failure shall be punished as provided for in section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 17-9012) 
Sec. 74-171. - Buildings used to sell or dispose of illegal controlled substances. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Conviction means legal adjudication of guilt in a court having jurisdiction and the exhaustion of all direct appeals. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq.) known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwelling unit means any portion of a building used, intended or designed as a separate abode and used, intended or designed for living, sleeping, cooking and eating therein. 
Dwellings, buildings or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. 
Occupied means any person living in, using or having legal possession of a dwelling, except that a temporary guest or a trespasser shall not be considered an occupant. 
Owner means any person or persons having any individual, joint or common title or interest in real property defined by the laws of the state as a legal or equitable estate or interest. 
Tenant means one who occupies lands or the premises of another in subordination to that other's title, and with such other person's assent, express or implied. 
(b)  Nuisance declared. The city finds that the sale and purchase of illegal controlled substances is being conducted in certain buildings, structures and dwellings in the city, creating a source of illegal criminal activity which endangers the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. Therefore, buildings, structures and dwelling units where illegal drugs are being sold, stored or used are declared a public nuisance. 
(c)  Abatement. Where a house, dwelling unit, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated and more than 50 percent deteriorated and where a report is made by the police department or any law enforcement agency, or by five or more residents of the city, that illegal drugs are being sold, stored or used in such house, dwelling unit, building or structure, the chief of police shall notify the commissioner of housing and/or the commissioner of planning and development of such reports, and such commissioner shall proceed to exercise those procedures set out in sections 30 through 33 of the city housing code and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17 to have the building demolished or to otherwise abate the public nuisance. 
(d)  Notice. 
(1)  Where a house, dwelling unit, building or structure is vacant but less than 50 percent deteriorated or occupied and being used for illegal drug activity, the chief of police, upon the chief's own initiative, or after receiving five complaints from residents, shall serve a cease and desist notice upon the owners and tenants of the house, dwelling unit, building or structure informing such owner or tenant that such property may be subject to seizure if the illegal drug activity does not cease. Such notice shall be in substantially the form as exhibit A, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(2)  Upon the first conviction of illegal drug activity from a house, dwelling unit, building or structure, the chief of police will serve a second cease and desist notice and inform the owner and tenant that upon three convictions, the property will be referred to municipal court for abatement of the nuisance, which may result in seizure of the property. Such notice shall be in substantially the form as exhibit B, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(3)  Upon two convictions, the chief of police will refer the case to the solicitor, who shall serve a letter of notice of intent to declare the property a public nuisance in municipal court and seek to abate the public nuisance. Such notice shall be in substantially the form as exhibit C, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(4)  Upon three convictions, the solicitor will file a complaint in municipal court to abate the nuisance and cause to be served upon the owner, tenant and/or occupant of the building a rule nisi requiring the owner, tenant and/or occupant to show cause on a date certain why the nuisance should not be abated. 
(e)  Remedy. In abating the public nuisance, the municipal court may order: 
(1)  That the property be vacated if the building, structure or dwelling is 50 percent deteriorated. 
(2)  That the property be voluntarily vacated by a date certain if the building is less than 50 percent deteriorated. 
(3)  That a landlord initiate dispossessory proceedings to evict tenants engaged in illegal drug activity. 
(4)  That the property be voluntarily demolished if the building, structure or dwelling is 50 percent deteriorated. 
(5)  That the property be involuntarily demolished if the building, structure or dwelling is 50 percent deteriorated. 
(6)  That the property be voluntarily cleaned and closed where it is less than 50 percent deteriorated. 
(7)  That the property be involuntarily cleaned and closed where it is less than 50 percent deteriorated. 
(8)  That the property be voluntarily transferred to the City of Atlanta/Fulton County land bank authority, provided that the land bank authority agrees to abate the nuisance. 
(9)  That the property be referred by the chief of police to the United States attorney for possible forfeiture pursuant to 21 USC 881. 
(10)  Any other remedy deemed appropriate in abating nuisances in the state. 
(f)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Those buildings, dwelling units and structures that are subject to the city's historic preservation ordinance, shall be exempt from this section to the extent that demolition is authorized. 
(2)  Those buildings which have been granted a nonconforming use pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the city shall not lose such nonconforming use while the property is subject to the process authorized by this section. 
(3)  Public property such as that owned by the city housing authority is exempt from this section only to the extent that seizure of the property is authorized. 
(Code 1977, § 17-9016) 
Sec. 74-172. - Junked motor vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Junked motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled, which is without current registration and license tag and inspection sticker, and which is one or more of the following: 
(1)  Wrecked; 
(2)  Dismantled; 
(3)  Abandoned; 
(4)  Partially dismantled; or 
(5)  Inoperative. 
(b)  Nuisance declared. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot, tract, parcel of land or premises in the city to suffer, permit or allow any junked motor vehicle to be parked, let or maintained thereon; and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such a junked motor vehicle on the real property of another. The presence of such a junked motor vehicle shall constitute a public nuisance per se, except that it shall not be a nuisance to maintain, in an otherwise lawful manner: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle in an enclosed building; 
(2)  Any motor vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or 
(3)  Any motor vehicle on property occupied and used for repair, reconditioning and remodeling of motor vehicles in conformance with the zoning ordinances of the city. 
(c)  Exception. Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under other provisions of law. 
(d)  Section not exclusive. This section is not the exclusive regulation within the city. It shall be supplemental and in addition to the other regulatory statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(e)  Notice. Except in circumstances where the public health and safety require an immediate hearing before the municipal court as set forth in subsection (f) of this section, the commissioner of public works shall give written notice to the owner of the vehicle or the person in possession, charge or control of the real property affected, that, in the opinion of the commissioner, a public nuisance exists. Such notice shall be deemed adequate when attached to the vehicle so as to be visible to persons outside the vehicle. Such notice shall state that action to eliminate the nuisance is requested within the number of days specified in the notice, and shall further state that, if such action is not taken within the time specified, summons will be issued requiring the party notified to appear in the municipal court to have there determined whether a nuisance exists and should be abated. 
(f)  Hearing. If the commissioner of public works shall determine that such a nuisance exists on any property within the city, it shall be the duty of the commissioner to issue summons to the owner of the real property affected, persons in possession of the real property affected, and to the last registered and legal owner of record of the junked motor vehicle unless identification numbers are not available to determine ownership, to appear before a judge of the municipal court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5 to determine whether a nuisance exists and should be abated. 
(g)  Service. Summons or complaints issued in accordance with subsection (f) of this section shall, in all cases, be served upon owners and persons in possession of such real property, and owners of the junked motor vehicle whose identity is known; and the return of service signed by the public officer or agent or an affidavit of service executed by a duly authorized citizen of this state reciting that a copy of such complaint or orders was served upon such person personally or by leaving such copy at the place of such person's residence shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owners and parties in interest. 
(1)  If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside out of the city, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such summons or complaint to be served upon such party or parties by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such party or parties or such service may be made by any citizen; and the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen that such party or parties were served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the residence shall be conclusive as to such service. 
(2)  Nonresidents of the state shall be served by publishing the same once each week for two weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city. A copy of such complaint or summons shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property affected by the complaint or summons. A copy of such complaint or summons will also be filed in the proper office or offices for the filing of lis pendens notices in the county in which the property is located, and such filing of the summons or complaint shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to such nonresidents by registered or certified mail. 
(3)  If either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities and the guardian or personal representative resides outside the city in this subsection or is a nonresident, such person shall be served as provided in this subsection in such cases. If such minor or insane person or person laboring under disabilities has not guardian or personal representative or if such minor or insane person lives outside of the city or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of such person's residence, which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person; in the case of other persons who live outside of the city or who are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located, who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such persons. 
(4)  If the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint or summons upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided for nonresidents of the state as set out in this section, or service may be perfected upon any person holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(h)  Failure to abate. If, upon a hearing as provided for in this section, a judge of the municipal court shall find that a nuisance exists, and further orders any party to abate such nuisance within a specified time, then each ten days that the nuisance is maintained subsequent to the expiration of the time fixed in the judgment shall constitute an offense. 
(i)  Abatement by city. If the nuisance, as adjudged by the municipal court, is not abated as ordered within ten days from the date of such adjudication, then the commissioner of public works is authorized to remove any junked motor vehicle from the property in question. The cost to the city of this abatement shall be charged to parties adjudged responsible for such nuisance abatement. If the owner of the real property affected has been adjudged responsible for abatement, and the charges remain unpaid for a period of 30 days after payment is due, the mayor or designee shall cause an execution to be issued against the owner of the property for those charges. The execution shall be a lien on the property and, when recorded in the general execution docket of the county, shall be a lien on all property of the defendant in execution from the date of such recording. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9-6001(10), 9-6031, 9-6032, 17-9015) 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 74-173. - Unclean vacant lot. 
(a)  Nuisance declared. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a vacant lot, tract, or parcel of land in the city to permit the accumulation of trash and other refuse upon said property to the extent that it endangers the public health, safety or welfare. The accumulation of such trash and other refuse shall constitute a public nuisance per se. 
(b)  Notice to owner to remedy condition. Except in urgent circumstances where the public health and safety require an immediate hearing within the municipal court as set forth in subsection (c) of this section, the commissioner of public works shall give written notice to the owner, or the person in charge or control of such property stating that in the opinion of the commissioner the conditions existing upon that property constitute a nuisance, setting forth action to be taken to eliminate the objectionable conditions, and requesting that it be made within the number of days specified in the notice. The notice shall further state that unless objectionable conditions are voluntarily removed within the time specified it will be the duty of the commissioner to cause summons to be issued requiring the party notified to appear in the municipal court to have there determined whether the conditions involved constitute a nuisance and should be abated. 
(c)  Court of appearance. If the commissioner of public works shall determine that conditions constituting a nuisance exist on any property within the city, it shall be the duty of the commissioner to issue summons to the owner of the property, persons in possession, and all parties in interest, to appear before the judge of the municipal court as provided by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5 to determine whether or not such conditions constitute a nuisance and should be abated. 
(d)  Hearing; failure to comply with order to abate. If, upon a hearing as provided for before the judge of the municipal court, the judge shall find that the conditions set out in this section exist and that those constitute a nuisance, and further orders the person to abate within a specified time, then each ten days that the condition adjudicated to be a nuisance by the judge is maintained subsequent to the expiration of the time fixed in the judgment shall constitute an offense. 
(e)  Action of commissioner upon failure to abate nuisance within specified time. Upon the adjudication by the judge of the municipal court that a nuisance exists, and notwithstanding the provisions set out in this section, if the owner of the property has not abated the nuisance after the expiration of five days from the date of the adjudication by the judge of the municipal court, then the commissioner of public works shall cause the nuisance to be abated and the objectionable conditions to be removed from the property. The commissioner of public works shall be authorized to cause the removal of trash and refuse from the property and to charge the cost and expense thereof to the owner. If the owner of the real property affected has been adjudged responsible for abatement, and the charges remain unpaid for a period of 30 days after payment is due, the mayor or designee shall cause an execution to be issued against the owner of the property for those charges. The execution shall be a lien on the property and, when recorded in the general execution docket of the county, shall be a lien on all property of the defendant in execution from the date of such recording. 
(f)  Service of summons issued by public officers; return as evidence of service. 
(1)  Summons or complaints issued in accordance with subsection (c) of this section shall, in all cases, be served upon owners and parties in interest, and the return of service signed by the public officer or agent or an affidavit of service executed by a duly authorized citizen of this state reciting that a copy of such complaint or orders was served upon the owners and parties of interest personally or by leaving such copy at the place of residence shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owners and parties in interest. 
(2)  If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside out of the city, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such summons or complaint to be served upon such party by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such party or such service may be made by any citizen; and the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen that such party was served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the residence, shall be conclusive as to such service. 
(3)  Nonresidents of this state shall be served by causing a copy of the complaints or summons to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property affected by the complaint or summons. Where the address of such nonresident is known, such as the address on file with the tax assessor, a copy of such complaint or order shall be mailed to such person by registered or certified mail. A copy of such complaint or summons will also be filed in the proper office or offices for the filing of lis pendens notices in the county in which the property is located, and such filing of the summons or complaint shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(4)  If either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities and the guardian or personal representative resides outside the city or is a nonresident, such person shall be served as provided in this section in such cases. If such minor or insane person or person laboring under disabilities has no guardian or personal representative or if such minor or insane person lives outside of the city or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of such person's residence, which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person. In the case of other persons who live outside of the city or who are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located, who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(5)  If the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer shall make an affidavit to the effect, then the service of such complaint or summons upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided for nonresidents of the state as set out in this section, or service may be perfected upon any person holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(Ord. No. 2002-57, § 1, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 74-174. - Graffiti abatement. 
(a)  Definition. 
"Graffiti" is defined according to O.C.G.A. 17-15A-2 as "any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of real property or improvements thereon without prior authorization of the owner or occupant of the property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It shall constitute a nuisance and shall be unlawful for: 
(i)  any person(s) to deface, alter, modify, change, draw, damage or destroy by spraying or use of paint, or marking of ink, dye or any other similar substance on public and/or private buildings or structures, an inscription, slogan, drawing or modification, or otherwise damage private or public property in contradiction of other City Ordinances, by or through the application of "graffiti" as defined herein; 
(ii)  any person exercising control over or having a legal or equitable interest in a parcel of real property to permit graffiti to remain on public and/or private buildings or structures located thereon after the expiration of the time to remove in accordance with subsection (c). 
(c)  Notice to remove. No person exercising control over or having a legal or equitable interest in a parcel of real property shall be subject to citation for permitting graffiti to remain on public and/or private buildings or structures located thereon without first having been given 30 days from the date of written notice, in accordance with the provisions of Section 10 of the Atlanta Housing Code, to remove the graffiti. 
(d)  Removal by inmates. Labor by inmates from the Atlanta City Detention Center or by a person sentenced to perform community service by the Atlanta Municipal Court may be used to remove or obliterate unlawfully placed graffiti on public property. The rules and regulations governing such use of labor by inmates shall be directed by the City of Atlanta's Department of Corrections and subject to state law as well as the rules and regulations of the Board of Corrections of Georgia. 
(e)  Enforcement. Any person empowered by the City of Atlanta to issue citations may issue citations as a violation of Sec. 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 2008-83(08-O-2136), § 1, 11-24-08; Ord. No. 2011-26(11-O-0943), § 1, 6-29-11) 
Secs. 74-175—74-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FLOOD AREA REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), §§ 1—17, approved May 29, 2013, repealed the §§ 74-201—74-207, and enacted new §§ 74-201—74-209 as set out herein. The former sections 74-201—74-207 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 74-201. - Intent and disclaimer. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this article is to regulate and restrict uses and structures within both traditional and historically modified floodplain areas of the City of Atlanta in order to protect life and property, to prevent or minimize the hazards and damage which follow periods of severe inundation and to reduce the public cost of rescue efforts, relief efforts and flood control activities made necessary by such inundation; to protect the natural function and character of the traditional floodplain and surrounding areas; and to enable owners of property within the City of Atlanta to qualify for national flood insurance. 
(b)  Disclaimer of liability. The Atlanta City Council finds the degree of flood protection required by this article to be reasonable and consistent with historically established and nationally accepted levels of protection based on scientific and engineering practices. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the floodway, traditional floodplain, historically modified floodplain, special flood hazard area, or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 1, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-202. - Flood insurance study and maps adopted. 
The Federal Emergency Management Agency flood insurance study, flood hazard boundary map and flood insurance rate map, for the City of Atlanta, Georgia, revised June 22. 1998, and as it may be revised, shall constitute the official flood maps for the city. Revisions of such maps shall include but not be limited to future conditions maps. All land shown on said maps as lying within a "special flood hazard area," and all other land subject to inundation during the base flood, as confirmed by a flood study or a field run survey, shall be subject to the regulations set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 2, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-203. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ancillary structures means structures that are not principal structures and are not intended for occupancy. Such structures shall include, but not be limited to, fences, carports, tool sheds, decks, patios, pools, playgrounds, and picnic facilities. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the commissioner's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Combined sewershed means a sewershed with sewers that were designed to collect and transmit both stormwater and wastewater and that functioned as combined sewers as of September 24, 1998, as determined by the commissioner. 
Commissioner means the commissioner of the department of watershed management, or an authorized designee. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Elevated structure means an existing structure which has been raised or rebuilt in compliance with this article. 
Flood protecting means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to a structure which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate, improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, or structures and their contents. 
Floodway means any channel through which water passes at depths or velocities capable of discharging a base flood without increasing the elevation to which floodwaters would rise by more than one foot anywhere in a special flood hazard area. 
Footprint area means the enclosed area of the horizontal dimensions of a structure as defined by the exterior walls and as projected on the ground. Footprint area shall not include any decks, patios, porches, carport, or multiple floors for the purpose of this calculation. 
Highest observed flood means the water surface elevation of the highest flood on record in the department of watershed management or as measured from the lowest grade adjacent to the structure to the top of the high water mark. 
Historically modified floodplain means an area in a combined sewershed, in which significant portions of the historic "natural" stream have been enclosed in a pipe (excluding bridges, roadway culverts and short pipe segments) and is subject to periods of severe inundation. 
Infrastructure means any public or private road, bridge, drainage system, sewer, water main or other utility and related appurtenances. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction. Paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
Lowest floor means the lowest enclosed area of a structure, including the basement. An unfinished, flood-resistant area below an elevated structure used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such area is built in compliance with this article. 
Mapped floodplain means those areas of land subject to periods of severe inundation which are shown on the official flood maps of the city and which are subject to the regulations contained in this article. 
Multi-family residential structure means multiple dwellings and lodgings as defined in Atlanta City Code section 16-29.001(12)(b). 
Nonresidential structure means any structure that is not a single-family residential structure or a multi-family residential structure. Examples of nonresidential structures include, but are not limited to, restaurants, service stations, shopping centers, office buildings, theaters, warehouses, manufacturing facilities, food processing facilities, hotels, libraries, churches, schools, and municipal, county, state, and federal government buildings. 
Sewer basin means all portions of the city's wastewater collection and transmission systems tributary to and hydraulically linked to a trunk sewer entering a wastewater treatment facility. Each sewer basin in the city is typically independent of other sewer basins. 
Sewershed means a subdivision of a sewer basin that typically consists of hydraulically linked sewers that are tributary to a point in the sewer system. 
Single-family residential structure means any single-family dwelling as defined in Atlanta City Code section 16-29.001(12)(a). 
Special flood hazard area means the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1—30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the flood hazard boundary map or the flood insurance rate map), and all other areas subject to inundation during the base flood. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the value of the structure before the damage occurred, as provided in 44 C.F.R. § 59.1. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure taking place during a ten-year period in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the structure prior to the improvement, as provided in 44 C.F.R. § 59.1 and Section 2 of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District's Model Floodplain Management/Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance (2006). 
Traditional floodplain means any area of land presently having natural or man-made contours of elevation at or below the base flood elevation shown on the flood maps and those areas of land which are not so shown on the flood maps where inundation is likely to occur during a base flood as determined from evidence of prior flooding or as determined by hydrologic studies to establish the probable depth of such floodwaters. 
Unmapped floodplain means those areas of land subject to periods of severe inundation which are not shown on the official flood maps of the city, which are otherwise subject to the regulations contained in this article. 
Value of the structure means (1) the actual cash value of the structure as set out in "Table 100 Building Valuation Data" at appendix A, section 104.2 of the Atlanta City Code, and as permitted by FEMA Publication 213 page 10, or (2) the appraised value of the structure according to the property tax records in the Fulton County or DeKalb County tax assessor database immediately prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement. In the event there is a conflict between these two values, the lower value of the structure shall apply, in accordance with Atlanta City Code section 1-2. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 3, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2015-36(15-O-1246), § 1, 7-15-15 ) 
Sec. 74-204. - Permits required. 
(a)  Permit required. Use of lands and buildings, and construction, reconstruction, repair, modification or demolition of any structure within all floodplains, including special flood hazard areas, shall require review and approval of a permit by the commissioner. 
(b)  Flood study or field run survey required. The Federal Emergency Management Agency flood maps, more particularly described in section 74-202, adopted by the city are used for general reference purposes only. A flood study or a field run survey may be required to determine the location and extent of the floodplain area on a specific parcel. 
(i)  Flood study. In an unmapped floodplain or in a mapped floodplain where elevation has not been established, a flood study may be required in order to establish the base flood elevation. Such a flood study shall address, at a minimum, impact to upstream, downstream and adjacent properties, and the free flow of flood waters. 
(ii)  Field run survey. In order to establish the horizontal extent of the vertical floodplain elevation, a field run survey may be required to establish the actual location of the limit when proposed development is proximate to the limits of a floodplain/floodway. 
(iii)  A flood study or field run survey required under this subsection shall be certified by either a professional engineer or registered land surveyor. 
(c)  Review and approval. Any proposal which includes any of the activities described in this article shall be submitted to the commissioner for review before any such activity is commenced. The commissioner may authorize the approval of any of such activities upon a finding, based on detailed plans and specifications submitted with the proposal, that the activity can be completed and occupied or used in full compliance with the requirements of this article. No part of any such activity shall be commenced before such permit approval has been issued and all other permits and licenses required by applicable law have been issued or obtained. 
(d)  Permit revocation. The commissioner may recommend the revocation of any such permit when the commissioner determines the activity is not being accomplished, or that the land is not being used or occupied, as shown on the plans and specifications approved by the commissioner. A permit approval so revoked may be reinstated upon application by the holder under such rules and conditions as are established by the commissioner consistent with the requirements of this article and other applicable laws. 
(e)  Protection of existing flood storage and from flooding. The commissioner shall not, by authorizing the approval of a permit under the authority of this article, authorize any use of land, any extension or enlargement of a use of land which existed before the original date of enactment of the provisions of said article, or the commencement of any of the activities described in this article, where the effect thereof would be to decrease the volume of existing flood storage on that land or to increase flooding conditions upstream, downstream or adjacent to that land. 
(i)  Protection of floodways. The floodway shall be that as defined in the flood insurance study, City of Atlanta, Georgia, Fulton and DeKalb County, Federal Emergency Management Agency, revised June 22, 1998, and as it may be subsequently revised or extended. On those watercourses and rivers regulated hereunder where the floodway has not been defined in the said flood insurance study and until such time as these watercourses and rivers are defined in an officially adopted or revised flood insurance study, the floodway shall be defined as the channel of the watercourse or river and the adjacent areas of the defined or undefined floodplain that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot upstream of, downstream of, or at the point being considered. No fill or encroachments shall be placed within the defined floodway that would impair the ability to carry and discharge the waters resulting from the 100-year base flood. 
(ii)  Floodplain protection. The commissioner shall not authorize the approval of any permit authorizing the placement of fill or stored materials, or the construction of any building or other structure within the floodplain. Earth-disturbing activities in the floodplain shall be permitted only when the resulting configuration shall allow stormwater to enter the floodway by sheet flow (not channelized flow) and results in no loss of existing flood volume. Any earth-disturbing activities within a floodplain shall be subject to requirements of stream bank buffer limits and should be constructed using best management practices for soil erosion and sedimentation control. The use of compensating excavation or contouring; procedures to modify flood hazard limits may apply to install necessary public roadway and utilities within the flood limits to support existing and new property(s) which are not within the flood limits or to restore riparian buffer areas. Restoration of riparian buffer areas includes streambank stabilization projects that utilize natural channel design principles and the removal of a pipe or culvert to restore a stream channel with a minimum of a 25-foot vegetated buffer on each side of the channel. 
All applications for permits issued by the commissioner which would allow any use or construction wholly or partly in a special flood hazard area shall include detailed plans and specifications which demonstrate that no expansion of a special flood hazard area would result from the work which would be authorized by any such permit. No such permit shall authorize any proposed use or construction which would have a finished elevation less than two feet higher than the nearest base flood elevation and that would be closer than 15 feet from the nearest base flood elevation, and no such permit shall be issued until the plans and specifications submitted are in compliance with this article and have been authorized by the commissioner. Any comments or requirements endorsed on such plans and specifications or on an addendum thereto, by the commissioner shall become a part of any permit issued for the work covered by the plans and specifications and shall be enforced as are all other requirements applicable to such permit. 
(iii)  Reserved. 
(iv)  Modification to existing structures or existing usages of the floodplain in violation of, but predating the provisions of this article. Minor modifications and routine maintenance of uses and structures which were lawful prior to the original date of enactment of the provisions of this article, including existing structures, fills, pavements, utilities, manufactured homes, mobile homes, mobile home sites and other facilities, shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(A)  Permitted modifications of existing structures or existing usage. Any modification to an existing usage, when such existing usage is in violation of this article, that enhances the protection of life or property or which is reasonably necessary to the maintenance and upkeep of the property concerned and which does not extend the scope and magnitude of the existing violation of these regulations, is permitted provided the value of such modification or maintenance does not exceed 50 percent of the value of the structure or total existing usage prior to such modification or maintenance, excluding the value of the land but including the value of existing structures, utility service connections, fills, pavements, slabs, mobile home sites and other facilities which can be reasonably demonstrated as an integral part of that existing usage. 
(B)  Modifications requiring additional measures. Any improvement, modification or maintenance and any repairs or reconstruction required by any reason, including damages arising from normal deterioration, flood, other natural act or accident, of any existing usage where such existing usage is in violation of this article, shall bring that existing usage under the scope of the regulations set forth in this subsection; and that existing usage shall be brought into compliance with this article, providing that the total value of such improvement, modification, maintenance, repair or reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the value of the structure or existing usage before such improvement, modification or maintenance or before such flood, other natural act or accident, excluding the value of the land but including the prior value of structures, utility service connections, fills, pavements, slabs, mobile home sites and other facilities which can be reasonably demonstrated as an integral part of the existing usage prior to the event. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 4, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2017-43(17-O-1393), § 1, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 74-205.1. - Single-family residential structures in traditional floodplain areas. 
(a)  New development. A new single-family residential structure to be located on property encumbered by a traditional floodplain, floodway, or special flood hazard area shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. If a new single-family residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, development is prohibited. 
(b)  Substantially damaged or substantially improved structures. If an existing single-family residential structure located within the traditional floodplain, floodway, or special flood hazard area has sustained substantial damage or is proposed for substantial improvement, the structure shall be relocated not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. 
(c)  Elevating existing single-family structures. If, due to site conditions, an existing single-family residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-205.1(b), the structure may be elevated in accordance with either section 74-205.5(b) or section 74-205.5(c): provided however, section 74-205.5(a) shall apply to all elevated structures regardless of whether section 74-205.5(b) or section 74-205.5(c) applies. 
(d)  Flood protecting single-family residential structures. An existing single-family residential structure that has not been substantially damaged or is not proposed for substantial improvement can be flood protected, in accordance with section 74-205.5(d). A new single-family residential structure or an existing single-family residential structure that has been substantially damaged or is proposed for substantial improvement cannot be flood protected in order to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 5, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-205.2. - Multifamily residential structures in traditional floodplain areas. 
(a)  New development. A new multifamily residential structure to be located on property encumbered by a traditional floodplain, floodway, or special flood hazard area shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. If a new multifamily residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, development is prohibited. 
(b)  Substantially damaged or substantially improved structures. If an existing multifamily residential structure located within the traditional floodplain, floodway, or special flood hazard area has sustained substantial damage or is proposed for substantial improvement, the structure shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. 
(c)  Elevating existing multifamily structures. If due to site conditions, an existing multifamily residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-205.2(b), the structure may be elevated in accordance with either section 74-205.5(b) or section 74-205.5(c); provided however that section 74-205.5(a) shall apply to an elevated multifamily residential structure regardless of whether section 74-205.5(b) or section 74-205.5(c) applies. 
(d)  Flood protecting multifamily residential structures. An existing multifamily residential structure that has not been substantially damaged or is not proposed for substantial improvement can be flood protected in accordance with section 74-205.5(d). A new multifamily residential structure or an existing multifamily residential structure that has been substantially damaged or is proposed for substantial improvement cannot be flood protected in order to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 6, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-205.3. - Nonresidential structures in traditional floodplain areas. 
(a)  New development. A new nonresidential structure to be located on property encumbered by a traditional floodplain, floodway, or special flood hazard area shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. If a new non-residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, development is prohibited. 
(b)  Substantially damaged or substantially improved structures. If an existing nonresidential structure located within the traditional floodplain, floodway, or special flood hazard area has sustained substantial damage or is proposed for substantial improvement, the structure shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. 
(c)  Elevating existing non-residential structures. If, due to site conditions, an existing nonresidential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-205.3(b), the structure may be elevated in accordance with either section 74-205.5(b) or section 74-205.5(c); provided however that section 74-205.5(a) shall apply to an elevated nonresidential structure regardless of whether section 74-205.5(b) or section 74-205.5(c) applies. 
(d)  Flood protecting nonresidential structures. If, due to structural conditions, an existing nonresidential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal and the two foot vertical requirements in section 74-205.3(b), an existing nonresidential structure may be flood protected in accordance with section 74-205.5(d). 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 7, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-205.4. - Ancillary structures and infrastructure in traditional floodplain areas. 
(a)  Ancillary structures. Ancillary structures may be allowed in traditional floodplain areas if designed and constructed to minimize and mitigate impact on the traditional floodplain, allow for stormwater to enter the floodway by sheet flow (not channelized flow) and results in no net loss in flood storage volume. Ancillary structures shall not be allowed in the floodway. 
(b)  Infrastructure. Infrastructure may be allowed in traditional floodplain areas if designed and constructed to minimize and mitigate impact on the traditional floodplain area. Onsite sewage management systems (septic tanks) and wells are prohibited in traditional floodplains. Stormwater management systems may be allowed only if designed such that there is no net loss in flood plain storage volume. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 8, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-205.5. - Standards for elevating and flood protecting structures in traditional floodplain areas. 
(a)  Basic requirements for elevating structures. The following requirements apply to the elevation of any structure within the traditional floodplain area; 
(i)  Design and construction of elevated structures shall utilize methods and practices that minimize flood damage and current and future encroachment into the floodway and traditional floodplain; 
(ii)  The elevation of the structure's lowest floor shall be the greater of either: three feet above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest observed flood; 
(iii)  Elevated structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletin "Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements" August 2008, or as amended; 
(iv)  The area below the lowest floor of an elevated structure shall be flood resistant, unfinished, and designed with piers or wall openings to facilitate the natural flow of floodwaters under the structure; 
(v)  The unfinished and flood-resistant area below the lowest floor shall remain unoccupied and shall only be used for parking vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; 
(vi)  Stormwater management facilities and grease traps with backflow prevention devices that are properly designed to be isolated from flood waters may be allowed; 
(vii)  The interior portion of the area below the lowest floor shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; provided however, the minimum area necessary for access to upper floors may be finished with flood damage-resistant materials in accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletin "Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements" August 2008, or as amended; 
(viii)  Elevated structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(ix)  Heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), electrical, ventilation, plumbing equipment (including water heater), and other service facilities shall be located at least three feet above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest observed flood (whichever is greater) to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(x)  Designs for complying with the requirements of this article shall be certified by either a professional engineer or architect; 
(xi)  Landings and stairs that allow for the natural flow of floodwaters will be allowed for minimum entry access; 
(xii)  If the proposed elevated structure is located in multiple flood zones or if multiple base flood elevations cross the site, the higher or most protective base flood elevation shall take precedence; 
(xiii)  The design shall provide for the drainage of floodwaters in not less than 72 hours pursuant to FEMA Technical Bulletin I (August 2008); and 
(xiv)  A file-stamped copy of an elevation certificate filed in the land records of the county in which the property is located shall be submitted to the commissioner prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. This elevation certificate shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor and shall document the elevation of the lowest floor relative to mean sea level and compliance with the ordinance. 
(b)  Elevation of existing structures via jacking on existing foundation. An existing structure that has been substantially damaged or is proposed for substantial improvement may be elevated by jacking, intact, on an existing foundation, provided the criteria of section 74-205.5(a) are met in addition to the following criteria: 
(i)  No elevated structure shall exceed the original geometric footprint area or horizontally expand living space into or over the traditional floodplain; 
(ii)  Foundations shall contain a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding as provided in 44 C.F.R. § 60.3 and Section 5 of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District's Model Floodplain Management/Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance (2006); 
(iii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
(iv)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings provided they permit the flow of floodwater in both directions. 
(c)  Elevation of existing structures via demolition and rebuilding on an equivalent footprint area. An existing structure that has been substantially damaged or is proposed for substantial improvement may be demolished and relocated on the lot such that the passage of water is facilitated or the floodplain is otherwise enhanced or protected, provided the criteria of section 74-205.5(a) arc met in addition to the following criteria: 
(i)  No elevated structure shall exceed the original footprint area or increase the net encroachment into or over the floodplain; and 
(ii)  Foundations shall be designed to resist anticipated hydrodynamic loads, potential for debris impact, and scour pursuant to FEMA Technical Bulletin I (August 2008). Foundations shall be designed with the following criteria: 
(A)  The total area of the walls below the base flood elevation exposed to flood waters shall be at least 50 percent open. Wall openings shall be distributed along all walls exposed to flood waters; 
(B)  The bottoms of all wall openings shall be at grade; 
(C)  Garage doors not allowing the natural flow of floodwaters when closed shall not be considered wall openings; and 
(D)  Openings may be equipped with grilles, louvers, or bars provided they allow the natural flow of floodwater in both directions. 
(d)  Flood protecting structure. Flood protecting structures within the traditional floodplain is generally prohibited, unless expressly authorized by the provisions of this article. If expressly authorized under the provisions of this article, a structure may be flood protected in accordance with the following criteria: 
(i)  Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located three feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation; 
(ii)  Designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy, in accordance with the following; 
(A)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and 
(B)  A record of such certificate, which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are flood proofed shall be filed and recorded in the land records of the county in which the property lies; and 
(iii)  Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(A)  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
(B)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
(C)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 9, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-206.1. - Single-family structures in a historically modified floodplain areas. 
(a)  New development. A new single-family residential structure to be located on property encumbered by a historically modified floodplain shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. 
(b)  Elevating new single-family structures. If, due to site conditions, a new single-family residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-206.1(a), the structure shall be constructed to be two feet above the high water mark or three feet above the nearest base flood elevation. Such a structure must also comply with section 74-206.5(a). 
(c)  Substantially damaged or substantially improved structures. If an existing single-family residential structure located within the historically modified floodplain has sustained substantial damage or is proposed for substantial improvement, the structure shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. 
(d)  Elevating existing single-family structures. If, due to site conditions, an existing single-family residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-206.1(c), the structure may be elevated in accordance with either section 74-206.5(b) or section 74-206.5(c); provided however, section 74-206.5(a) shall apply to all elevated structures regardless of whether section 74-206.5(b) or section 74-206.5(c) applies. 
(e)  Flood protecting single-family residential structures. An existing single-family residential structure that has not been substantially damaged or is not proposed for substantial improvement may be flood protected, in accordance with section 74-206.5(d). A new single-family residential structure or an existing single-family residential structure that has been substantially damaged or is proposed for substantial improvement may not be flood protected to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(f)  Fill in floodplain. The placement of fill in the historically modified floodplain area may be allowed if it can be demonstrated that there will be no increase of flood elevation or adverse impacts on any upstream, downstream or adjacent property. 
(g)  Regional mitigation. The demonstration of no increase of flood elevation or adverse impacts on any upstream, downstream or adjacent property, as required pursuant to section 74-206.1(f), may be achieved by contribution to a regional flood mitigation system located within the same sewer basin as the subject property, subject to approval by the commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 10, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2017-43(17-O-1393), § 2, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 74-206.2. - Multifamily structures in historically modified floodplain areas. 
(a)  New development. A new multifamily residential structure to be located on property encumbered by a historically modified floodplain shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. 
(b)  Elevating new multifamily residential structures. If, due to site conditions, a new multifamily residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-206.2(a), the structure shall be constructed to be two feet above the high water mark or three feet above the nearest base flood elevation. Such a structure must also comply with section 74-206.5(a). 
(c)  Substantially damaged or substantially improved structures. If an existing multifamily residential structure located within the historically modified floodplain has sustained substantial damage or is proposed for substantial improvement. the structure shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. 
(d)  Elevating existing multifamily residential structures. If, due to site conditions, an existing multifamily residential structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-206.2(c), the structure may be elevated in accordance with either section 74-206.5(b) or section 74-206.5(c); provided however, section 74206.5(a) shall apply to all elevated structures regardless of whether section 74-206.5(b) or section 74-206.5(c) applies. 
(e)  Flood protecting multifamily residential structures. An existing multifamily residential structure that has not been substantially damaged or is not proposed for substantial improvement may be flood protected in accordance with section 74-206.5(d). A new multifamily residential structure or an existing multifamily residential structure that has been substantially damaged or is proposed for substantial improvement may not be flood protected to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(f)  Fill in floodplain. The placement of fill in the historically modified floodplain area may be allowed if it can be demonstrated that there will be no increase of flood elevation or adverse impacts on any upstream, downstream or adjacent property. 
(g)  Regional mitigation. The demonstration of no increase of flood elevation or adverse impacts on any upstream, downstream or adjacent property, as required pursuant to section 74-206.2(f), may be achieved by contribution to a regional flood mitigation system located within the same sewer basin as the subject property, subject to approval by the Commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 11, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2017-43(17-O-1393), § 3, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 74-206.3. - Nonresidential structures in historically modified floodplain area. 
(a)  New development. A new nonresidential structure to be located on property encumbered by a historically modified floodplain shall be located not less than three feet above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest observed flood. 
(b)  Flood protecting new non-residential structures. If, due to site conditions, a new nonresidential structure cannot be located not less than three feet above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest observed flood, in accordance with section 74206.3(a), the structure may be flood protected in accordance with section 74-206.5(d). 
(c)  Substantially damaged or substantially improved structures. If an existing nonresidential structure located within the historically modified floodplain has sustained substantial damage or is proposed for substantial improvement, the structure shall be located not less than three feet above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest observed flood. 
(d)  Elevating existing non-residential structures. An existing nonresidential structure required to be elevated in accordance with section 74-206.3(c) may be elevated in accordance with either section 74-206.5(b) or section 74-206.5(c); provided however that section 74-206.5(a) shall apply to an elevated non-residential structure regardless of whether section 74-206.5(b) or section 74-206.5(c) applies. 
(e)  Flood protecting non-residential structures. If, due to structural conditions, an existing non-residential structure cannot be located not less than three feet above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest observed flood, an existing non-residential structure may be flood protected in accordance with section 74-206.5(d). 
(f)  Fill in floodplain. The placement of fill in the historically modified floodplain area may be allowed if it can be demonstrated that there will be no increase of flood elevation or adverse impacts on any upstream, downstream or adjacent property. 
(g)  Regional mitigation. The demonstration of no increase of flood elevation or adverse impacts on any upstream, downstream or adjacent property, as required pursuant to section 74-206.3(f), may be achieved by contribution to a regional flood mitigation system located within the same sewer basin as the subject property, subject to approval by the commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 12, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2017-43(17-O-1393), § 4, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 74-206.4. - Ancillary structures and infrastructure in historically modified floodplain areas. 
Ancillary structures and infrastructure may be allowed in historically modified floodplain areas if designed and constructed to minimize and mitigate impact on the historically modified floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 13, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-206.5. - Standards for constructing, elevating and flood protecting structures in historically modified floodplain areas. 
(a)  Basic requirements for elevating structures. The following requirements apply to the elevation of any structure within a historically modified floodplain area: 
(i)  Design and construction of elevated structures shall utilize methods and practices that minimize flood damage and current and future encroachment into the floodway and historically modified floodplain; 
(ii)  The elevation of the structure's lowest floor shall be the greater of either; three feet above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest observed flood; 
(iii)  Elevated structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletin "Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements" August 2008, or as amended; 
(iv)  The area below the lowest floor of an elevated structure shall be flood resistant, unfinished, and designed with piers or wall openings to facilitate the natural flow of floodwaters under the structure; 
(v)  The unfinished and flood-resistant area below the lowest floor shall remain unoccupied and shall only be used for parking vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; 
(vi)  Stormwater management facilities and grease traps with backflow prevention devices that are properly designed to be isolated from flood waters may be allowed; 
(vii)  The interior portion of the area below the lowest floor shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; provided however, the minimum area necessary for access to upper floors may be finished with flood damage-resistant materials in accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletin "Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements" August 2008, or as amended; 
(viii)  Elevated structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(ix)  Heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), electrical, ventilation, plumbing equipment (including water heater), and other service facilities shall be located at least three feet above the base flood elevation or two feet above the highest observed flood (whichever is greater) to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(x)  Designs for complying with the requirements of this article shall be certified by either a professional engineer or architect; 
(xi)  Landings and stairs that allow for the natural flow of floodwaters will be allowed for minimum entry access; 
(xii)  If the proposed elevated structure is located in multiple flood zones or if multiple base flood elevations cross the site, the higher or most protective base flood elevation shall take precedence; 
(xiii)  The design shall provide for the drainage of floodwaters in not less than 72 hours pursuant to FEMA Technical Bulletin 1 (August 2008); and 
(xiv)  A file-stamped copy of an elevation certificate filed in the land records of the county in which the property is located shall be submitted to the commissioner prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. This elevation certificate shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor and shall document the elevation of the lowest floor relative to mean sea level and compliance with the ordinance. 
(b)  Elevation of existing structure via jacking on existing foundation. An existing structure that has been substantially damaged or is proposed for substantial improvement may be elevated by jacking, intact, on an existing foundation provided the criteria of Section 74-206.5(a) are met in addition to the following criteria: 
(i)  Foundations shall contain a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding as provided in 44 C.F.R. § 60.3 and Section 5 of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District's Model Floodplain Management/Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance (2006); 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings provided they permit the flow of floodwater in both directions. 
(c)  Elevation of existing structure via demolition and rebuilding on an equivalent footprint area. An existing structure that has been substantially damaged or is proposed for substantial improvement may be demolished and relocated on the lot such that the passage of water is facilitated or the floodplain is otherwise enhanced or protected provided the criteria of section 74-206.5(a) are met in addition to the following criteria: 
(i)  Foundations shall be designed to resist anticipated hydrodynamic loads, potential for debris impact, and scour pursuant to FEMA Technical Bulletin 1 (August 2008). Foundations shall be designed with the following criteria: 
(A)  The total area of the walls below the base flood elevation exposed to flood waters shall be at least 50 percent open. Wall openings shall be distributed along all walls exposed to flood waters; 
(B)  The bottoms of all wall openings shall be at grade; 
(C)  Garage doors not allowing the natural flow of floodwaters when closed shall not be considered wall openings; and 
(D)  Openings may be equipped with grilles, louvers, or bars provided they allow the natural flow of floodwater in both directions. 
(d)  Flood protecting structures. Flood protecting structures within the historically modified floodplain is generally prohibited, unless expressly authorized by the provisions of this article. If expressly authorized under the provisions of this article, a structure may be flood protected in accordance with the following criteria: 
(i)  Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located three feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation; 
(ii)  Designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy in accordance with the following; 
(A)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and 
(B)  A record of such certificate, which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are flood proofed shall be filed and recorded in the land records of the county in which the property lies; and 
(iii)  Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(A)  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
(B)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
(C)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 14, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-207. - Enforcement. 
The commissioner is authorized to enforce the requirements of this article in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. 
(a)  Violations. Any person in violation of this article shall be subject to the general penalty set out in section 1-8 and shall be required to modify or remove the violation to achieve compliance with this article. Each day during which violation or failure to comply continues shall he a separate violation. 
(b)  Stop work orders. The commissioner of the department of watershed management, and the commissioner of the department of city planning, or their respective designees, are each authorized to issue stop work orders to any person that violates this article. Stop work orders shall be effective immediately and remain in effect until corrective actions have occurred. 
(c)  Building permit. If the City of Atlanta determines that a permittee has failed to comply with any provision of this article, the commissioner of the department of city planning or said commissioner's designee may suspend or revoke the building permit. 
(d)  Withhold certificates of occupancy or completion. The commissioner of the department of city planning or said commissioner's designee is authorized to refuse to issue certificates of occupancy or completion for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on a site in violation of a stop work order until the owner has taken the remedial measures as set forth in the stop work order, or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein. 
(e)  Flood damaged and unusable structures in a floodplain. If a structure has been flooded and sustained damage to a degree that renders the structure unusable or uninhabitable, or otherwise presents a threat to public health, safety, welfare and environment, the owner shall repair or demolish the structure. Any such structure that remains in a damaged state fair at least 24 months shall be declared a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief according to the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
(f)  Violations deemed public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided herein, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article that constitute a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment may be declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief according to the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 15, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17) 
Sec. 74-208. - Relationship to other laws. 
(a)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for the riparian environment shall control. 
(b)  Relationship to 42 U.S.C. 4001 et seq. This article is enacted pursuant to the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4001 et seq.). 44 C.F.R. § 60.1 et seq., and to implement the requirements of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-570 et seq. Words and phrases used in this article which are defined in the National Flood Insurance Program rules and regulations codified at 44 C.F.R. § 59.1 et seq. and effective December 1, 1976 (41 FR 46968 et seq.), and as they may be revised, shall have the meanings set out in such rules and regulations unless the context in which such words or phrases are used in this article clearly imports a different meaning, or unless otherwise defined herein. 
(c)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 16, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-209. - Indemnity agreements. 
The city finds that the construction of new structures, the elevation and flood protecting of existing structures, the installation of a swimming pool or other in-ground water features, or the construction of a parking lot in a special flood hazard area generally will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. However, as stated in Atlanta City Code section 74-201(b), such improvements may be subject to inundation under certain conditions. Therefore, prior to the issuance of any permit for construction of a new structure, the elevation of an existing structure, the installation of a swimming pool or other in-ground water feature, or the construction of a parking lot in a special flood hazard area, the owner of the subject property shall execute an indemnification and hold harmless agreement, in a form provided by the city, which shall state at a minimum, that owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the city for any damages or claims for damages, suits, costs, judgments losses, and injuries arising out of the owner's construction, maintenance, use or removal of said improvements. The indemnification shall be filed and recorded in the land records of the county in which the property lies and shall be a permanent covenant running with the land and shall be binding upon the successors in title of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2013-20(13-O-1021), § 17, 5-29-13) 
Sec. 74-210. - Appeal. 
(a)  Within 30 days of the date of the denial or issuance of a permit, aggrieved or adversely affected parties may file an appeal with the commissioner. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall include a copy of the initial denial or issuance of the permit. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an appeal, and for good cause, the commissioner may suspend the permit, or applicable portions thereof, pending review. Within 30 days after receipt of an appeal, the commissioner shall make a determination and shall notify the appellant. 
(c)  The commissioner's determination may be appealed to the Superior Court of the County where the subject property is located. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of issuance of the commissioner's determination as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 and will be reviewed under the standard provided by O.C.G.A. § 50-13-19(h). 
( Ord. No. 2015-36(15-O-1246), § 2, 7-15-15 ) 
Sec. 74-211. - Letter of map change. 
If a property owner feels their structure is improperly shown in a 100-year floodplain, the commissioner will direct them to complete the Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA) letter of map change process. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36(15-O-1246), § 3, 7-15-15 ) 
Sec. 74-212. - Proposed change in use of existing encroachments. 
(a)  Traditional floodplain. Existing structures in the traditional floodplain that are proposed for a redevelopment that will change the structure category (e.g., a multifamily structure redeveloped to a nonresidential structure) must comply with the following: 
(1)  The proposed redeveloped structure shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. 
(2)  If due to site conditions, the redeveloped structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-212(a)(1), the structure may be elevated in accordance with sections 74-205.5(a) and 74-205.5(c). 
(3)  The proposed redeveloped structure must comply with the applicable requirements of section 74-205.1, 74-205.2 or 74-205.3. 
(4)  The type or degree of occupancy of the replacement structure must be less than the type or degree of occupancy of the original structure. (i.e. Multi-family or single-family occupancy may change to non-residential use but non-residential use may not change to residential). 
(b)  Historically modified floodplain. Existing structures in the historically modified floodplain that are proposed for redevelopment that will change the structure category (e.g., a multifamily structure redeveloped to a nonresidential structure) must comply with the following: 
(1)  The proposed redeveloped structure shall be located not less than 15 feet horizontally and two feet vertically beyond the nearest base flood elevation. 
(2)  If due to site conditions, the redeveloped structure cannot comply with the 15-foot horizontal requirement, in accordance with section 74-212(b)(1), the structure may be elevated in accordance with sections 74-206.5(a) and 74-206.5(c) 
(3)  The proposed redeveloped structure must comply with the applicable requirements of section 74-206.1, 74-206.2 or 74-206.3. 
(4)  The type or degree of occupancy of the replacement structure must be less than the type or degree of occupancy of the original structure. (i.e. Multi-family or single-family occupancy may change to non-residential use but non-residential use may not change to residential). 
( Ord. No. 2017-43(17-O-1393), § 5, 7-26-17 ) 
Secs. 74-213—74-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RIPARIAN BUFFER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 74-300. - Title, authority, and purpose. 
(a)  Title. This article may be cited as the "City of Atlanta Riparian Buffer Ordinance." 
(b)  Authority. This article is enacted pursuant to the city's authority under Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II (Home Rule and supplementary powers); O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. (Municipal Home Rule powers); Atlanta City Charter §§ 1-102(b), 1-102(c)(42), and 1-102(c)(46); and to implement the requirements of the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-570 et seq. 
(c)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to maintain stream water quality and protect water resources by protecting buffer areas along the streams and wetlands of the city; to minimize development within such buffers by requiring authorization for any development; to provide additional protection for streams and wetlands within the city beyond the buffer areas mandated by the State of Georgia; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation, and water pollution; and to promote the safety, health, peace, and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 1, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-301. - Findings and applicability. 
(a)  Findings. The City of Atlanta finds that buffers adjacent to streams and wetlands are beneficial to water quality because they: 
(1)  Protect, restore, and maintain the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Improve surface water, urban stormwater runoff, and groundwater quality by filtering pollutants, nutrients, sediment, and other contaminants; 
(3)  Reduce erosion and sedimentation; 
(4)  Protect and stabilize stream banks and stream channels; 
(5)  Maintain base flow of streams by aiding in groundwater recharge, and thereby protect dry weather low flows in streams; 
(6)  Contribute organic matter that is a source of food, energy, and habitat for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(7)  Provide tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat including but not limited to the moderation of water temperature in streams; 
(8)  Provide and protect riparian wildlife habitat and wildlife migration corridors; 
(9)  Offer educational and recreational opportunities; and 
(10)  Protect greenspace. 
Therefore, the city finds that the protection of the streams, wetlands, and the areas adjacent to them is vital to the safety, health, peace, and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to both public and private property within the city. This article shall be administered in its entirety by the department of watershed management unless otherwise specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 2, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-302. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Authorized encroachment means development in. the buffer authorized by the commissioner allowing an activity otherwise prohibited by this article. 
(2)  Applicant means the person who applies for an authorized encroachment and who must be the owner of the real property containing the buffer or an authorized agent of the owner. 
(3)  Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of sound conservation and engineering practices, and vegetative measures to prevent or minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, as referenced in section 74-302(16). 
(4)  Buffer means the area of land lying adjacent to a wetland or stream in which development is prohibited or limited as more particularly set out in section 74-303. 
(5)  City means City of Atlanta. 
(6)  Commissioner means the commissioner of the department of watershed management or a designee. 
(7)  Department means the department of watershed management or its successor agency. 
(8)  Development means any human-made change to improved or unimproved property that includes, but is not limited to, construction of buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing and grubbing, clearing, grading, paving, installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling, storage of equipment or materials, or any construction activity. 
(9)  Effective date means the date of adoption by city council and approval by the mayor of the Riparian Buffer Ordinance on December 11, 2001. 
(10)  EPD means the Environmental Protection Division of the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(11)  Existing lot means a parcel of land that was both: 
(i)  approved by the director of the bureau of planning or incorporated in the city's official cadastral maps prior to the effective date, or approved later than the effective date but was initiated by an application for subdivision completed and filed on or before May 25, 2001, with all necessary supporting documentation according to the Atlanta City Code, and 
(ii)  recorded in the records of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton or DeKalb County. 
(12)  Extreme hardship means a unique or special condition more particularly set out in section 74-306(b)(3) proposed by an applicant as grounds for the grant of an authorized encroachment on a new lot. 
(13)  Georgia Stormwater Management Manual means the guide, First Edition (August 2001 or as updated), published by the Atlanta Regional Commission and adopted by reference in section 74-508 of the Atlanta City Code, and commonly referred to as the "Blue Book." The Georgia Stormwater Management Manual is currently available from the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District ( http://www northgeorgiawater.com or http://www georgiastormwater.com ). 
(14)  Hardship means a unique or special condition, more particularly set out in section 74-306(a)(1), and not to include lesser property value by comparison to properties in the vicinity, proposed by an applicant as grounds for the grant of an authorized encroachment. 
(15)  Impervious cover or surface means any paved, hardened, or structural surface, regardless of material. Impervious cover or surface includes, but is not limited to buildings, rooftops, driveways, streets, roads, parking lots, swimming pools, dams, gaming courts, decks, any concrete or asphalt, and any other surfaces or structures that will substantially reduce or prevent the infiltration of water. 
(16)  Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia means the guide published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and adopted by reference in section 74-40(a) of the Atlanta City Code and commonly referred to as the "Green Book." The Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation and Control in Georgia is currently available from the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission ( http://www.gaswcc.org ). 
(17)  Mitigation means measures undertaken to protect, restore, or enhance a stream, wetland, or buffer in order to compensate for or reduce the adverse impacts of development within a stream, wetland, or buffer, and more particularly set out in section 74-306(d). 
(18)  New lot means a parcel of land that: 
(i)  was approved by the director of the bureau of planning after the effective date, and was not initiated by an application for subdivision completed and filed on or before May 25, 2001, and; 
(ii)  is recorded in the records of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton or DeKalb County. 
(19)  Normal stream flow means any stream flow that consists of base flow during any period of the year under normal meteorological conditions. Base flow results from groundwater that enters the stream channel through sub-surface flow and includes spring flows into streams. Base flow does not include surface water entering stream channels immediately after precipitation. 
(20)  On-site sewage management system means a system that includes a septic tank, absorption field and any other elements intended to be used for management and disposal of sewage on-site, as specified in GA Comp. R. & Regs. § 290-5-26-.02(gg) and as regulated by O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-20 et seq. 
(20.1)  Redevelopment means a development project on a previously developed site. 
(21)  Stream means any watercourse that sustains normal stream flow during any period of the year under normal meteorological conditions. 
(22)  Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse in a well-defined channel that contains the base flow of the stream. 
(23)  Technical panel means at least three department of watershed management staff professionals designated by the commissioner in accordance with section 74-307 who hold periodic meetings, develop procedures, make determinations, and maintain the public record in order to process applications for authorized encroachments. 
(24)  Waters of the state means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 12-7-3(16). 
(25)  Well means an excavation or constructed opening into the ground from which groundwater is sought or obtained. 
(26)  Wetlands means those areas, delineated in accordance with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation. Manual, 1987 as amended that under normal conditions contain hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrologic conditions reflecting temporary or permanent inundation or saturation by surface or ground water. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas and typically support a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
(27)  Wrested vegetation, point of means that point at the edge of a stream where vegetation has been moved or wrested as a result of normal stream flow or wave action. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 3, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 2012-01(11-O-1840), § 3, 1-26-12) 
Sec. 74-303. - Buffer requirements. 
From and after the effective date of this ordinance, no person shall conduct development within the buffers set out as follows: 
(a)  City of Atlanta Stream Buffer. Streams shall have a 75-foot, natural, undisturbed, vegetative buffer measured perpendicularly and horizontally on both sides of the stream from the point of wrested vegetation. 
(b)  City of Atlanta Wetlands Buffer. Wetlands shall remain in their natural state and shall have a minimum 25-foot, natural, undisturbed, vegetative buffer measured horizontally and perpendicularly on all sides of the wetland (where applicable) from the edge of the wetland as determined and delineated in accordance with section 74-401 et seq. of the Atlanta City Code. Wetlands lying in part or in whole within a stream buffer shall have a buffer that includes the extent of the wetland within the stream buffer, plus the wetland buffer. 
(c)  Water Supply Watershed Buffer. The water supply watershed buffer applies to streams that are both tributary to a water supply and within a seven-mile radius of the boundary of a reservoir. A map of the Water Supply Watershed Buffer (which currently consists of the Long Island Creek Basin) shall be maintained for public inspection in the department of watershed management. The following buffer requirements shall apply from and after January 13, 2009: 
(1)  A natural, undisturbed vegetative buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet measured perpendicularly and horizontally on both sides of the stream from the point of wrested vegetation. 
(2)  No impervious surfaces or on-site sewage management systems shall be constructed within a distance of 150 feet measured perpendicularly and horizontally on both sides of the stream from the point of wrested vegetation. 
(d)  Waters of the State Buffer. As required by O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and section 74-43(c)(15) of the Atlanta City Code, waters of the state not otherwise covered by this article shall have a 25-foot, natural, undisturbed, vegetative buffer measured perpendicularly and horizontally from the point of wrested vegetation. 
(e)  Measuring of buffers. For purposes of measuring buffers set out in this section, if wrested vegetation is not present due to a human-made modification, removal, or replacement of the stream bank with a structure (e.g. concrete lining, gabions, retaining wall, or rip rap), the buffer shall be measured from the top of the structure or point of modification or removal. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 4, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 2012-01(11-O-1840), § 4, 1-26-12) 
Sec. 74-304. - Stream crossing requirements. 
Construction or repair of structures that cross streams, including but not limited to those exempt under section 74-305, shall be subject to the following: 
(a)  A hydraulic analysis prepared, signed, and sealed by an engineer registered to practice in the State of Georgia is required for any proposed stream crossing. The analysis shall demonstrate that the proposed crossing will not adversely impact upstream and downstream properties during a 100-year flood; and 
(b)  Free-span techniques shall be employed to prevent blockage or constriction of natural drainage ways; and 
(c)  Approximately perpendicular crossing angles shall be employed; provided, however, crossings shall be aligned to minimize buffer disturbance to the maximum extent practicable; and 
(d)  Best management practices shall be utilized, stream banks shall be properly stabilized, and buffers shall be vegetated in accordance with the City of Atlanta Buffer Revegetation Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 5, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-305. - Exemptions. 
Subject to protection of the buffer to the maximum extent practicable and compliance with stream crossing requirements set out in section 74-304, the construction, operation, and maintenance of the following are exempt from the authorized encroachment requirements of section 74-306: 
(a)  Existing public streets, utilities, and related appurtenances; 
(b)  Stream crossings for public or private utility lines, and for streets and stormwater infrastructure and related appurtenances required to be dedicated to the city; 
(c)  Public drinking water, public wastewater, and public stormwater infrastructure and related appurtenances and treatment facilities; 
(d)  Multi-use trails, pedestrian bridges, and associated appurtenances listed in the City of Atlanta Comprehensive Development Plan; provided, however, section 74-306(d) shall apply; 
(e)  A single driveway necessary to provide access to an existing lot; 
(f)  Environmental monitoring and remediation activities such as water quality monitoring, stream gauging activities, and soil and groundwater monitoring or remediation; 
(g)  Removal of dead, dying, diseased, or hazardous trees, provided, however, no grading or stump removal shall be conducted, and such removal is authorized by the city arborist pursuant to section 158-26 et seq. of the Atlanta City Code; 
(h)  Removal without replacement of existing impervious cover from the buffer; and 
(i)  Activities on owner-occupied. single-family, residential lots to protect, restore, or enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality, or aquatic habitat, or minor land disturbing activities as set out in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(3); provided, however, no grading shall be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 6, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-306. - Authorized encroachments. 
The commissioner may authorize an encroachment to allow development within the buffer upon a showing by the applicant that due to site-specific conditions, the buffer required by this article would result in a hardship or extreme hardship; provided however, the grant of such encroachment shall require mitigation such that post-development conditions are at least as protective of water quality as pre-development conditions. 
An authorized encroachment may be granted in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Existing lots of record. In addition to the requirements set out in (c), (d) and (e) of this section, the commissioner may grant an authorized encroachment subject to the requirements of this article on existing lots of record (as defined herein): 
(1)  The commissioner may grant an authorized encroachment subject to the requirements of this ordinance when literal enforcement of the required buffer would result in a hardship, and no reasonable alternative to an authorized encroachment exists; and 
(2)  No authorized encroachment shall be granted to an existing lot of record that allows for development less than or equal to 50 feet from a stream measured in accordance with section 74-303 of this article unless it is a redevelopment that meets the requirements of subsection 74-306(a)(3) of this article or a single- or two-family residential development; and 
(3)  No authorized encroachment shall be granted for redevelopment of an existing lot of record unless the redevelopment results in a net reduction of the buffer encroachment from the existing condition, the redevelopment is designed to minimize the degree and impact of the encroachment, and the result of redevelopment is an overall improvement of buffer's ability to provide water quality and other environmental benefits. 
(b)  New lots of record. In addition to the requirements set out in (c) and (d) of this subsection, the following shall apply to authorized encroachments on new lots of record (as defined herein): 
(1)  No authorized encroachment shall be granted to a new lot of record to achieve greater than the minimum total developable area for a property's zoning classification. 
(2)  No authorized encroachment shall be granted to a new lot of record to achieve greater than the minimum development requirements of a commercial lot. 
(3)  No authorized encroachment shall be granted to a new lot of record except in the case of an extreme hardship. An extreme hardship shall be based upon on a showing by the applicant (set out more particularly in section 74-308) that no reasonable alternative for compliance exists and denial of such authorized encroachment would result in one of the following: 
(i)  non-compliance with applicable state or federal regulatory law, including, in particular, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; or 
(ii)  severe and unavoidable hazard to public health or safety; or 
(iii)  severe and unavoidable harm to the environment; 
provided, however, neither lesser property value by comparison to properties in the vicinity, nor compliance with this or other applicable ordinances shall constitute grounds for extreme hardship. 
(c)  All lots of record. The following are applicable to all authorized encroachments. 
(1)  Authorized encroachments shall not be granted that reduce the buffer to a width less than the minimum standards established by O.C.G.A. §§ 12-2-8, 12-7-6, or federal law. 
(2)  Authorized encroachments shall not be granted for a distance, location, or activity that is greater than necessary to alleviate a hardship or extreme hardship imposed by a strict application of this article. 
(3)  Actions of a property owner that have created a hardship or extreme hardship shall not constitute grounds for granting an authorized encroachment. 
(4)  The granting of a zoning variance shall not create a right to an exemption under section 74-305 or the grant of an authorized encroachment under section 74-306. 
(5)  Authorized encroachments shall not be granted for wells, on-site sewage management systems, detention ponds, or underground stormwater detention facilities, except upon a showing by the applicant of an extreme hardship as set out in section 74-306(b)(3). 
(6)  Authorized encroachments shall not be granted for impervious gaming courts. 
(7)  Authorized encroachments shall be designed to maximize the area of the buffer where sheet flow discharge of stormwater occurs. The sheet flow of stormwater through the entire buffer shall be the goal of the design. However, where redirection of stormwater is necessary for drainage control, vegetated swales shall be utilized where practicable. 
(d)  Mitigation. Mitigation shall be required as a condition for the grant of an authorized encroachment in order to ensure that post-development conditions are at least as protective of water quality as pre-development conditions. Mitigation shall be proposed by the applicant in accordance with guidance prepared by the department of watershed management that shall include, at a minimum, the following options: 
(1)  Stormwater quality improvement measures or stormwater quantity reduction measures as specified by the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Stream or wetland restoration; 
(3)  Buffer revegetation as specified in the City of Atlanta Buffer Revegetation Guidelines, which shall be maintained by the department of watershed management and available for public inspection; 
(4)  Reduction of run-off beyond pre-development levels; 
(5)  Removal of existing impervious surfaces; 
(6)  Buffer compensation; or 
(7)  Green Infrastructure or low impact development practices designed in accordance with the Coastal Stormwater Supplement of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 7, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 2012-01(11-O-1840), §§ 1, 2, 5, 1-26-12) 
Sec. 74-307. - Technical panel. 
The commissioner shall designate a technical panel for the review and processing of applications for authorized encroachments. The technical panel shall be comprised of at least three staff professionals in the department of watershed management certified by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19 in the field of pollution, erosion, and sedimentation control at the plan reviewer level (Level II). Technical panel members shall serve for a period of two years renewable by the commissioner, and should have expertise in the following areas: stream buffer revegetation, erosion and sedimentation control, stream and wetland restoration, mitigation (as defined herein), and riparian habitat restoration. The technical panel shall meet not less than once monthly, shall develop procedural rules, maintain a docket, and make records available for review upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 8, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-308. - Contents of an application for an authorized encroachment. 
(a)  Applicants shall apply for an authorized encroachment on a form supplied by the department and in a format specified by the department. An application shall include, at a minimum, the following showings by the applicant: 
(1)  Documentation that the lot was recognized by the city either on or before the effective date of this ordinance (as defined herein), or after the effective date of this ordinance; 
(2)  A written description of the project, including details of the buffer disturbance 
(3)  Documentation of hardship or extreme hardship should the authorized encroachment application be denied; 
(4)  Alternative plans which attempt to meet the same development goals as the original site plan while preventing buffer intrusion, and an explanation of why the alternative development is not feasible; 
(5)  Demonstration that impact to the stream buffer will be minimized and that impact only occurs to the extent necessary to remove a hardship or extreme hardship; 
(6)  Signature of the applicant; and 
(7)  A site plan that depicts the physical characteristics of the property, including, at a minimum, the following: 
(i)  Waters of the state, streams, wetland delineation, floodplain boundaries, other natural features, and all buffers as determined by a field survey; 
(ii)  Property boundaries, size, existing and proposed topography, slopes, soil types, vegetation, and other relevant physical characteristics of the property; 
(iii)  Locations of both existing and proposed structures, utilities, stormwater facilities, impervious surfaces, and the boundaries of the area of soil disturbance both inside and outside of the buffer. The area of the buffer to be impacted shall be accurately and clearly delineated, and shall show the total area and length of buffer disturbance; 
(iv)  Erosion and sedimentation control measures in accordance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia to prevent the migration of sediment into streams, wetlands, or waters of the state; 
(v)  100-year flood components for all streams with elevations and contour locations as they cross the property. Where 100-year flood elevations have been determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Maps, or where other studies deemed acceptable by the department exist, those elevations shall be used. In areas that have not been studied by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as shown on flood insurance rate maps, the commissioner may require a 100-year flood study prepared in accordance with Atlanta City Code Chapter 74, Article V, and prepared by a professional engineer or hydrogeologist currently licensed in the State of Georgia; 
(vi)  Proposed mitigation for the buffer disturbance in accordance with section 74-306(d). 
(b)  The commissioner may require other information deemed necessary to evaluate an application including, but not limited to, engineering analysis of stream dynamics, cross sections and profiles, details of proposed mitigation, and modifications to site plans. 
(c)  The applicant shall certify that all information provided in the application and all supporting documentation is true and correct. The omission or misrepresentation of material fact in connection with the application shall be grounds for denial. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 9, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-309. - Technical review. 
Within 30 days of receipt of a substantially complete application, the technical panel shall conduct a technical review, which shall include, at a minimum, an evaluation of the following: 
(a)  Whether the application meets the requirements of section 74-308 and provides sufficient information to proceed with review; 
(b)  Whether the application contains a disqualifying characteristic that makes the applicant ineligible for an authorized encroachment; 
(c)  Whether the proposed encroachment is on a wetland, 100-year floodplain, or other location that is inappropriate for development; 
(d)  Whether the property owner has demonstrated a hardship or an extreme hardship; 
(e)  Whether, in light of the showings by the applicant required by section 74-308, the applicant has demonstrated that the location and extent of the proposed buffer encroachment has been minimized; 
(f)  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
(g)  Whether, in light of the mitigation proposed by the applicant in accordance with section 74-306(d), the post-development conditions will be at least as protective of water quality as pre-development conditions; 
(h)  Whether the proposed development meets all other requirements of this ordinance; and 
(i)  Whether the property to be affected by the authorized encroachment has no reasonable use given, but not limited to, the current zoning if the authorized encroachment is denied. 
Upon completion of technical review, the technical panel shall either request modifications, or notify the applicant that technical review is complete and that the applicant may proceed with public notice as required by section 74-310, or in the event compliance with the applicable criteria is not possible, deny the application for authorized encroachment. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 10, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-310. - Public notice of application, public comment, and maintenance of public record. 
A public notice and comment period is required as a condition for the grant of an authorized encroachment. The purpose of public notice and comment is to provide an opportunity for comment on the proposed encroachment, and to provide the technical panel with relevant information consistent with the requirements of this ordinance. The applicant shall complete the following public notice requirements upon notification by the technical panel that technical review is complete: 
(a)  Public notice and comment period. The public notice and comment period shall be 30 consecutive calendar days from the date the sign(s) required by section 74-310(b)(3) is(are) posted. 
Comments shall be submitted to the attention of the riparian buffer technical panel in the department of watershed management. Comments shall be timely and must identify the application to which they pertain. Public comments shall be made part of the application file. 
(b)  Notice requirements. The applicant shall notify the public of the application for an authorized encroachment in accordance with this section. The commissioner is authorized to develop standards and procedures for posting of notice, which shall, at a minimum, include the following: 
(1)  The applicant shall notify all owners of real property adjoining the stream or wetland for a distance of 200 feet upstream and 500 feet downstream as measured from the property line contiguous to the stream or wetland that an authorized encroachment is being requested. The notice shall be sent via certified mail return receipt requested, shall contain both a copy of the application and the information listed in section 74-310(c), and shall be postmarked the same date the sign(s) required by section 74-310(b)(3) is(are) posted; and 
(2)  The applicant shall notify the chairperson of the NPU in which the subject property is located that an authorized encroachment is being requested. The notice shall be sent via certified mail return receipt requested, shall contain both a copy of the application and the information listed in section 74-310(c), and shall be postmarked the same date the sign(s) required by section 74-310(b)(3) is(are) posted; and 
(3)  The applicant shall post at least one sign on the property for which the authorized encroachment is being sought in a format as determined by the department or in accordance with the following specifications: 
(i)  Post one sign adjacent to each street the property abuts for every 600 feet of frontage; 
(ii)  The sign shall contain the words "stream buffer encroachment" in letters not less than three inches high; 
(iii)  The sign shall be legible and posted in a conspicuous place on the property so it can be easily viewed from the public street on which the property fronts; 
(iv)  The sign shall be at least one and one-half feet by two feet; 
(v)  The sign shall contain all information in section 74-310(c); and 
(vi)  The sign shall remain in place for a minimum of 30 consecutive calendar days. 
(c)  Notice contents. The notice required by this section shall include the following information: 
(1)  The property address where the encroachment is being proposed; 
(2)  The scope of the proposed encroachment; 
(3)  The authorized encroachment application number; 
(4)  The location where plans may be reviewed and the date by which comment may submitted as set out in section 74-310(a); and 
(5)  The current address and contact information, including phone number, for the riparian buffer technical panel, department of watershed management. 
(d)  Certification. Upon completion of public notice and comment period, the applicant shall certify to the technical panel that all public notification requirements have been fulfilled and shall provide documentation of compliance including, but not limited to, dated photographs of the sign(s), copies of required letters, and certified mail return receipts. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 11, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 2012-01(11-O-1840), § 6, 1-26-12) 
Sec. 74-311. - Processing of applications for authorized encroachments. 
(a)  Public comment. Following the receipt of certification of completion of public notice, the technical panel shall determine whether public notice was completed in accordance with section 74-310. 
(b)  Determination. After due consideration of public comments, the technical panel shall issue a determination within 30 days after receipt of certification of completion of public notice and comment period and notify the applicant of the determination in writing. The technical panel may make findings of fact and conclusions to support its determination. The technical panel may take any of the following actions on an application for an authorized encroachment: 
(1)  Issue the authorized encroachment as requested in the application; 
(2)  Issue an authorized encroachment with written, site-specific conditions necessary to ensure conformity to the requirements and stated intent of this article; or 
(3)  Deny the application. 
(c)  Expiration. An application shall expire when there has been no activity on the application for a period of 180 days. With respect to an application not approved for issuance of an authorized encroachment, "no activity" shall mean that the applicant has not responded to the technical panel's notification that additional information or corrections are required before further processing of the application can take place. 
(d)  Term. An authorized encroachment may be transferred to subsequent property owners; provided, however, changes to the site plan as set out in section 74-308(a)(7) require resubmission of the application. The authorized encroachment shall expire if a building permit is not issued for the proposed encroachment within 30 months of the date the encroachment is granted. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 12, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-312. - Notice of disposition. 
(a)  Following the grant of an authorized encroachment, the applicant shall notify each of the following parties of the technical panel's determination under section 74-311(b) via certified mail return receipt requested within ten calendar days of receipt of notice: 
(1)  All property owners notified pursuant to section 74-310(b)(1); and 
(2)  The chairperson of the NPU in which the subject property is located. 
(b)  The notice required by section 74-312(a) above shall state the technical panel's determination, the location where the application and related records are available for inspection, and the deadline for appeal as set out in section 74-313(a). 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 13, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-313. - Appeal. 
(a)  Within 30 days of the date of issuance of a determination by the technical panel, aggrieved or adversely affected parties may file an appeal with the commissioner. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall include a copy of the technical panel's determination. 
Appellants shall submit a copy of the appeal to the technical panel. Upon receipt of an appeal and for good cause, the commissioner may suspend the authorized encroachment pending review. Within 30 days after receipt of an appeal, the commissioner shall make a determination and notify the appellant. 
(b)  The commissioner's determination may be appealed to the superior court of the county where the subject property is located. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of issuance of the commissioner's determination as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 and will be reviewed under the standard provided by O.C.G.A. § 50-13-19(h). 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 14, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-314. - Relationships to other laws and regulations. 
(a)  Relationship to O.C.G.A. § § 12-2-8 and 12-7-6. 
(1)  The City of Atlanta Stream Buffer shall overlay the state waters buffer recognized by section 74-43(c)(15) of the Atlanta City Code, and created by O.C.G.A. §§ 12-2-8 and 12-7-6. If an applicant applies to EPD for a state waters buffer variance under O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6, the applicant must also apply with the city for an authorized encroachment, and these applications may be considered concurrently. 
(2)  No provision of this article shall be interpreted as relaxing or exempting any requirement of O.C.G.A. §§ 12-2-8 or 12-7-6. The commissioner shall not grant an authorized encroachment to stream buffers otherwise regulated by the Environmental Protection Division, Department of Natural Resources, State of Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 absent the grant of a stream buffer variance from EPD. 
(3)  Receiving a stream buffer variance from EPD from the operation of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 is not grounds for the commissioner to grant a similar authorized encroachment. 
(b)  Relationship to the Metropolitan River Protection Act. No provision of this article shall be interpreted as relaxing or exempting any requirement of the Metropolitan River Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-453. Further, the requirements of this article are intended to fulfill the requirements of the Metropolitan River Protection Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-453, which mandate that local jurisdictions adopt regulations governing the use of all land which is in the drainage basin of any tributary flowing into the Chattahoochee River Corridor (2,000-foot Chattahoochee River Corridor), which at a minimum, include buffer areas of adequate width as determined by local governing authorities along all flowing streams in the drainage basin of any tributary, in which buffer areas there shall be no development. 
(c)  Relationship to Chapter 74 Article VIII of the Atlanta City Code (Wetland Protection Regulation). 
(1)  The commissioner shall not grant an authorized encroachment allowing development in a wetland under the jurisdiction of the United States Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to § 404 of the Clean Water Act absent the grant of a United States Army Corps of Engineers permit. 
(2)  No section of this article shall be interpreted as relaxing or exempting any requirements of section 74-401 et seq. of the Atlanta City Code, § 404 of the Clean Water Act, or any jurisdictional wetland disturbance permitting procedures under the jurisdiction of the United States Army Corps of Engineers. 
(3)  The City of Atlanta Wetland Buffer shall overlay any buffers or other protections that may be required by federal law. If an applicant applies to the Department of the Army for a wetland disturbance permit, the applicant must also apply with the city for an authorized encroachment, and these applications may be considered concurrently. Receiving a United States Army Corps of Engineers permit is not grounds for the commissioner to grant a similar authorized encroachment. 
(d)  Relationship to O.C.G.A., 12-5-570 et seq. The water supply watershed buffer is adopted, effective January 13, 2009, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-570 et seq. and GA Comp. R. & Regs. §§ 391-3-16.01 et seq. 
As required by O.C.G.A. § 12-5-570 et seq., from and after January 13, 2009, new facilities located within seven miles of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir that handle hazardous materials of the types and amounts determined by the Department of Natural Resources, State of Georgia, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by the Department of Natural Resources, State of Georgia. 
(e)  Relationship to Chapter 74 Article II of the Atlanta City Code (Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control). Erosion and sedimentation control best management practices as set forth in Chapter 74 Article II of this Code shall be implemented to prevent the migration of any sediment into a stream, wetland, waters of the state, or buffer, if such practices are not already required by this or other ordinances. 
(f)  Relationship to plat approval process for lot creation. No new lot shall be created, and the commissioner shall not approve any preliminary or final subdivision plat, that requires an authorized encroachment in order to comply with minimum lot development requirements as set out in section 74-306(b)(1) or section 74-306(b)(2), or in Parts 15 and 16 of the City of Atlanta Land Development Code. In addition, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  All riparian buffers shall be shown on the plat; 
(2)  For any new development, the riparian buffer shall be physically delineated in accordance with City of Atlanta Buffer Revegetation Guidelines. 
(g)  Conflict with other laws. No section of this ordinance shall be interpreted as relaxing or exempting any requirements of Chapter 74 Article II, Chapter 74 Article VI, or Chapter 158 Article II of the Atlanta City Code. In the event of a conflict between or among any provisions of this article, or any other laws, regulations, or policies, the requirements that are most protective of water quality shall apply. Violation of this article shall not preclude the prosecution of a violation of other sections of this Code which may apply. 
(h)  Liability. Neither the issuance of a building permit nor compliance with this article shall relieve any person from civil liability to any person or property otherwise imposed by law, or constitute the assumption of such liability. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2009-01(08-O-2281), § 1, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 15, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-315. - Nonconformities. 
Structures, or impervious surfaces, existing as of the effective date of this article, and as amended, shall be deemed existing nonconforming for the purposes of this article. No structure or impervious surface shall be horizontally expanded to occupy greater land area inside the buffer; altered in a manner that changes the quantity, velocity, or quality of stormwater runoff; or moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the buffer without an authorized encroachment. Any replacement or reconstruction activity within the buffer shall occur within the original footprint or shall require compliance with the provisions of this article. No authorized encroachment is required by this article for repairs, restoration, and renovation performed upon existing structures and impervious surfaces which are considered to be existing nonconforming as of the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 16, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-316. - Buffer management and maintenance. 
(a)  In the event that development is conducted within 25 feet of any buffer, the buffer shall be physically protected by placing currently approved tree protection fencing at the buffer boundary or the limits of construction, whichever is more protective of the buffer. If an authorized encroachment has been granted, the limits of the encroachment shall be similarly delineated. 
(b)  The owner of the property containing a buffer as defined herein shall be responsible for maintenance of the buffer and shall inspect the buffer periodically for evidence of degradation in regard to the purposes listed in section 74-301 and compliance with all other provisions of this article. Corrective actions shall be taken by the owner in a manner to ensure compliance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 17, 4-27-10) 
Sec. 74-317. - Enforcement. 
The commissioner is authorized to enforce the requirements of this article in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. 
(a)  Any person who conducts development within a buffer that is in violation of this Code shall be subject to the general penalty set out in section 1-8 (a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or any combination thereof) and shall be required to restore or remove the unpermitted encroachment and revegetate the area per the City of Atlanta Buffer Revegetation Guidelines. Each day during which violation or failure to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(b)  Notice of violation. If the City of Atlanta determines that a person has failed to comply with any provision of this article, it may issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be served on the applicant, owner, or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(c)  Stop work orders. The commissioner of the department of watershed management, and the commissioner of the department of city planning, and the commissioners' designee(s) are each authorized to issue stop work orders to any person that violates any provision of this article. Stop work orders may include a specific area and activity, or the entire site and all activities. Stop work orders are effective immediately and shall remain in effect until the necessary corrective actions or remedial measures have occurred. Stop work orders shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. 
(d)  Refusal to issue certificates of occupancy or completion. The commissioner of the department of city planning or said commissioner's designee is authorized to refuse to issue certificates of occupancy or completion for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on a site until the owner or responsible person has taken the remedial measures as set forth in the notice of violation or stop work order, or has otherwise corrected the violations described therein. 
(e)  Suspension, revocation, or modification of building permit. If the City of Atlanta determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with any provision of this article or with the terms and conditions of an authorized encroachment, the commissioner of the department of city planning or said commissioner's designee may suspend, revoke or modify the building permit that was issued authorizing the development, and following implementation of remedial measures or mitigation to protect water quality, may reinstate the building permit. 
(f)  Suspension, revocation, or modification of authorized encroachment. If the City of Atlanta determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the requirements of an authorized encroachment, the commissioner may suspend, revoke or modify the authorized encroachment, and following implementation of remedial measures or mitigation to protect water quality, may reinstate the authorized encroachment. 
(g)  Restoration or removal of encroachment. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, development within a buffer that is in violation of this article shall constitute a nuisance per se and shall be unlawful. The solicitor or city attorney is authorized to file such actions as may be necessary to remedy the encroachment in the buffer, including petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or any other appropriate legal action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate an unlawful use or activity. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 18, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17) 
Secs. 74-318—74-320. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), §§ 19—21, approved April 27, 2010, repealed §§ 74-318—74-320, which pertained to liability; conflict with other regulations; and relationship to Metropolitan River Protection Act. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 74-321. - Severability. 
Should any section, subsection, clause, or provision of this article be declared to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this article in whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 2001-100, § 3, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2002-21, § 3, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2010-13(10-O-0058), § 22, 4-27-10) 
Secs. 74-322—74-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WETLAND PROTECTION REGULATIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-83, § 1, approved Nov. 26, 2002, established art. VIII, §§ 74-401—74-405 to read as herein set out. Sections 3 and 4 of said ordinance provided that the Generalized Wetland Map (Exhibit B) referenced in the text of Article VIII, Wetland Protection Regulations, is hereby adopted, and incorporated into and made a part of Article VIII, Wetland Protection Regulations, by reference, and that the Generalized Wetland Map (Exhibit B) shall be kept on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk. 

Sec. 74-401. - Purpose and intent. 
The intent of this article is to protect the environmental integrity of freshwater wetlands within the City of Atlanta. The purpose of this ordinance is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through the permitting process. 
(Ord. No. 2002-83, § 1, 11-26-02) 
Sec. 74-402. - Definitions. 
For purposes of interpreting this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Jurisdictional wetland determination means an official, written statement or map signed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
Jurisdictional wetland means a wetland area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Wetland delineation means the establishment of wetland boundaries by a representative of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or an authority designated by the Corps. 
Wetland means an area inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2002-83, § 1, 11-26-02) 
Sec. 74-403. - Coordination with the Army Corps of Engineers Wetland Permitting Process. 
This section is included pursuant to the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-2-8 and is intended to provide applicants for a development or demolition permit with notice when the proposed activity may require a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers permit due to potential impacts upon jurisdictional wetlands, and to coordinate the City permitting process with the Corps of Engineers permitting process. 
(a)  Permitting process. Prior to the issuance of a development or demolition permit, the commissioner of the department of watershed management, or designee, shall review plans; verify the certification required in section 74-403(c) below; and determine if the applicant is to be referred to the Corps of Engineers for a jurisdictional wetland determination. As a general rule, applicants and landowners should endeavor to avoid development and/or demolition activities in or near wetlands. 
(1)  If the proposed activity is not located within 50 feet of a wetland shown on the generalized wetland map, city permitting procedures shall proceed. 
(2)  If the proposed activity is located within 50 feet of a wetland shown on the generalized wetland map, the department of watershed management shall refer the applicant to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for a jurisdictional wetland determination and receive proof of such determination from the Army Corps of Engineers prior to the issuance of any city development or demolition permit. 
(i)  If the Corps of Engineers determines that a Department of the Army permit or letter of permission is required for the proposed activity, the city shall not issue a development or demolition permit for the proposed activity until after the issuance of the Department of the Army permit or letter of permission. 
(ii)  If the Corps of Engineers determines that the proposed activity does not require a Department of the Army permit, city permitting procedures shall proceed. 
(b)  Generalized wetland map. The generalized wetland map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article by reference. Wetlands shown on the generalized wetland map do not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands and cannot serve as a substitute for a jurisdictional wetland determination or a delineation of wetland boundaries as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. No action by the City of Atlanta pursuant to these regulations relieves the landowner or applicant from federal or state permitting requirements. The generalized wetland map may be amended as more detailed information regarding the exact location and boundaries of wetlands becomes available. Not all wetlands in the City of Atlanta may be shown on the generalized wetland map and the omission of wetlands from the generalized wetland map does not relieve the applicant or property owner from compliance with applicable laws regarding wetlands. 
(c)  Additional requirements. Upon application for a development or demolition permit, applicants shall be required to certify that they have reviewed the generalized wetland map and to certify whether or not the proposed activity is to occur within 50 feet of a wetland shown on the map. The City of Atlanta may require additional information deemed necessary to verify compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-83, § 1, 11-26-02) 
Sec. 74-404. - Monitoring and enforcement procedures. 
(1)  If the City of Atlanta discovers a violation of this article that also may constitute a violation of any provisions of the Clean Water Act as amended, the City of Atlanta shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(2)  The commissioner of the department of watershed management and/or his designee is authorized and empowered to enforce the requirements of this article in accordance with the procedures of this section. The department of watershed management shall have authority to issue stop work orders, citations, and/or revocation of permits in the event of any violation of this article. 
(3)  Any enforcement activities for violations of the provisions of this article which are also violations of article II and III of chapter 74 for land-disturbing activities shall be undertaken pursuant to the provisions of article II and III of chapter 74. 
(4)  Any enforcement activities for violations of the provisions of this article which are also violations of chapter 158 for vegetation shall be undertaken pursuant to the provisions of chapter 158. 
(5)  In addition to any other sanctions listed in this article, a person who fails to comply with the provisions of this article may be liable to the city in civil court for any costs incurred by the city to enforce or correct violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-83, § 1, 11-26-02) 
Sec. 74-405. - Severability. 
Should any section, subsection, clause, or provision of this article be declared to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this article in whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 2002-83, § 1, 11-26-02) 
Secs. 74-406—74-425. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-426. - Statement of findings. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Discharges to the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(2)  These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments. 
(3)  These non-stormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters. 
(4)  The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(5)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the storm sewer system of the city; 
(6)  Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the storm sewer system of the city; 
(7)  Therefore, the City of Atlanta must adopt this article to prohibit such non-stormwater discharges to the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the storm sewer system of the city is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-427. - Statement of policy and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. 
(b)  This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the storm sewer system of the city; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the storm sewer system of the city; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-428. - Definitions. 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Commissioner means the Commissioner of the Department of Watershed Management or his designee. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Department means the Department of Watershed Management (DWM). 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm sewer system of the city, except as exempted in section 74-437 of this article. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(a)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the department of watershed management; or 
(b)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the City of Atlanta; and 
(2)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Publicly-owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Clean Water Act, which is owned by a state or municipality (as defined by section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act). This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
Violator means any person, business or commercial entity violating any provision of this article or allowing any person or persons under their control or authority to violate any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-429. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-430. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-431. - Responsibility for administration. 
The police and the commissioner of the department of watershed management or his designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Secs. 74-432—74-435. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITIONS AND NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 74-436. - Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-437. - Exemptions. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing discharging potable water performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, discharges from fire hydrant flushing, and other discharges as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-438. - Prohibition of illegal connections. 
The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the storm sewer system of the city is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the commissioner of the department of watershed management. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the department of watershed management requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the department of watershed management. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-439. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the department of watershed management prior to allowing discharges to the sewer system of the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-440. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The commissioner of watershed management or any duly authorized agent of the department may, upon the permission of the property owner, enter on and inspect any and all public and private property in the city to determine by inspection that those properties are or not free of any condition which may be in violation of this article. For the purpose of this duty, the agent of the department of watershed management is eligible to apply for status as a code enforcement agent under section 98-1. In order to enforce code provisions and issue citations, the agent of the department of watershed management must apply for and receive status as a code enforcement agent. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner, agent of the owner or operator of any property or facility within the city shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the department of watershed management. 
(2)  The owner, agent of the owner or operator of any property or facility within the city shall allow the department of watershed management ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The department of watershed management reserves the right, upon the approval of the property owner, to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  Any judge of the municipal court may grant permission to the department of watershed management to require the owner, agent of the owner or operator of any private property or facility to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the department of watershed management. 
a.  It is prohibited for any person to interfere in any way with the proper sampling and monitoring operations of any equipment or devices. 
b.  All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner, agent of the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the department of watershed management and any obstruction shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the Department of Watershed Management access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the department of watershed management has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the department of watershed management is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the department of watershed management may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03; Ord. No. 2006-74, § 1, 10-11-06) 
Sec. 74-441. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm sewer system of the City of Atlanta, or State Waters, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  Said person shall notify the department of watershed management in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. 
(1)  If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(2)  Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  Any notification made to the City of Atlanta is not exclusive of any state or federal notification requirements. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Secs. 74-442—74-445. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 74-446. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction. 
(b)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, any judge of the municipal court shall have the power to authorize the commissioner of the department of watershed management to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and restore the property. The department of watershed management is authorized to recover the total amount of all costs of the abatement as outlined in sections 74-450 and 74-453. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-447. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever the department of watershed management finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the commissioner may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The City of Atlanta may serve notice to abate a violation, by mailing such notice to the last-known address of the alleged violator. 
(2)  The notice of violation shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the department of watershed management by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(3)  Such notice may require actions including, but not limited to any of the following: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-448. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
(a)  Administrative remedy. 
(1)  Prior to any final order to comply with any notice of violation, the alleged violator shall be given the opportunity to appeal any notice of violation issued by the department to the commissioner of watershed management. 
(2)  The city acting by and through its commissioner of watershed management shall review the notice of violation, the reasons submitted by the alleged violator for determining such conditions not to be in violation, and shall issue a decision in writing. 
(3)  If such decision is to affirm, overturn or modify said notice of violation, the commissioner shall set forth the reasons for doing so. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by such decision, after exhausting his or her administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal to the Superior Court of the county wherein which such alleged violation occurred or is proposed to occur, for review of such written decision. 
(c)  The commissioner of the department of watershed management shall conduct the review process for any notice of violation, as described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-449. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten days of any decision of the Superior Court upholding the decision of the department of watershed management and the commissioner, then representatives of the department of watershed management may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent of the owner or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-450. - Costs of abatement of the violation. 
(a)  Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. 
(1)  The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within ten days of such notice. 
(2)  If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(b)  Any person or business shall be liable to the city for the total amount of all costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating a violation. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-451. - Enforcement. 
The primary authority and responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be vested in the commissioner of watershed management. Upon a determination that a person is in violation of this chapter, the commissioner or his designee shall give written notice of violation that indicates they are in violation of a section in this chapter, and they may or issue a citation requiring the violator to appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing on the charge of violation of this chapter. Upon a finding that a section of this chapter has been violated, the violator shall be subject to one or more of the penalties provided in section 74-452 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-452. - Penalties. 
(a)  For any violations of this article, any person violating the provisions of this article may be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  First violation. Upon conviction, a fine not less than $50.00 and not more than $1,000.00 and a probationary period not to exceed 90 days. 
(2)  Second violation. Upon conviction, a fine not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or probationary period not to exceed 180 days with a period of confinement in the city jail not to exceed ten days, or both. 
(3)  Third violation. Upon conviction, a fine not less than $500.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or a probationary period not to exceed one year with a period of confinement in the city jail not to exceed 30 days, or both. 
(4)  Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the department of watershed management shall deem appropriate, after the department has taken one or more of the actions described above, the violator may be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(c)  Businesses and commercial entities. In addition to any other penalty imposed under this article, if any person or business performing work under any contract with the city is found guilty of violating this section, the city may terminate the contract by giving written notice of the termination to the person or business. The contract shall be null and void upon delivery of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-453. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment may be declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief according to the provisions of Article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-454. - Remedies not exclusive. 
(a)  The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the department of watershed management may seek cumulative remedies. 
(b)  The department of watershed management may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Sec. 74-455. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-75, § 3, 6-24-03) 
Secs. 74-456—74-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - POST DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 74-501. - Introduction. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(a)  Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
(b)  Land development projects and other land use conversions can also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(c)  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(d)  These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment projects by the use of structural and nonstructural measures, such as the conservation or restoration of open space and greenspace areas; 
(e)  Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution; and 
(f)  Therefore, the City of Atlanta has established this set of regulations governing the management of post-development stormwater runoff and the ongoing maintenance of stormwater control systems for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges and control systems in order to reduce or minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 1, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-502. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment by focusing on the types of frequently occurring storm events that generate the most water quality impacts. 
(b)  Proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet those purposes through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Establish post-construction stormwater management and site planning and design criteria to protect natural resources from the direct impacts of the land development process, and to preserve and/or restore natural hydrologic conditions on development sites; 
(3)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management methodologies, stormwater better site design practices, peak rate and/or runoff reduction, and the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas by establishing minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Coordinate site design plans with the City of Atlanta's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for operation, inspection, maintenance, and repair of private structural stormwater control facilities and private commitments for nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety or the environment; 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term compliance; and 
(8)  Protect public health and safety by reducing the risk of localized flooding and reducing the amount of runoff entering public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 2, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-503. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Commissioner means the commissioner of the department of watershed management or a designee. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the City of Atlanta, other government agency, or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Demolition means removal of an existing building, structure, or other impervious surface. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Grading means altering ground surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions and slopes; this includes, but is not limited to, stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and includes the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Greenfield means land in its natural condition. 
Greenspace means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a vegetated state. 
Green infrastructure means an interconnected natural system and/or engineered system that strengthens and mimics natural hydrologic functions and processes through the use of plants and soil to slow, filter, evapotranspire, and infiltrate stormwater runoff close to its source; or the capture and reuse of stormwater runoff. 
High risk operation means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater as consistent with facilities operating under a Standard Industrial Code (SIC) or requiring coverage under the Georgia General NPDES Stormwater Permit for Discharges from Industrial Activities or as identified as a highly visible pollutant source (HVPS) per the City of Atlanta's Stormwater Management Plan (SWMP) developed in accordance with the requirements of the City of Atlanta's NPDES Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) permit. 
Hotspot means an area with, or having potential for a high level of pollution and/or contamination within a larger area of low adverse environmental impact or normal environmental quality. 
Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural percolation of water into soil, which includes, but is not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and standard concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an entity which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which, when properly recorded in the deed records of the Superior Court of Fulton or DeKalb County, whichever is applicable, constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation, as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit means the applicable national pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued by the State Environmental Protection Division and in effect at the time of application for a post-development stormwater plan approval. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding up to the 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgage or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Percolation means the process of absorption of stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of Atlanta to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the City of Atlanta. Where phased development or plan approval occurs, which includes but is not limited to demolition, preliminary grading, roads and utilities, the existing conditions at the time prior to issuance of the first project-related approval or permit shall represent pre-developed conditions, in accordance with section 74-513(d). 
Project means the portion of the proposed development in terms of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Q means the peak rate of discharge. 
Redevelopment means a land development project or addition on a previously developed site. 
Regional stormwater management facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for site-specific on-site controls may be either eliminated or reduced. 
Responsible party means the owner or owner's agent. 
Runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Runoff reduction means the interception, evapotranspiration, infiltration or capture and reuse of stormwater runoff. 
Single-family residential development means development or redevelopment of a lot containing a single one- or two-family dwelling as defined in section 16-29.001(12) of the City of Atlanta's Zoning Ordinance. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches, practices and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, retention, detention, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flooding, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means the document(s) describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management site plan means an engineering drawing depicting how and where stormwater management facilities and practices will be installed on the site. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release, or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose; whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 3, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-504. - Applicability. 
(a)  Development and redevelopment. This article shall apply to all development and redevelopment, except single-family residential development, unless exempt pursuant to section 74-504(d). The standards found in this article apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of any impervious cover; or 
(2)  New development that involves land development activities of one disturbed acre or more; or 
(3)  Redevelopment that involves land development activity of one disturbed acre or more; or 
(4)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition, or demolition and replacement of 500 square feet or more of impervious cover; or 
(5)  Demolition that leaves in place more than 500 square feet of impervious cover within the area of demolition, unless building permit application for replacement structure or use which includes appropriate stormwater management is in place. 
(b)  Single-family residential. Sections 74-513(a), 74-513(b), 74-515 and 74-516 of this article shall apply to a single-family residential development, unless exempt pursuant to section 74-504(d). For the purposes of this article, a single-family residential development shall include the following: 
(1)  Development or redevelopment of any site involving the construction of a single-family residence; or 
(2)  Addition or modification that involves the creation, addition, or demolition and replacement of 1,000 square feet or more of impervious cover to any single-family residential site. 
A single-family residential development shall not include development or redevelopment of a site intended to be developed as a larger common plan of development or sale as defined in Atlanta City Code Section 74-37. 
(c)  High risk operation and hotspot. This article shall apply to any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that meets the definition of hotspot or high risk operation, which includes, but is not limited to, fueling stations or industrial facilities with potential for runoff pollution. 
(d)  Exemptions. The following activities are exempted from sections (a), (b) and (c) above, but shall be subject to the minimum requirements in section 74-516: 
(1)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within properly zoned agricultural areas resulting in less than 1,000 square feet of impervious surface; 
(2)  Regrading or reshaping existing athletic fields or public parks resulting in less than 1,000 square feet of new impervious surface; 
(3)  Installations, repairs, or modifications to storm drains, drainage structures, stormwater management facilities, or other drainage facilities to improve drainage capabilities; 
(4)  Installations, repairs, or modifications to sanitary sewer facilities to expand or improve sanitary sewer service capabilities; 
(5)  Work specifically related to the installation, repair, or maintenance of utility service connections, including but not limited to sewer, water, electric, telephone, and gas, to existing facilities; 
(6)  Installations of dumpster pads with drains connected to sanitary sewers; 
(7)  Installations or modifications to existing structures to accommodate Americans with Disability Act (ADA) requirements, including but not limited to elevator shafts, handicapped access ramps and parking, and enlarged entrances or exits; 
(8)  Installations or modifications to existing structures to address health and safety issues or compliance with Atlanta City Code requirements, including but not limited to. fire escapes, stairways, and additional exits; 
(9)  Installations to existing structures of incidental mechanical or electrical equipment placed on areas of previously existing impervious surfaces; 
(10)  Installation of hardscape less than 5,000 square feet, such as uncovered parking, pedestrian, or patio areas, which utilize pervious pavement or other appropriate infiltration techniques; 
(11)  Incidental maintenance or repair of existing impervious paved surfaces which impact less than 1,000 square feet; 
(12)  Overlays or resurfacing of existing impervious paved surfaces; 
(13)  Any work permitted in the public rights-of-way such as the installations of sidewalks, driveway aprons, and street cuts, or projects on private property necessitated by activities in the public rights-of-way; 
(14)  Sidewalks or trails 15 feet wide or less where runoff is directed via sheet flow toward vegetated areas at least twice as wide as the paved area, provided that the potential for erosion is adequately addressed; 
(15)  Stream bank stabilization or restoration activities, or activities solely for the purpose of environmental remediation; 
(16)  Replacement of an existing driveway to access a single-family residential development; or 
(17)  Any minor work which in the professional judgment of the commissioner is deemed in the best interest of the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2005-46, § 1, 7-26-05; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 4, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-505. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The commissioner of the department of watershed management or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 5, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-506. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
(a)  The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(b)  During any permitted construction activity, erosion and sedimentation control best management practices as set forth in Article II of Chapter 74 shall be implemented to prevent the migration of any sediment into any perennial streams, intermittent streams, stream buffer, and waters of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04) 
Sec. 74-507. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04) 
Sec. 74-508. - Stormwater design manual. 
The City of Atlanta will utilize the policy, criteria and information, including technical specifications and standards, in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, the applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement and any relevant rules, regulations, or policies of the City of Atlanta, including Chapter 74 of the Code of Ordinances, or procedures of the department of watershed management in effect at the time of application for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 6, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-509. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall obtain a building permit or other appropriate approval from the City of Atlanta. 
(c)  A permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 74-510; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 74-511; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 74-517; 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with section 74-518, if applicable; and 
(5)  Permit application and plan. 
(d)  The approved stormwater management plan shall obligate the responsible party to accomplish all land clearing, construction, development and drainage in accordance with the stormwater management plan. Any and all permits for development activities may be revoked at any time if the construction of stormwater management facilities is not conducted in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(e)  Applicant or responsible party shall obtain all state and federal permits required for the proposed development activity in addition to the plans and permits required by the City of Atlanta. 
(f)  The City of Atlanta shall inform the applicant or responsible party whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the City of Atlanta shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same. 
(g)  Upon a finding by the department of watershed management that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement meet the requirements of this article, the City of Atlanta may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(h)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or responsible party shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant or responsible party shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(2)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(3)  The City of Atlanta shall be allowed access to the site for inspection and enforcement; and 
(4)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the department of watershed management. 
(i)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or responsible party shall submit the stormwater engineer's certification and as-built plan as required by section 74-519(b). If the as-built differs substantially from the approved plan but is still acceptable to the City of Atlanta, then the applicant or responsible party shall update the recorded inspection and maintenance agreement upon approval of the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 7, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-510. - Stormwater consultation meeting. 
(a)  When a development, redevelopment or demolition of a site that meets at least one of the applicability criteria found in section 74-504(a) is proposed, the owner, developer, engineer, or agent shall participate in a consultation meeting with the department of watershed management to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and ideas for stormwater management designs utilizing green infrastructure and runoff reduction techniques. The owner, developer, engineer, or agent shall receive a consultation meeting certification at the conclusion of the consultation meeting. This consultation meeting shall be held prior to approval of a preliminary plat or the submittal of an application for a permit in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  The department of watershed management shall schedule a consultation meeting within five business days from the date a written meeting request is received by the department of watershed management, office of site development. 
(2)  Failure of the department of watershed management to schedule a consultation meeting within the time required by this section shall waive the requirements of section 74-510(a) and a copy of the written meeting request submitted to the department of watershed management, office of site development by the owner, developer, engineer, or agent attached to the permit application shall meet the requirement of the consultation meeting certification in section 74-509(c)(1). 
(3)  If no consultation meeting is requested or attended by the owner, developer, engineer, or agent prior to the submittal of a permit application, the department of watershed management may delay review of the permit application until such meeting is held; provided however that when the land development activity involves only an application for the erection of a structure governed by Chapter 16-28A of the Zoning Code, the requirements of section 74-509(c)(1) and section 74-510(a) shall not apply. 
(b)  To assist the department of watershed management's review of the land development project and to assist the applicant or responsible party with the creation of a stormwater management plan, the following information should be submitted prior to or at the time of the consultation meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which shall illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys; boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Infiltration rates. Infiltration rates shall be determined by soil surveys, on-site soil analysis, or percolation test. If a site has been previously developed or graded or contains urban soil types, a percolation test is required. 
(3)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources in existence prior to the commencement of the project. This inventory shall address resources both on the site and in the surrounding area that is or may be impacted by the project. This inventory shall also include a description of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks, including but not limited to drinking water well setbacks and septic setbacks. Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that present constraints for development. 
(4)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system that identifies the scope and magnitude of the project and related stormwater requirements, and identifies how stormwater better site design techniques will be used to reduce the need for structural stormwater controls. The plan shall also include: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 8, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-511. - Submittal requirements for stormwater management plans. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in section 74-513. 
(b)  This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the State of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, the Coastal Stormwater Supplement and the City of Atlanta's submittal requirements for commercial and single-family residential development. Plans and studies shall be presented in a format that itemizes each of the requirements in section 74-511(c), including performance criteria set forth in section 74-513. 
(c)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the applicable design requirements and forms found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, the Coastal Stormwater Supplement and the City of Atlanta's submittal requirements for commercial and single-family residential development. This includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site; 
(2)  Vicinity map; 
(3)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys; boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces; 
(4)  Infiltration rates. Infiltration rates shall be determined by soil surveys, on-site soil analysis, or a percolation test. If site has been previously developed or graded or contains urban soil types, a percolation test is required; 
(5)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources in existence prior to the commencement of the project. This inventory shall address resources both on the site and in the surrounding area that is or may be impacted by the project. This inventory shall also include a description of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks, including but not limited to drinking water well setbacks and septic setbacks. Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that present constraints for development; 
(6)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines in section 74-513; 
(7)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall be calculated in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, and include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 74-513; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For a subdivision of land or planned development, post-development runoff volumes, rates, and velocities shall be calculated based on the built out conditions of the entire parcel to be subdivided, regardless of future ownership of individual lots. Estimates of impervious surfaces shall be made based on maximum allowable lot coverage in accordance with section 16-29.001(38) of the City of Atlanta's Zoning Ordinance when meeting the performance criteria in section 74-513 (c) through (i). The developer of said subdivided parcel may provide the runoff reduction/water quality measures in accordance with sections 74-513(a) and (b) for individual lots and must be reflected accordingly on the final plat; 
(8)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: a map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 74-513; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans, TMDL implementation plans, and/or local greenspace protection plan; 
(9)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(10)  Construction phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the City of Atlanta Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control provisions found in Article II of Chapter 74, the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act, and any NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. Prior to the approval of the stormwater management plan, the applicant or responsible party shall submit a proposed staged construction and inspection control schedule for approval; otherwise, the construction and inspection control schedule will be for the entire drainage system. No stage work related to the construction of stormwater management facilities or BMPs shall proceed until the next proceeding stage of work, according to the sequence specified in the approved staged construction and inspection control schedule, as inspected and approved. Runoff reduction and water quality measures shall be installed in the final phase of construction to prevent clogging; 
(11)  Stormwater landscaping plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved; 
(12)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. This plan will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include a narrative describing how stormwater management system is designed to function, including capture, runoff control, water quality treatment, channel protection and flood protection, a narrative describing ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for all stormwater management facilities and practices as shown on the stormwater management site plan, an inspection and maintenance schedule, description of maintenance tasks, identification of responsible parties for ongoing maintenance, description of funding source, and a review of access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan; 
(13)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant or responsible party must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Such easements shall be reflected in all plats and surveys; 
(14)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. The owner must execute an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with section 74-517; and 
(15)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant or responsible party shall certify and provide documentation to the City of Atlanta that all applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the site development and stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 9, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-512. - Off-site facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional stormwater management facility. The off-site or regional stormwater management facility, if applicable, must comply with the following: 
(1)  The off-site or regional stormwater management facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose; 
(2)  The off-site or regional stormwater management facility must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices; 
(3)  There must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility; and 
(4)  On-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(b)  A stormwater management plan that shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional stormwater management facility must be submitted to the department of watershed management. 
(c)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department of watershed management that the use of an off-site or regional stormwater management facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 10, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-513. - Performance criteria for stormwater management. 
For new developments, the following performance criteria shall be applied to the area of the site impacted by the proposed work. For redevelopment, the following performance criteria shall be applied to the area of the site impacted by the proposed work, provided that the impacted area does not exceed 35 percent of the previously developed area. If the impacted area exceeds 35 percent of the previously developed area, the following performance criteria shall be applied to the entire development, including the previously developed area: 
(a)  Stormwater runoff reduction. The stormwater runoff volume generated by the first one inch of rainfall shall be retained on-site in order to help maintain pre-development site hydrology and help protect the local watershed from several indirect impacts of the land development process, including decreased groundwater recharge, decreased baseflow and degraded water quality. A stormwater management system is presumed to comply with this criteria if: 
(1)  It includes green infrastructure practices that provide for the interception and evapotranspiration, infiltration, or capture and reuse of stormwater runoff, that have been selected, designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the information presented in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; or constitutes an alternative practice responsibly designed and documented by the engineer to reproduce the intent of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; and 
(2)  It is designed to provide the amount of stormwater runoff reduction from the runoff generated by the first one inch of rainfall as specified in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. 
(b)  Water quality protection. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if it satisfies the stormwater runoff reduction criteria in section 74-513(a). However, if any of the stormwater runoff volume generated by the first one inch of rainfall cannot be reduced or retained on the development site, due to site characteristics or constraints, such as, a high water table, surface bedrock, contaminated soils, low soil infiltration rates, or the presence of a high risk operation or hotspot, the remaining volume shall be increased by a multiplier of 1.2 and shall be intercepted and treated in one or more stormwater management practices that provide at least an 80 percent reduction in total suspended solids loads in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  The practice shall be sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural management practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; or constitutes an alternative practice responsibly designed and documented by the engineer to reproduce the intent of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement; and 
(3)  Runoff from a high risk operation or hotspot land use activity identified by the City of Atlanta is adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural management practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation with native vegetation of the applicable stream buffer pursuant to Chapter 74, Article VII: Riparian Buffer Requirements; 
(2)  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; and 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
For redevelopment projects that create, add, or demolish and replace less than 5,000 square feet of impervious surface and meet the performance criteria of Section 74-513(a) and (b), stream channel protection is not required. 
(d)  Overbank flooding protection. For new development (greenfield), overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by attenuating the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate up to the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. 
For redevelopment, overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by reducing the peak discharge rate up to the 25-year, 24-hour storm event in accordance with the following formula: 

PIC = Pre-development Impervious Cover 
PDRR = Peak Discharge Rate Reduction 
For sites where previous demolition has removed impervious surfaces, pre-development peak discharge rate calculations and percentage of impervious coverage shall be calculated based on pre-demolition conditions. For sites that have been demolished and have remained fallow and stabilized with vegetation for a minimum of five years, they shall be considered as having pre-development conditions of 20 percent impervious cover for purposes of calculating peak discharge rate reduction. 
For land development permitted post-2004 and served by appropriate stormwater management facilities, subsequent redevelopment of the same area is not required to further reduce the peak discharge rate, provided that the site continues to meet the reduction previously achieved. 
For redevelopment projects that create, add, or demolish and replace less than 5,000 square feet of impervious surface and meet the performance criteria of section 74-513(a) and (b), overbank flooding protection is not required. 
(e)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by attenuating and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event without any increase in peak discharge rate, such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
For redevelopment projects that create, add, or demolish and replace less than 5,000 square feet of impervious surface and meet the performance criteria of section 74-513(a) and (b), extreme flooding protection is not required. 
(f)  Structural stormwater controls. 
(1)  All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from City of Atlanta before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City of Atlanta may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
(2)  Applicant or responsible party shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(g)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The applicant or responsible party may take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume and runoff reduction requirements. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. 
(h)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan, pursuant to section 74-511, using the methods included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and applicable sections of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement. 
(i)  Rules for dam safety and any other applicable federal, state, or local requirement. Any land development activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 11, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-514. - High risk operation and hotspot requirements. 
In addition to the provisions of this article, developments and redevelopments that meet the definition of high risk operation or hotspot shall meet the following criteria: 
(a)  No portion of the area of risk shall bypass the stormwater management system; 
(b)  At a minimum, treatment method must be as specified in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and be designed for the specific pollutant of risk; and 
(c)  The commissioner may, at his discretion, create additional and specific policies regarding these types of operations. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 12, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-515. - Single-family residential plan requirements. 
In addition to the requirements in sections 74-513(a), 74-513(b), and 74-516, single-family residential developments not otherwise exempt from this Article, under section 74-504(d), shall submit a grading plan and an erosion and sediment control plan to the site development section of the department of watershed management identifying the following: 
(a)  Existing and proposed ground contours and elevations; 
(b)  Sanitary and storm sewers, structures and easements; 
(c)  Location, configuration and finished floor elevations for existing and proposed building structures; 
(d)  Location, configuration and finished elevations for existing and proposed paved areas; 
(e)  Erosion and sediment control practices in conformance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6; and 
(f)  Plan shall be signed and sealed by State of Georgia registered architect, landscape architect, engineer or land surveyor. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 13, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-516. - Minimum requirements. 
For all development and redevelopment activities, including single-family residential and those which are otherwise exempt from this article, the following minimum requirements shall apply: 
(a)  Lots and buildings shall be developed in a manner to ensure that stormwater exiting individual parcels or lots under post-developed conditions does not adversely impact the adjacent parcels or lots as a result of concentrated flows, flooding, erosion, or deposits of silt or sediment; 
(b)  The stormwater discharge from a downspout, cistern, or any water collection device shall be located a distance of no less than ten feet from common property line and oriented so direction of concentrated flow is not toward the adjacent property line; 
(c)  Discharge from any downspout described in (a) must be dissipated, infiltrated, or diverted such that flows will not be concentrated; and 
(d)  No person shall erect, construct, or otherwise permit any obstruction that prevents the natural or contained flow of water to any component of the stormwater system of the City of Atlanta, unless such obstruction is allowed as part of a permit approved pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 14, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-517. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder for which the City of Atlanta requires ongoing maintenance, the owner or responsible party shall execute an inspection and maintenance agreement. Such agreement shall be submitted prior to the issuance of any such permit and shall be binding on all appropriate successors in title of the site. Inspection and maintenance agreements may terminate or be amended if superseded by subsequent development approved by the City of Atlanta. Any applicant for development will be required to obtain an inspection and maintenance agreement for all proposed and existing stormwater management facilities on the property. 
(b)  The inspection and maintenance agreement must be approved by the City of Atlanta; and upon approval, recorded in the deed records of the Superior Court of Fulton or DeKalb County, whichever is applicable, prior to issuance of permit. 
(c)  Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor in title. If portions of the site are sold or otherwise transferred, the inspection and maintenance responsibility shall pass to the appropriate successor in title. Such transfers shall designate for each portion of the site, the responsible party to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance and shall be recorded in the deed records for the property. The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. 
(d)  Where a stormwater maintenance facility exists on any property to be subdivided, including, but not limited to, subdivisions, planned developments, multifamily developments, or mixed use developments, the facility shall be owned in accordance with the following: 
(1)  If a property owners' association is created, in accordance with the Georgia Property Owners' Association Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220, et seq.), the stormwater maintenance facility shall be treated as a common area, and the following provisions, at a minimum, shall be included in the property owners' association's bylaws or covenants: 
a.  Governance by the Georgia Property Owners' Association Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220, et seq.) or a successor to that Act that grants lien rights to the association for maintenance expenses and tax obligations; 
b.  Automatic compulsory membership in the property owners' association of all lot purchasers and their successors in title; 
c.  A fair and uniform method of assessment and collection/payment for dues, maintenance, and related costs; 
d.  Perpetual and continued inspection and maintenance liability for the required stormwater facility; 
e.  Filing of all required covenants, declarations, and restrictions with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton or DeKalb County, whichever is applicable; and 
f.  Prior arrangement for the transfer of ownership of the stormwater maintenance facility in fair and equal parts to all lot owners in the case of the property owners' association dissolving. 
(2)  If a property owners association is not created, the stormwater maintenance facility shall be owned by all appropriate successors in title to the land in the development sold or otherwise transferred. Costs associated with the inspection and maintenance of the stormwater facility shall be assessed equitably among all of the lots in the development. 
(e)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall comply with the requirements of the department of watershed management and include, at a minimum, a description of the property, appropriate details of the stormwater management plan, an operations and maintenance plan, and a plan for annual inspection. 
(f)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Atlanta may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 74-520 of this article. 
(g)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder, the owner or responsible party shall execute an indemnification and hold harmless agreement, in a form provided by the City of Atlanta, which shall state at a minimum, that the owner or responsible party shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of Atlanta for any up-stream or down-stream damages due to structural, design, installation, maintenance or any other failure of the stormwater management facility. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 15, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-518. - Performance and maintenance bonds. 
Bonding requirements shall be in parallel with those included for erosion control application requirements, pursuant to section 74-39(b)(5). Prior to release of the bond, all stormwater facilities shall be intact and functioning as designed and in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 16, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-519. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the City of Atlanta or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the City of Atlanta. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
(1)  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
a.  The date and location of the inspection; 
b.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
c.  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
d.  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(2)  If any violations are found, the responsible party shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspection and as built plans. Upon completion of a project, and prior to final inspection pursuant to section 74-43(f) or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant or responsible party is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants or responsible parties are required to submit an electronic format as determined by the department of watershed management, and a paper format of the actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the as built configuration for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the City of Atlanta is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 17, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-520. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Absence of an inspection and maintenance agreement. The absence of an inspection and maintenance agreement shall not relieve the owner or responsible party from performing proper maintenance and inspection of the stormwater management facility. If the owner or responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of this article, the City of Atlanta may correct the violation as provided in section 74-520(e) hereof. 
(b)  Pre-existing facilities. For facilities constructed prior to the effective date of this article, the owner or responsible party shall perform proper maintenance of the stormwater management facility as required by the indemnification agreement. If the owner or responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of this article, the City of Atlanta may correct the violation as provided in section 74-520(e) hereof. 
(c)  Maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. The following shall apply to all sites regardless of the existence of an inspection and maintenance agreement: 
(1)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
(2)  A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the owner or responsible party. Such inspection shall be conducted in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement pursuant to section 74-517, or, in the absence of an inspection and maintenance agreement, in accordance with the requirements of this article. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City of Atlanta shall notify the party responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail, or by delivery in person of a notice of violation to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Failure of the City of Atlanta to provide such notice shall not relieve the owner or responsible party from performing proper maintenance and inspection of the stormwater management facility. If the owner or responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Atlanta may correct the violation as provided in section 74-520(e) hereof; and 
(3)  An annual inspection shall be performed and attested to by a qualified professional (certified Level II Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission Specialist) with results reported to the department of watershed management. Any deficiencies noted in either operation or maintenance of the facility must be included in the report along with the proposed remedies required and a time table for their implementation. If substantial deficiencies are found, a follow-up inspection to confirm correction of said deficiencies shall be performed and reported to the department of watershed management. 
(4)  Inspection programs by the City of Atlanta may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to routine inspections, random inspections, inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations, and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to reviewing maintenance and repair records, sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities, and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(d)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall maintain records of all maintenance and repairs and provide copies to the department of watershed management upon request. 
(e)  Failure to maintain. If an owner or responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement or indemnity agreement, the City of Atlanta, after 30 days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The City of Atlanta may assess the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2004-56, §§ 2—4, 9-15-04; Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 18, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-521. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Notice of violation. If the City of Atlanta determines that an owner or responsible party has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan, inspection and maintenance agreement, indemnity agreement, or any provision of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such owner or other responsible party. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible party in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible party; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the municipal court by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, or where a person is taking action without a required permit, such a notice of violation must be appealed within 24 hours). 
(Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 19, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-522. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in section 74-523 may be in addition to and shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(b)  All development and redevelopment activities, including single-family residential development, shall comply with the following: 
(i)  Lots and buildings shall be developed in a manner to ensure that stormwater exiting individual parcels or lots under post-developed conditions does not adversely impact the adjacent parcels or lots as a result of concentrated flows, flooding, erosion, or deposits of silt or sediment; 
(ii)  The stormwater discharge from a downspout, cistern, or any water collection device shall be located a distance of no less than ten feet from common property line and oriented so direction of concentrated flow is not toward the adjacent property line; 
(iii)  Discharge from any downspout described in (a) must be dissipated, infiltrated, or diverted such that flows will not be concentrated; and 
(iv)  No person shall erect, construct, or otherwise permit any obstruction that prevents the natural or contained flow of water to any component of the stormwater system of the City of Atlanta, unless such obstruction is allowed as part of a permit approved pursuant to this article. 
Failure to comply with the requirements of this subsection shall be a violation of this article subject to the enforcement provisions and penalties outlined in this article. 
(c)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The City of Atlanta may enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(d)  Any enforcement activities for violations of the provisions of this article which are also violations of Article II of Chapter 74 for land-disturbing activities shall be undertaken pursuant to the provisions of Article II of Chapter 74. 
(e)  Any enforcement activities for violations of the provisions of this article which are also violations of Chapter 158 for vegetation shall be undertaken pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 158. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 20, 2-13-13) 
Sec. 74-523. - Penalties. 
(a)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed within the time provided in the notice of violation for appeal to the municipal court, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. 
(b)  Notice. Upon expiration of the notice, the City of Atlanta may notify the person in violation of its intent to seek penalties and of any other enforcement to be taken under this section. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City of Atlanta shall first notify the owner or other responsible party in writing of its intended action, and shall provide not more than 72 hours (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, or taking action without a required permit 24 hours notice shall be provided) to cure such violation. In the event the owner or other responsible party fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City of Atlanta may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The City of Atlanta may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the owner or other responsible party. It shall stop all activities at the site except for the work required to remedy the violation or violations. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the owner or other responsible party has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The City of Atlanta may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the owner or other responsible party has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The City of Atlanta may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the owner or other responsible party has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. Suspension, revocation or modification of a permit shall not prohibit the responsible party from taking the necessary remedial measures to cure the violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the owner or other responsible party, fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within the time provided in the notice of violation, or such greater period as the City of Atlanta shall deem appropriate after the City of Atlanta has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City of Atlanta may issue a citation for the violation of this article and impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per violation, depending on the severity of the violation, for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the City of Atlanta may issue a citation to the owner or other responsible party, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. Imposition of criminal penalties shall be a separate and distinct action from the imposition of civil penalties pursuant to subsection (4) of this section. 
(6)  Liability. Implementation of this section does not reduce liability under any other applicable state or federal law, rule, or requirement. 
(c)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law. Each remedy listed in this subsection may be sought and imposed for each day of violation and the department of watershed management may seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2013-05(12-O-1761), § 21, 2-13-13) 
Secs. 74-524—74-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 74-601. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: 
(a)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the City of Atlanta of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(b)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the City of Atlanta and prevent harm to the public health, safety, and general welfare, including the potential degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-602. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all public and private property within the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-603. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-604. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-605. - Definitions. 
The following definitions will apply to this article except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Handbill" means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, placard, paper, booklet, flyer or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original which: 
(1)  Advertises or contains advertisement for sale of any merchandise, product, service, business, opportunity; or 
(2)  Directs attention to any business or commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of promoting sales; or 
(3)  Directs attention to or advertises an event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged. 
"Litter" means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds; ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and, glass containers, broken glass, dead animals, or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "solid waste" as such term is defined in Chapter 130 of this Code. 
"Property open to the public" means the right of way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof, waterways and drainage systems, any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands, or forests, and residential, commercial, or industrial, properties. 
"Unsolicited newspaper" means one that has not been ordered, subscribed to or requested by the recipient. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-606. - Unlawful disposal of litter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to throw, dump, sweep, push, blow, deposit, or leave litter on any private property or property open to the public within the City of Atlanta unless the litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to throw, dump, sweep, push, blow, deposit, or leave litter in any public or private gutter, street, right of way, waterway, or storm water collection system within the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-607. - Distribution of handbills and unsolicited newspapers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to throw, deposit, leave, place, or to cause the throwing, depositing, leaving, or placing of any commercial or noncommercial handbill or unsolicited newspaper on any property open to the public within the City of Atlanta, however, it shall not be a violation of this article to hand out or to distribute handbills or unsolicited newspapers to any person or persons. 
(b)  Handbills or unsolicited newspapers placed on private property shall be placed or deposited in a manner reasonably designed to prevent the handbill from being blown or drifted about such private property or property open to the public, including streets, storm water catchment and conveyance systems and other public places. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed an authorization to place handbills in mailboxes when such use is prohibited by federal law or by postal regulations. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to deposit or leave, or to cause the depositing or placing of any commercial or noncommercial handbill or unsolicited newspaper on any parked vehicle within the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 2008-61(08-O-1247), § 1, 7-16-08) 
Sec. 74-608. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
It shall be unlawful to transport by any type of vehicle, a load which is falling, shifting, blowing, dropping or in any way escaping from the vehicle. All loads being transported throughout the city limits shall use a tarpaulin or other appropriate cover to secure the load. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-609. - Maintenance of litter receptacles and placement of litter. 
(a)  Maintenance of litter receptacles. To facilitate the proper disposal of litter, all litter receptacles provided by commercial businesses and institutions for the use of public patrons shall be well-maintained and regularly emptied. The types of businesses and institutions required to meet this provision include but are not limited to, fast-food outlets, shopping centers, convenience stores, supermarkets, service stations, commercial parking lots, motels, hospitals, schools, government facilities, and public transportation facilities. 
(b)  Placing materials into receptacles. A person or persons placing litter, including household garbage and recyclables, in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles, shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-610. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or throw, deposit, dump, place or leave litter in any manner within the city limits of the City of Atlanta. Any person that violates the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to penalties as provided by this section. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Citations. Any person who violates this article shall be issued a citation that requires the person to appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing on the charge of violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Penalties. Upon a finding that a section of this ordinance has been violated, the violator shall be subject to one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $1,000.00 a day. 
(2)  Reimbursement to the City of Atlanta for the reasonable cost of removing any litter thrown, deposited, dumped, placed or left in violation of this chapter. 
(3)  Probation by order of the court in the form of mandatory litter cleanup of any public property, public street or right-of-way, for a distance not to exceed one mile. 
(4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Sec. 74-611. - Enforcement. 
Any person empowered by the City of Atlanta to issue citations may issue citations to enforce compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 2-13-07) 
Secs. 74-612—74-699. - Reserved. 
Chapter 75 - SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), approved Dec. 9, 2003, amended ch. 75 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said chapter pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 2003-93, § 2(Exh. A), approved May 27, 2003. 

Sec. 75-1. - Policy. 
(a)  The City of Atlanta shall integrate green and/or sustainable building principles and practices into the design, construction, and operations of all city facilities, and city-funded projects to the fullest extent possible and at minimum to the extent described in section 75-19. Furthermore, the city shall provide leadership and guidance to encourage the application of green building practices in private sector development. This policy is expected to yield long-term cost savings to the city's taxpayers due to substantial improvements in life-cycle performance and reduced life-cycle costs. 
(b)  In addition, the city shall evaluate all land purchases for future development on the basis of reducing environmental impacts that include but are not limited to transit, pedestrian and bicycle accessibility, urban and brown fields redevelopment, on-site stormwater mitigation capacity, vegetation and habitat restoration, and renewable energy opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 1, 7-26-17 ) 
Secs. 75-2—75-15. - Reserved. 
Sec. 75-16. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the City of Atlanta's policy on sustainable building is to require the city's commitment to environmental, economic, and social stewardship, to yield cost savings to the city taxpayers through reduced operating costs, to provide healthy and productive work environments for staff and visitors, and to contribute to the city's goals of protecting, conserving, and enhancing the region's environmental resources. Additionally, the city shall help to set a community standard of sustainable building. 
(Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03) 
Sec. 75-17. - Organizations affected. 
All city departments and offices and their contractors responsible for financing, planning, designing, developing, constructing and managing city-owned facilities and buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03) 
Sec. 75-18. - Definitions. 
Sustainable building: Sustainable building means the integration of building materials and methods that promote environmental quality, economic vitality, and social benefit through the integrated design, construction and operation of the built environment. Sustainable building merges sound, environmentally responsible practices into one discipline that looks at the environmental, economic and social effects of a building or built project as a whole. Sustainable design encompasses the following broad topics: energy use, water use, indoor environmental quality, materials selection, stormwater infiltration and the building energy management. 
Life cycle cost analysis: An inclusive approach to costing a program, facility, or group of facilities that encompasses planning, design, construction, operation and maintenance over the useful life of the facilities and finally any decommissioning or disassembly costs. Life cycle cost analysis looks at the net present value of design options as investments. The goal is to achieve the highest, most cost-effective environmental performance possible over the life of the project. 
LEED TM rating system: LEED TM stands for Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design, and is a voluntary, consensus-based, market-driven green building rating system developed by the U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC). It is based on existing, proven technology and evaluates environmental performance from a "whole building" perspective. LEED TM is a third-party certifying system designed for rating new and existing commercial, institutional, and multi- family residential buildings. 
Renovation: Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a property, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the property before the improvement or repair is started. 
(Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 2, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 75-19. - Policy and goals. 
(a)  It is the policy of the City of Atlanta to finance, plan, design, construct, manage, renovate, maintain, and decommission its facilities and buildings using sustainable practices and means. This applies to new construction and renovations in which the total project square footage includes at least 5,000 gross square feet of occupied space. 
(b)  The LEED TM rating system and Reference Guide shall be used as a guidance for design and as a measuring tool to determine what constitutes sustainable building by national standards. 
(c)  Facilities and buildings over 5,000 gross square feet of occupied space shall at a minimum incorporate sustainable design criterion as defined by this article. Design and project management teams are required to achieve LEED TM Silver Certification. 
(d)  At the time facilities are required to be audited and comply with retro commissioning requirements per Part 8, Chapter 2, Article J of the City's Land Development Code, Part III of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances, facilities shall obtain LEED TM Existing Buildings: Operation & Maintenance or the most recent equivalent. 
(Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 3, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 75-20. - Procedures and responsibilities. 
(a)  The commissioners of all city departments or their designee(s) whose responsibilities include planning, designing, constructing or renovating city-owned, city-managed, and city-leased facilities are responsible for ensuring facilities and buildings comply with section 75-19. 
(b)  The manager office of buildings or designee is responsible for coordinating city departments any educational and technical resources available that support and promote sustainable design and construction of city facilities. 
(c)  The commissioners of all city departments or their designee(s) are responsible for completing LEED TM training. 
(Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 4, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 75-21. - Budgeting and financing. 
All capital construction which falls under this policy is required to budget LEED TM design standards in the conceptual development of a city funded facility and/or the CDP/CIP process through the department of planning. Budget planning and life cycle cost analysis to achieve LEED TM Silver Certification and LEED TM Existing Buildings: Operations & Maintenance Certification is required. 
(Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 5, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 75-22. - Training. 
LEED TM training will be coordinated through the office of buildings or designee and/or other sponsoring departments. 
(Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 6, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 75-23. - Request for proposal. 
The commissioners of all city departments whose responsibilities include planning, designing, constructing or renovating city-owned facilities are responsible for submitting a request for proposal (RFP) to the department of procurement specifying the mandatory requirement of complying with the sustainable development design guidelines per section 75-19 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03) 
Sec. 75-24. - Implementation. 
(a)  The sustainable development design standards shall be forwarded to the department of planning and community development for review consistent with the above referenced policy objectives, and incorporated in the CDP and CIP process. 
(b)  The department of procurement shall assist and review all RFQ/RFP documents to ensure consistency with this article and with the city's sustainable purchasing and green infrastructure policies. 
(Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 7, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 75-25. - Exemptions. 
Many projects do not meet the policy criteria, including some buildings smaller than 5,000 gross square feet, roadways, and other infrastructure. City facility construction projects that are unoccupied or serve specialized functions (e.g. pump station, garage, storage building, etc.) are not subject to the city's sustainable development design guidelines. These projects shall implement City of Atlanta Sustainable Development Design Guidelines and strategies to the maximum extent practicable. 
Even though projects may become exempt from the city's required sustainable development design guidelines, project managers and design teams are encouraged to apply the relevant portions of City of Atlanta Sustainable Development Design Guidelines and to develop goals that increase the environmental, social, and economic benefits of the project. In addition, all exempted projects shall comply with benchmarking requirements per Part 8, Chapter 2, Article J of the City's Land Development Code, Part III of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 8, 7-26-17 ) 
Sec. 75-26. - Facility design prerequisites. 
All city departments and offices and their contractors responsible for financing, planning, designing, developing, constructing and managing city funded projects shall include the following prerequisites when designing a facility (as consistent with the USGBC LEED TM Rating Standards): 
(1)  Compliance with Atlanta Code of Ordinances, Article II, Section 74-35, Erosion and Sedimentation Control. 
(2)  Fundamental building systems commissioning: Verify and ensure that fundamental building elements and systems are designed, installed, and calibrated to operate as projected. 
(3)  Minimum energy performance: Establish minimum energy performance for buildings and respective systems of buildings. Energy and water efficiency of those buildings and respective systems is to be measured, managed, and optimized on an ongoing basis. 
(4)  CFC Reduction in HVAC&R equipment: Reduce ozone depletion. 
(5)  Recycling: Implement a comprehensive recycling program that reduces waste generated by building occupants. 
(6)  Minimum indoor air quality: Establish minimum indoor air quality (IAQ) performance to prevent the development of indoor air quality problems in buildings. 
(7)  Environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) control: Prevent exposure of building occupants and systems to ETS. 
(8)  Education: Educate appropriate city personnel responsible for operations and maintenance of those systems throughout the building's lifecycle. 
(Ord. No. 2003-108, § 2(Exh. A), 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2017-42(17-O-1218), § 9, 7-26-17 ) 
Secs. 75-27—75-50. - Reserved. 
Chapter 78 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency services, ch. 70; fire hydrants, § 154-91 et seq. 
Land development code reference— Impact fee for emergency services, § 19-1001 et seq. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; constitutional grant of power to provide for fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; fire safety and protection, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Persons allowed in vicinity of fires. 
No person, except firefighters, the mayor, members of the council, the police force, the owners of the property, their agents and the agents of insurance companies, shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of any fire, without being ordered there by the fire chief. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the fire chief shall be arrested and charged therefor. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3025) 
Sec. 78-2. - Placing trash or obstruction in front of firehouse. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully and knowingly to put any trash or other obstruction in front of any firehouse. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3030) 
Secs. 78-3, 78-4. - Reserved. 
Sec. 78-5. - Additional qualifications of fire chief; functions and duties of fire and rescue department. 
(a)  In addition to the qualifications provided in section 2-221, the fire chief shall possess at least five years experience at a senior supervisory level in management and administration of fire prevention and protection services. This experience must have been gained by virtue of previous government employment. 
(b)  The fire and rescue department shall have the following functions and duties: 
(1)  Protection of life and property against fire; 
(2)  Protection of life and property for homeland security against weapons of mass destruction; 
(3)  Provision of first responder, basic life support and/or advance life support services against medical emergencies; 
(4)  Provision of first responder services to motor vehicle accidents against disentanglement and emergency medical needs; 
(5)  Provision of first responder services to emergencies involving hazardous waste materials, high angle rescues, tunnel rescues, trench rescues, water rescues and building collapse; 
(6)  Protection of life and property against emergencies at the airport; 
(7)  Administration and enforcement of appropriate statutes, ordinances and regulations related to fires and explosions; 
(8)  Regulation of the installation and use of any equipment that prevents a hazard as to fires or explosions, including fire escapes, emergency exits, fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment that may be installed in or outside any vehicle, structure, building, grounds or underground passageway; 
(9)  Initiation and conduct of programs of public education in fire prevention and safety. 
(10)  Detect and prevent arson. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 70, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2004-74, § 3, 10-20-04) 
Secs. 78-6—78-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF FIRE AND RESCUE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-74, § 1, adopted 10-20-04 renamed article II to read as herein set out. 
Charter reference— Department of fire, app. IV, §§ 1(e), 21 et seq. 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-301 et seq.; personnel, ch. 114; police and fire promotions, § 114-226 et seq. 
Related laws reference— Firefighters pensions, § 6-366 et seq. 
State Law reference— Local fire departments, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq. 

Sec. 78-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department means the department of fire and rescue. 
(Ord. No. 2004-74, § 2, 10-20-04) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-27. - Application of article. 
This article shall apply to all persons employed as firefighters by the department and to all future officers and employees of the department. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3001(a)) 
Sec. 78-28. - Assignment of certain positions without competitive examination; removal or transfer of certain persons. 
(a)  The fire chief or designee is authorized, in the fire chief's discretion, to make assignments to the positions of fire apparatus operator, firefighter/rescue technician, section chief, battalion chief, assistant chief and deputy chief, without the use of written competitive examinations. 
(b)  Any fire apparatus operator, firefighter/rescue technician, section chief, battalion chief, assistant chief or deputy chief in the department may be removed or transferred at the pleasure of the fire chief. Such person so removed or transferred shall resume the nondiscretionary rank or title in the department held immediately prior to such person's appointment to fire apparatus operator, firefighter/rescue technician, section chief, battalion chief, assistant chief or deputy chief. Such person shall be notified in writing of the removal or transfer. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3001(b)) 
Sec. 78-29. - Assistance to fire chief by other city officers and employees. 
It shall be the duty of all city officers and employees to aid in all proper ways in carrying out this article and such rules and regulations as may, from time to time, be prescribed by the fire chief under this article and to afford the fire chief or designee all reasonable facilities and assistance to inspect all books, papers, documents and accounts applying or in any way appertaining to any and all officers, places, positions and employments subject to civil service. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3003) 
Sec. 78-30. - Hearings and investigations before fire chief. 
All hearings and investigations before the fire chief or the fire chief's designee shall be governed by this article and by rules of practice and procedure to be adopted by the fire chief, and in the conduct thereof neither the fire chief nor the fire chief's designee shall be bound by the technical rules of evidence. No informality in any proceedings or hearing or in the manner of taking testimony before the fire chief or the fire chief's designee shall invalidate any order, decision, rule or regulation made, approved or confirmed by the fire chief. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3004) 
Sec. 78-31. - Uniforms for personnel. 
(a)  Sworn members. The council shall provide a uniform or uniform allowance each year to the uniformed members of the department, the costs thereof not to exceed $600.00. In lieu of providing uniforms to members who perform fire duties but who do not wear uniforms, the council shall pay the sum of $600.00 per year, half of this sum to be paid in March of each year and half in September. 
(b)  General fire employees. The council shall provide a uniform each year to non-sworn members of the department who are required to wear uniforms, the cost thereof not to exceed $300.00 per year. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3008; Ord. No. 1997-43, § 1, 8-11-97) 
Sec. 78-32. - Appointment of firefighting personnel to special duty during a period of temporary disability. 
The fire chief may, with the approval of the chief financial officer, appoint firefighting personnel, who have been temporarily disabled due to injuries received in the line of duty, to special duty within the department for a period not to exceed six months. This appointment shall be contingent upon the ability of the employee to perform service other than firefighting, on a full-time basis in another area of the department, and upon the disability of the employee, during this period, being diagnosed as a temporary disability by a qualified physician. The period of special duty may be extended after six months upon approval of the chief financial officer. Salaries for these employees shall be paid from a special appropriation account established by the chief financial officer for that purpose. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3010) 
Sec. 78-33. - Probationary period for fire recruits. 
Any person selected as a fire recruit shall be duly notified and, upon accepting and reporting for duty, shall be appointed for a probationary period that shall commence upon appointment and continue until six months after the completion of the required training at the fire academy. If the conduct and efficiency shall at any time during the probationary period be unsatisfactory to the fire chief or the fire chief's designee, the person shall be notified in writing, relieved from duty and the person's name stricken from the list. If the person's services during this probationary period have been satisfactory to the fire chief, the person shall be so notified in writing and the person's name placed on the list of regular firefighters. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3011) 
Sec. 78-34. - Authority to cut wires. 
The fire chief or other authority acting under the fire chief is authorized to cut any wires, electric or otherwise, which shall be deemed necessary to preserve life or property without incurring any liability on the part of the city therefor. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3006) 
Sec. 78-35. - Unauthorized use of uniforms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without authority, to wear the uniform or any distinctive part thereof or anything similar to a distinctive part thereof, which has been designed and approved by the uniform committee of the department of fire and rescue. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3009; Ord. No. 2004-74, § 2, 10-20-04) 
Secs. 78-36—78-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE SAFETY STANDARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— General fire safety powers, app. I(24). 
Cross reference— Approval required for permit for theater or assembly hall using electricity, § 14-4; approval of carnivals, sideshows and similar exhibitions, § 14-7; fire protection requirements for tent shows, § 14-12; fire protection for wrestling or boxing exhibitions, § 14-41; applicability of fire code to Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, § 22-67. 
Land development code reference— Building regulations, § 8-2001 et seq. 
State Law reference— Fire safety standards, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq.; application of fire codes to existing buildings, O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-200 et seq., 25-2-14.1. 

Sec. 78-56. - State safety fire rules and regulations adopted. 
The rules and regulations promulgated for the prevention and destruction of life and property by fire, explosion and related hazards in this state by the state safety fire commissioner, under authority of the powers vested in and duties imposed upon the state safety fire commissioner by O.C.G.A., title 25, chapter 2, (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.) are adopted as the rules and regulations of the city. The rules and regulations of such statute shall govern inspections made for the purpose of eliminating fire hazards in the city. 
The city also adopts all amendments, which the safety fire commissioner for the state may make from time to time to the rules and regulations promulgated by that office unless such amendments are specifically excluded or superseded by this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 8-2002; Ord. No. 1998-69, § 1, 10-13-98) 
Charter reference— Adoption of standard codes of technical regulations by reference, § 2-404. 
State Law reference— Adoption of codes by reference, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 
Sec. 78-57. - Fire prevention code adopted, incorporated by reference; amendments. 
(a)  For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the safeguarding to a reasonable degree of life and property from hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or occupancy of buildings or premises, the most recent edition of the International Fire Code, including Appendices B, C and D thereto, as currently adopted by the State of Georgia and amended by Chapter 120-3-3 of GA Safety Fire Commissioner Rules and Regulations, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are altered, amended or repealed in this article, is incorporated in this article by reference as the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta. 
(b)  The Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta, (being also the most recent edition of the International Fire Code, as currently adopted and amended by the State of Georgia) is amended to apply within the City of Atlanta in the following respects: 
(1)  Sub-Paragraph 104.6.3 (Fire Records), Paragraph 104.6 (Official Records), Section 104 (General Authority and Responsibilities) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"104.6.3 Fire Records. 
The chief of the fire rescue department shall keep in the office of the fire safety division a record of all fires and all facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby, and whether such losses are covered by insurance, and if so, in what amount. Such records shall be made daily from the reports made by the fire department officers and inspectors. All such records shall be public." 
(2)  Paragraph 104.9 (Alternative materials and methods), Section 104 (General Authority and Responsibilities) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"104.9 Alternative materials and methods. 
The fire chief or his designee (fire marshal) shall have the power to accept use of alternative materials or alternative methods of construction upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his/her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Code. The fire chief shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. Approved alternate shall be at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the Code in quality, fire resistance, durability and safety. The particulars of such alternate when granted shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant." 
(3)  Sub-Paragraph 104.9.3 (New material processes, or occupancies which may require permits), Paragraph 104.9 (Alternative materials and methods), Section 104 (General Authority and Responsibilities) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall be added to read as follows: 
"104.9.3 New material processes, or occupancies which may require permits. 
The chief of the fire rescue department and the fire marshal shall determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, that new materials, processes, or occupancies shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said code. The fire marshal shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons." 
(4)  Paragraph 105.4 (Construction Plans Approval), Section 105 (Permits) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"105.4 Construction Plans Approval. 
It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, or alter any commercial building without construction documents approval by the fire chief or his designee for fire department accessibility, fire hydrant requirements, Life Safety Code requirements for assembly occupancies and flammable and combustible liquid tank installations." 
(5)  Sub-Paragraph 105.6.8 (Compressed gases), Paragraph 105.6 (Required Operational Permits), Section 105 (Permits) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"105.6.8 Compressed gases. 
A permit shall be required for the storage, handling, or use at normal temperature and pressure of more than 200 cubic feet of flammable compressed gas or 6,000 cubic feet of nonflammable compressed gas." 
(6)  Sub-Paragraph 105.6.25 (Lumber yards, woodworking plants and or any other type of wood working operations an operational permit is required), Paragraph 105.6 (Required Operational Permits), Section 105 (Permits) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"105.6.25 Lumber yards, woodworking plants and or any other type of wood working operations an operational permit is required. 
No person shall store in excess of 50,000 board feet of lumber without a permit." 
(7)  Sub-Paragraph 105.6.27 (LP [Liquid Propane] Gas), Paragraph 105.6 (Required Operational Permits), Section 105 (Permits) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"105.6.27 LP (Liquid Propane) Gas. 
No person shall install or maintain any LP Gas container without a permit. Where a single container or the aggregate of interconnected containers is over 200-gallon water capacity, the installer shall submit plans to the fire official. A permit shall not be required for the installation or maintenance of portable containers of less than 120-gallon water capacity. 
EXCEPTION: A permit shall not be required for individual containers with a 500-gallon water capacity or less serving occupancies in Group R-3, which are located outside the Fire District as outlined in Section 8-2074 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances." 
(8)  Sub-Paragraph 105.6.30 (Open Burning), Paragraph 105.6 (Required Operational Permits), Section 105 (Permits) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"105.6.30 Open Burning. 
The burning of construction debris, organic debris from stumps, branches, and other land clearing efforts and any and all other outdoor burning, other than cooking fires, is prohibited within the city limits." 
(9)  Sub-Paragraph 105.6.39 (Repair garages and motor fuel-dispensing facilities), Paragraph 105.6 (Required Operational Permits), Section 105 (Permits) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"Section 105.6.39 Repair garages and motor fuel-dispensing facilities. 
No person shall use any building, shed or enclosure as a place of business for purpose of repair, maintenance or service of any motor vehicle, marine or fleet motor fuel-dispensing facilities therein, without a permit." 
(10)  Sub-Paragraph 105.6.39.1 (Repair garages and motor fuel-dispensing facilities, prohibited areas), Paragraph 105.6 (Required Operational Permits), Section 105 (Permits) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall be added to read as follows: 
"Section 105.6.30.1 Repair garages and motor fuel-dispensing facilities, prohibited areas. 
No person shall use any public way, street, alley, or portion of an airport ramp, or apron as a place of business for the purpose of: repair, maintenance or service of any motor vehicle, marine or fleet motor fuel-dispensing facilities therein." 
(11)  Sub-Paragraph 105.6.47 (Fire Inspection and Operational Permit Fees), Paragraph 105.6 (Required Operational Permits), Section 105 (Permits) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall be added to read as follows: 
"Section 105.6.47 Fire Inspection and Operational Permit Fees. 
(a)  The Fire Chief of the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department or his designee is authorized to charge and collect fees, on a yearly, one time or location basis for the issuance of permits or activities including storing of certain materials that constitute fire hazards for which permits are required by the Fire Prevention Code, and certain activities not requiring a fire permit shall be in accordance with the following schedule of charges. 
In addition to the annual fees described in city ordinance § 105.6.47, a $25.00 processing fee shall be charged. 
(1)  FIRE SAFETY INSPECTION FEES: 
(A)  Existing Occupancies. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12 (2) fire inspection shall be performed in order to issue permits or authorize occupancy as required. 
The annual fees therefore shall be as follows: 
i.  There shall be an inspection fee of $200.00 for a business having up to 3,000 square feet. 
ii.  There shall be an inspection fee of $250.00 for a business having 3,001 square feet to 10,000 square feet. 
iii.  There shall be an inspection fee of $350.00 for a business having more than 10,000 square feet. 
v.  There shall be an inspection fee of $450.00 for high-rise structures up to 70,000 square feet. 
vi.  There shall be an inspection fee of $650.00 for high-rise structures of more than 70,001 square feet. 
(B)  OPERATIONAL PERMITS: Operational permits are required to conduct certain operations or businesses. In addition to Fire inspection fees, operational fees may be required for certain activities as listed. Multiple operations performed at the same location shall be charged a single inspection fee pursuant to § 105.6.47(a)(1). However, each operation shall be individually accessed permit fees and may incur cumulative fees. 
These fees shall not apply to structures that are exempt pursuant to O.C.G.A. 25-2-12(2). 
Permit approvals subject to site inspection. The minimum fee for any activity not listed shall be $50.00. 

 
** (R)=Renewable (NR)=Non-Renewable 
(b)  A re-inspection fee of $200.00 shall be imposed for each re-inspection if a violation stated in the initial written notice has not been corrected. 
(12)  Paragraph 107.6 (Maintenance of exit ways in public assembly occupancies), Section 107 (Maintenance) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall be added to read as follows: 
"107.6 Maintenance of exit ways in public assembly occupancies. 
Every aisle shall lead to an exit door or to a cross aisle running parallel to the seats and leading directly to an exit and shall not be obstructed by persons, chairs, tables, or any objects." 
(13)  Paragraph 107.7 (Public Assembly Occupant Load Accountability), Section 107 (Maintenance) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall be added to read as follows: 
"107.7 Public Assembly Occupant Load Accountability. 
107.7.1 Any place of public assembly with any number of persons beyond that previously approved by the fire chief, or his designee, in the occupancy permit that is issued prior to opening, shall be deemed to be an overcrowded condition. The owner shall not permit an overcrowded condition to exist, nor shall he/she allow the admittance of any person beyond that number of persons previously approved by the fire chief, or his designee. 
107.7.2 Signs stating the maximum occupant content shall be conspicuously posted by the owner of the building in each assembly room, auditorium or room used for a similar purpose. It shall be unlawful to remove or deface such notice. This number shall be determined by the fire chief or his designee and shall be based on the capacity of the exits provided and area of the space under consideration. 
107.7.3 Where standing room is permitted, the capacity of the standing area should be determined on the basis of seven square feet per person. 
107.7.4 Owners and operators of public assembly facilities where alcoholic beverages are consumed shall be able to provide an immediate accountability of the number of occupants in said facility at any given time. 
107.7.5 The use of numeric counting devices, such as but not limited to numeric clickers or means of accountability acceptable to the fire official, shall be utilized to meet the requirement of section 107.7.4. 
107.7.6 Individual(s) responsible for occupant load accountability shall be stationed at each entrance of the facility and shall be equipped with a minimum of two numeric counting devices. One numeric counting device shall be designated to account for the number of patrons entering the facility and the other numeric counting device shall be designated to account for the number of patrons exiting the facility. 
(14)  Section 108 (Appeals) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"Section 108 Appeals. 
Whenever the fire marshal disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply, or that the true intent and meaning of the code has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the fire marshal to the fire chief or his designee within five days of the fire marshal's decision. The fire chief shall respond in writing within ten days." 
(15)  Paragraph 109.4 (Violation Penalties), Section 109 (Violations) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"109.4 Violation Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any provisions of the Code, or fail to comply with this or any other provisions made there under, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted or approved there under, or any certificate or permit issued there under, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed by a court of competent Jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severely, for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively, being guilty of an offense, punishable by a fine of not less than $500.00 for the first offense, not less than $1,000.00 for the second offense, and not less than $1,500.00 for the third offense. The maximum fine shall be $5,000.00. All fines may carry imprisonment of not more than six months, or work on the public streets or public works of the city for not more than six months, or by any one or more of these punishments. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse a violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense." 
(16)  Section 202 (General Definitions) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta is amended to include the following definitions: 
FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. Whenever the words fire code official is used in the International Fire Code, they shall be held to mean the fire marshal or a duly authorized representative(s). 
ASPHALT/TAR KETTLE or ROOFING KETTLE shall mean any portable equipment either with or without wheels, or any portable fueled heating devices such as, but not limited to MAPP, Butane, and LP- Gas fueled torches, used for heating tar, pitch, asphalt, or other similar substance for application or the repair of roofs, floors, pipes, or other objects. 
(17)  Section 303 (Asphalt/Tar Kettles) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"Section 303 Asphalt/Tar Kettles. 
(a)  Permit required. 
(1)  No roofing kettle, tar kettle or any other heating devices used in the application or repair process of applying roofing materials shall be operated without a permit from the fire chief or his designee 
(2)  An annual roofing kettle or tar kettle permit shall be displayed at the job site. If more than one job is performed at one time, a copy shall be made so that each job site has a copy. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of each company to notify the fire safety division (by telephone) as to the location and type of work being performed before the job is started. 
(c)  Location: 
(1)  No roofing or tar kettle shall be operated on or inside any building without written permission from the fire chief or his designee. 
(2)  No roofing kettle or tar kettle shall be operated within 25 feet of any combustible material or substance. 
(d)  Street protection. All improved streets shall be protected from burning by use of sand or noncombustible materials under roofing kettles or tar kettles. The street shall be cleaned of excess tar and other debris upon completion of the work 
(e)  There shall be a portable fire extinguisher complying with section 906 and with a minimum 3A: 40B:C rating within 25 feet (7,620mm) of each asphalt (tar) kettle during the period such kettle is being utilized, and one additional portable fire extinguisher with a minimum 3A: 40B:C rating on the roof being covered. 
(f)  Precautions against fires. 
(1)  No more than 600 pounds of combustible material or substance to be heated shall be stored within 25 feet of any kettle while same is in operation. 
(2)  No kettle using flammable liquid for fuel shall be refueled while in operation and any flammable liquid placed within 25 feet of a kettle shall be stored in an approved safety container where it shall be kept sealed or closed at all times while the kettle is in operation. 
(3)  No mop or other applicator which has been used or submerged in tar, pitch, asphalt or other similar substance in the process of black roofing, waterproofing, or insulating shall be left overnight in or within 25 feet of any building structure or combustible material or substance. 
(4)  A kettle operator, experienced with the equipment involved and familiar with the fire hazards, the precautions to be observed, and the use of the fire extinguisher facility, shall be required to be in attendance at the kettle at all times the kettle is being fired or heated and so remain until the temperature of the kettle and the contents does not exceed 350 degrees Fahrenheit, as may be determined by a thermometer that shall be provided and maintained at or near the kettle at all times. 
(g)  Roofing or tar kettles in transit. 
(1)  Open flame in a roofing or tar kettle while in transit is prohibited. 
(2)  Kettle doors or lids shall be closed and secured while in transit. 
(3)  Kettle not equipped with wheels shall not be fired or used when mounted on a truck, except if the truck body is of all metal construction and the kettle is securely attached to the truck. 
(4)  Firing of a small patch kettle while located in the bed of a truck is prohibited. 
(h)  Hi-boys. Hi-boys shall be constructed of noncombustible materials. Hi-boys shall be limited to a capacity of 55 gallons (208L). Fuel sources or heating elements shall not be allowed as part of a hi-boy. 
(i)  Fuel containers under air pressure and Fuel containers that operate under air pressure shall not exceed 20 gallons (76L) in capacity and shall be approved. 
(j)  Location of fuel containers. Fuel containers shall be located at least 10 feet (3,048mm) from the burner. 
EXCEPTION: Containers properly insulated from heat or flames are allowed to be within two feet (610mm) of the burner." 
(18)  Paragraph 311.5 (Placards), Section 311 (Vacant Premises) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"311.5 Placards. 
311.5.1 Placard Specifications. Any building or structure determined to be unsafe, shall be placarded. This structure has been determined by the fire marshal of the City of Atlanta to be dangerous, unsafe, unsound and unfit for human habitation or occupancy and in violation of City of the Atlanta Fire Prevention Code and/or the Atlanta Housing Code or Commercial Institutional and Industrial Building Maintenance Code. The fire marshal shall notify the owner, operator or agent of the property by certified mail, return receipt requested, to his/her last known address that the building has been placarded and the reason therefore. 
311.5.1.1 Placard location. Placards shall be applied on the front of the structure. All placards shall be placed a minimum of ten feet above grade and be visible from the street. Additional placards shall be applied to the side of each entrance to the structure and on penthouses. 
311.5.1.2 Placard size and color. Placards shall be a minimum of 18 inches by 12 inches and a maximum of 24 inches by 24 inches in size with a red or green background, and a white reflective border. The border shall be a minimum 0.25 inch stroke and maximum of 0.5-inch stroke. All lettering on the placard shall be white reflective. 
311.5.2 Placard legend. The color designation of the placards shall have the following meanings: 
311.5.2.1 Green placards shall indicate that firefighters should proceed with caution and state the following: 
WARNING! 
BY ORDER OF THE FIRE MARSHAL, THIS STRUCTURE IS DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE. 
SECTION 78-57 OF THE ATLANTA FIRE PREVENTION CODE. 
311.5.2.2 Red placards shall indicate that firefighters should not enter property (unless for life safety) and conduct defensive operations and state the following: 
WARNING! 
BY ORDER OF THE FIRE MARSHAL, THIS STRUCTURE IS DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE. 
SECTION 78-57 OF THE ATLANTA FIRE PREVENTION CODE. 
311.5.3 Placard Lettering: 
311.5.3.1 The lettering for the word "WARNING" shall be a minimum of 1.75 inch in height with a 0.5 inch stroke of white reflective type. 
311.5.3.2 The lettering for "BY ORDER OF THE FIRE MARSHAL, THIS STRUCTURE IS DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE" shall be a minimum of 0.5 inch in height with a minimum stroke 1/16-inch stroke. 
311.5.3.3 The lettering for the" SECTION 78-57 OF THE ATLANTA FIRE PREVENTION CODE" shall be a minimum of 3/8-inch in height with a 1/16-inch stroke. 
311.5.4 Unlawful Entry. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon this property other than an authorized governmental licensee, the owner or his designated agent or contractor (upon written verification). It shall also be unlawful to occupy or to allow the occupancy of this property until rendered fit for human habitation or occupancy in a manner satisfactory to and approved by the bureau of buildings and/or the bureau of code compliance. Mutilation, unauthorized removal or defacing of this placard shall be an offense punishable by fine and/or imprisonment." 
(19)  Paragraph 403.1 (Fire Watch Personnel), Section 403 (Public Assemblages and Events) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"403.1 Fire watch personnel. Whenever in the opinion of the fire chief or his designee it is essential for public safety in any place of public assembly or any other place where people congregate, due to the number of persons, or the nature of the performance, exhibition, display, contest, or activity, the owner, agent, or lessee shall, at his expense, employ one or more experienced firefighters employed by Atlanta Fire Rescue Department as required and approved by the chief to be on duty at such place. Said firefighters shall be subject to the chiefs orders at all times when so employed, and shall be in uniform and remain on duty during the time such places are open to the public, or when such activity is being conducted. Before each such activity, said firefighter shall inspect the fire appliances provided to see that they are in proper place and in proper working order and shall keep diligent watch for fires, obstructions to means of egress and other hazards during the time such place is open to the public or such activity is being conducted and take prompt measures for extinguishment of fires that may occur and assist in the evacuation of the public from structures. The firefighters shall not be required or permitted while on duty to perform any other duties than those herein specified." 
(20)  Paragraph 404.2 (Approved Fire Safety and Evacuation Plan), Section 404 (Fire Safety and Evacuation Plans) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"404.2 Approved Fire Safety and Evacuation Plan. An approved fire and evacuation plan shall be prepared and maintained for the following occupancies and buildings: 
1.  Group A, other than group occupancies used exclusively for purposes of religious worship that have an occupant load less than 2,000. 
2.  Group B buildings having an occupant load of 500 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. 
3.  Group E. 
4.  Group H. 
5.  Group I. 
6.  Group R-1. 
7.  Group R-2 college and university buildings. 
8.  Group R-4. 
9.  High-rise buildings. 
10.  Group M buildings having an occupant load of 500 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. 
11.  Covered malls exceeding 50,000 square feet (4,645 m2) in aggregate floor area. 
12.  Underground buildings. 
13.  Buildings with an atrium and having occupancy in Group A, E or M." 
(21)  Sub-Paragraph 408.2.3 (Crowd Manager Certification) is added to Paragraph 408.2 (Group A Occupancies), Section 408 (Use and Occupancy-Related Requirements) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta and shall read as follows: 
"408.2.3 Crowd Manager Certification. Each qualified crowd manager supervisor shall be required to carry on his/her person an identification card issued by Atlanta Fire Rescue Department certifying his/her minimum training in life and fire safety." 
(22)  Sub-Paragraph 503.3.1 is added to Paragraph 503.3 (Marking), Section 503 (Fire Apparatus Access Roads) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta and shall read as follows: 
"503.3.1 A fire department access sign shall be installed at all required secondary fire department access points of a property. The sign shall state: Fire Dept. Access, name of the business/property, property address, and emergency contact information. 
PROPER FIRE DEPT. ACCESS SIGNAGE INSTALLATION * 

(23)  Section 505 (Premises Identification) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
Section 505 Fire Department Address Guide for All Properties. 
505.1 Single-family homes. Address shall be a minimum four inches high, with a 5/8-inch stroke and contrasting numbers. 
505.2 Multi-family communities (apartments, condos, townhouses). Multi family communities (apartments, condos, townhouses) and street address numbers shall comply with the following: 
505.2.1 Street Address Numbers. Street address shall be a minimum 12-inch high numbers with a two-inch stroke with contrasting background. 
(a)  Twelve-inch high numbers with a two-inch stroke are only acceptable when placed within approximately 75 feet of the road in which the property is addressed. 
505.2.2 Building Numbers. Building numbers shall be: 
(a)  Minimum 18 inches high numbers with a three-inch stroke with contrasting background. 
(b)  Buildings under 100 feet long: a minimum of one number per building. 
(c)  Buildings over 100 feet in length require a minimum of two numbers per building. 
505.3 Apartment Spread Numbers/Corridor Spread Numbers. Apartment spread numbers/ corridor spread numbers shall be: 
(a)  Apartment spread numbers shall be a minimum of seven-inch high numbers with a one-inch stroke with contrasting background. 
(b)  Corridor spread numbers shall be a minimum four-inch high number with a 5/8-inch brush stroke with a contrasting background. 
505.4 Apartment Numbers. Apartment numbers shall be a minimum four-inch high numbers with a 5/8-inch stroke with contrasting background and visible from access road. 




505.5 Large office and warehouse buildings. Large office and warehouse building addresses shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Address shall be a minimum of 24-inch high numbers with a four-inch stroke with contrasting background. 
(b)  Address must be visible from all access directions. 
(c)  Buildings over 500 feet long shall have two address locations if more than one access point is visible. 
(d)  Suite numbers are required for multi tenant complexes and shall be located over the front door and on the rear door with a six-inch high by one-inch brush stroke. 



505.6 Shopping Centers, High Rise Buildings and Other Applications. Shopping centers, high rise buildings and other applications address numbers shall be: 
(a)  Minimum 12 inches high numbers with a two-inch stroke with contrasting background. Be visible from all access directions. Suite numbers are required over the door with a six inches high by one-inch brush stroke. 
(b)  Buildings beyond 100 feet from the street and 10,000 square feet or more would need to install 18-inch by three-inch address numbers. 
505.7 Marquee and Monument. Addresses installed on a marquee or monument located next to the street will require numbers 12 inches high by two-inch brush stroke to be located a minimum of three feet above grade. Numbers shall contrast with the background. 
505.8 Self Storage Buildings Facilities Signs. 
505.8.1 Self Storage Buildings Facilities Signs shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The sign plate shall be 12 inches by 18 inches with a thickness of .080 aluminum construction. 
(2)  The sign face shall have a Brown reflective background with a white legend, using the standard 3M Scotchlite sign face number R7-32 or equivalent, with white screen printed lettering. 
(3)  The font style shall be Handel Gothic BT capital fonts. 
(4)  Signs are to be used for commercial applications only. 



505.9 Address directory. General. An approved address directory shall be installed at properties with more than one principal building each building shall have building unit identification numbers, or when, in the opinion of the chief, emergency response may be delayed due to the physical layout of the complex. 
505.9.1 Prior to construction, an address directory plan shall be submitted to the Atlanta Fire Rescue Fire Marshal's Office for approval via the City of Atlanta Building Department's plan submission process. 
505.9.1.1 Dimensions. The number of buildings in the complex shall determine the dimensions of the directory. 
(1)  Complexes containing 12 or fewer buildings require three feet x three feet 
(2)  Complexes containing 13 to 30 buildings require four feet x four feet (16 square feet) site directory. 
(3)  Complexes containing 31 or more buildings require five feet by five feet (25 square feet) site directory. 
505.10 Framing. Framing materials shall not encroach upon the face to the directory by more than one and one-half inches. Stanchions or supports shall not be included in the required size of the directory. 
505.11 Protection. The directory shall be protected against vandalism and disfigurement by a clear polycarbonate cover, with a minimum one-eighth inch thickness, sealed to protect from weather. 
505.12 Illumination. Address directories shall be internally illuminated utilizing white light. The directory must be illuminated from dusk to dawn. 
505.13 Installation requirements. Support posts or stanchions shall be set on concrete. Directories with dimensions of three feet by three feet (nine square feet) shall be 36 inches above grade. 
505.13.1 Directories with dimensions of four feet by four feet (16 square feet) and five feet by five feet (25 square feet) shall be 24 inches above grade. 


505.14 Depictions. All depictions must be clear, easily understood and legible at a distance of eight feet. The directory shall depict structures, building numbers, units, apartment space numbers, tennis courts, swimming pools, canals, waterfronts, driveways, streets, laundry rooms, fire hydrants, and other areas determined by the chief. 
505.15 Depictions shall comply with the following: 
1.  Directories shall be a dark print on a contrasting light background. 
2.  The name and address of the complex are required, but shall not exceed ten percent of the total size of the site directory. 
3.  Swimming pools, canals, and waterway areas shall be translucent blue. 
4.  Tennis courts shall be translucent green. 
5.  Fire hydrants shall be a ¼-inch diameter black circle filled with a translucent yellow center. The abbreviation "HYD" must be affixed by the location of the hydrant on the directory. 
6.  The directory shall be properly oriented to the viewer with a red symbol one inch in diameter, with the words "you are here" affixed at the appropriate location on the directory. 
7.  There must be a north directional arrow affixed to the directory. This arrow must be a minimum of three inches in size. 
8.  The building numbers must be one inch in diameter, located directly adjacent to the building on the driveway side. 
9.  The colors used on site directory may not be duplicated to represent more than one item. 
505.16 Setbacks. The directory shall be installed on the occupancy's property and at the location approved by the chief as follows: 
1.  The directory shall be set back from the street or curbing at least 25 feet to allow emergency vehicles to clear the public right of way. 
2.  Shall not exceed a distance of four feet from the edge of the property driveway facing the direction of oncoming traffic. 
3.  Shall not conflict with traffic visibility zones as provided for by other ordinances. 
4.  Shall be immediately visible and free from obstructions including architectural design and landscaping. 
505.17 Prohibition. Information such as advertising or additional artwork shall not be allowed on the address directory. 

(24)  Sub-Paragraph 507.5.4.1 is added to Sub-Paragraph 507.5.4 (Obstruction), Paragraph 507.5 (Fire Hydrant Systems), Section 507 (Fire Protection Water Supplies) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta and shall read as follows: 
"507.5.4.1 No person shall stop, park, or leave any vehicle within a 15-foot radius of a fire hydrant." 
(25)  Sub-Paragraph 901.6.2.2 is added to Sub-Paragraph 901.6.2 (Records), Paragraph 901.6 (Inspection, testing and maintenance), Section 901 (General) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta and shall read as follows: 
"901.6.2.2 Medical First Aid Equipment. Automated External Defibrillator (AED). 
(A)  Cabinets containing automated external defibrillators shall not be blocked from use or obstructed from view of the public. 
(B)  Cabinets Identification. Cabinets shall be identified in an approved manner by a permanently attached sign. 
(C)  Tampering with AEDs. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or tamper with an AED or other Life Safety device, except for the purpose of training, recharging or making necessary repair, or when approved by the Fire Code Official. 
(D)  The owner of the AEDs shall be responsible for the maintenance, inspection and testing of the AEDs per manufacturers requirements. Written records of the maintenance, inspection and testing of all AEDs shall be kept on file for review by the fire code official. 
(E)  AEDs shall be operational at all times." 
(26)  Sub-Paragraphs 912.2.1.1 and 912.2.1.2 are added to Sub-Paragraph 912.2.1 (Visible Location), Paragraph 912.2 (Location), Section 912 (Fire Department Connections) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta and shall read as follows: 
"912.2.1.1 A fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of a fire department connection (FDC) and or Standpipe connection on all new commercial construction. 
912.2.1.2 No transformer shall be located within a 20-foot radius of the following water connections: fire department, standpipe, sprinkler, test header, or a fire hydrant on all new commercial construction. 
EXCEPTION: The separation distance shall be reduced to ten feet when the transformer is separated by a non-combustible six-foot high wall on three sides, with the open side facing away from the water supply and or connection. A minimum three-foot clearance shall be provided between the transformer and the non-combustible wall on all sides, for maintenance, inspection, and testing functions." 
(27)  Sub-Paragraphs 1030.3.1 and 1030.3.2 are added to Paragraph 1030.3 (Obstructions), Section 1030 (Maintenance of the Means of Egress) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta and shall read as follows: 
"1030.3.1 Exit Doors. During the period of occupancy, no exit door shall be locked, bolted or otherwise fastened or obstructed by any means so that the door cannot be opened from the inside by the use of: a latch, knob, or by direct pressure applied to the door or to a panic release device. 
1030.3.2 Hold Open Devices. The use of a hold open device on an exit door(s) shall not be used, unless the hold open device is tied directly into the building's fire alarm system. The hold open device shall automatically release the exit door(s) upon activation of the building's fire alarm system." 
(28)  Sub-Paragraph 2006.5.3 (Training), Paragraph 2006.5 (Fueling and Defueling), Section 2006 (Aircraft Fueling) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"2006.5.3 Training. Aircraft refueler apparatus shall be attended and operated only by persons instructed in methods of proper use and operation and who are qualified to use such refueler apparatus in accordance with minimum safety requirements. Each qualified operator shall be required to carry on his/her person an identification card issued by Atlanta Fire Rescue Department certifying his/her minimum training in fire safety." 
(29)  Sub-Paragraph 2006.5.6 (Leaving Fueling Vehicles Unattended) shall be added to Paragraph 2006.5 (Fueling and Defueling), Section 2006 (Aircraft Fueling) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta and shall read as follows: 
"2006.5.6 Leaving Fueling Vehicles Unattended. The driver, operator or attendant of a fueling apparatus shall not leave the fueling apparatus unattended, while it is connected to the aircraft, ground support equipment or the hydrant fueling system. The connection of a fueling apparatus to an aircraft, ground support equipment or the hydrant fueling system shall be considered as fueling process." 
(30)  Paragraph 2803.3 of Section 2803 (General Requirements) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"2803.3 Waste Removal. Saw mills, planning mills and other woodworking plants shall be equipped with refuse removal systems which will collect and remove sawdust and shavings as produced. Blower and exhaust systems shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of NFPA 91." 
(31)  Section 3316 (Motorized Construction Equipment) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"SECTION 3316 Motorized Construction Equipment 
3316.1 Conditions of use. Internal-combustion-powered construction equipment shall be used in accordance with all of the following conditions: 
1.  Equipment shall be located so that exhausts do not discharge against combustible material. 
2.  Exhausts shall be piped to the outside of the building. 
3.  Equipment shall not be refueled while in operation. 
4.  Fuel for equipment shall be stored in an approved area outside of the building. 
5.  Bonding and grounding precautions shall be utilized during all fueling operations of motorized equipment." 
(32)  Paragraph 3501.2 (Permits) of Section 3501 (General) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"3501.2 Permits. 
(a)  A permit shall be required of each company, corporation, partnership or owner operator performing welding or cutting operations except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section. This permit shall not be required for each welding or cutting job location. The company, corporation, partnership, or owner operator shall notify the fire safety division in advance where such work is taking place, except when such work is done in response to an emergency call that does not allow for the fire safety division to be notified in advance of the work. 
(b)  A permit shall not be required of any company, corporation, partnership, or owner-operator: 
(1)  Where the welding or cutting is performed in areas approved for the purpose, or 
(2)  Where an approved permit system is established for control of the hazards involved. 
(c)  Application for a permit required by this article shall be made by the company, corporation, partnership, or owner-operator performing the welding or cutting operations or by his duly authorized agent. 
(d)  A permit for welding or cutting operations shall not be issued unless the individuals performing such operations are capable of doing such work in a safe manner. Demonstration of a working knowledge of the provisions of this article shall constitute acceptable evidence of compliance with this requirement. 
(e)  Companies, corporations, partnerships, and owner-operators required to have a permit shall maintain a record of all locations where welding or cutting operations are performed and have it available for inspection by the fire safety division." 
(33)  Paragraph 3509.8 (Hose and Hose Connections) in Section 3509 (Piping Manifolds and Hose Systems for Fuel Gases and Oxygen) in the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall be added to read as follows: 
"3509.8 Hose and Hose connections. An approved listed flame arrester check valve shall be installed in every fuel gas hose not more than six inches (152mm) downstream from the point of connection to a cylinder or other fuel supply, preferably at the regulator. Any such flame arrester shall be approved for the specific gas used." 
(34)  Sub-Paragraph 5604.1.1 is added to Paragraph 5604.1(General), Section 5604 (Explosive Materials Storage and Handling) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta and shall read as follows: 
"5604.1.1 Prohibitions. The storage of explosive and blasting agents is prohibited within the fire limits as established by section 8-2074 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances except for temporary storage for use in connection with approved blasting operations; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply to Wholesale and retail stocks of small arms ammunition, explosive bolts, explosive rivets or cartridges or explosive-actuated power tools in quantities involving less than 500 pounds of, explosive material." 
(35)  Sub-Paragraph 5704.2.9.5, Sub-Paragraph 5704.2.9 (Aboveground Tanks), Paragraph 5704.2 (Tanks Storage), Section 5704 (Storage), Chapter 57 (Flammable and Combustible Liquids) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"5704.2.9.5 Aboveground tanks inside of buildings. 
(1)  Tanks storing Class II and III liquids inside buildings shall be equipped with a device or other means to prevent overflow into the building including, but not limited to: a float valve, a preset meter on the fill line; a valve actuated by weight of the tank content; a low head pump which is incapable of producing overflow; or a liquid- tight overflow pipe at least one size larger than the fill pipe and discharging by gravity back to the outside source of liquid or to an approved location. 
(2)  Flammable or combustible liquids storage tanks in buildings shall be installed in accordance with NFPA standards adopted in GA Safety Fire Commissioner Rules and Regulations. 
(3)  Flammable and combustible liquids storage and day tanks which are utilized for buildings life safety systems emergency back-up shall be installed inside buildings located within the fire limits as established by the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances, Section 8-2074 in accordance with the following regulations: 
(a)  Tanks installed inside of a building shall be a secondary containment type tank, as defined in NFPA 30. 
(b)  All storage or day tanks in a building shall be located in the lowest story, cellar or basement. 
(c)  Installation of flammable or combustible liquid storage or day tanks on a roof of a building is prohibited. 
(d)  The aggregate capacity of all flammable or combustible liquid storage or day tanks in a building shall not exceed 15,000 gallons. 
(e)  A flammable or combustible liquid storage tank - 12,000-gallon maximum capacity - shall be located in a vault constructed in accordance with Section 3404.2.8 or inside a tank room constructed in accordance with the following regulations: 
1.  Tank room shall be constructed of walls, floor and top having a fire-resistive rating of not less than four hours with the walls bonded to the floor. 
2.  Tank room shall contain 100 percent of the total capacity of all tanks, and provided with a liquid-tight noncombustible sill raised not less than six inches above the floor. 
3.  There shall be three feet clearance around the tank and between the top of the tank and ceiling of the tank room for movement of fire-fighting personnel and fire protection equipment. 
4.  Tank room shall be provided with ventilation system per NFPA 30. 
5.  Tank room shall be provided with a leak-detection system providing audible and visual alarm. 
6.  Tank room containing tanks with an aggregate capacity of more than 500 gallons of flammable or combustible liquids shall be protected with an automatic suppression system designed in accordance with one of the following standards: 
(a)  NFPA 11, Standard for Low Expansion Foam; 
(b)  NFPA 12, Standard for Carbon Dioxide Extinguisher System; 
(c)  Automatic Suppression System approved by the Fire Marshal 
7.  The individual capacity of any tank in a tank building shall not exceed 12,000.gallons. 
8.  Warning placard shall be conspicuously posted on the door entering the tank room. The sign shall read 'Flammable Liquids, No Smoking or Open Flame'. 
9.  Spill containment shall be provided for the fuel delivery vehicle. The delivery vehicle's spill containment shall be able to contain 110 percent of the vehicle's largest compartment." 
(36)  Sub-Paragraph 5704.2.9.6.1, Sub-Paragraph 5704.2.9.6 (Aboveground Tanks Outside of Buildings), Sub-Paragraph 5704.2.9 (Aboveground Tanks), Paragraph 5704.2 (Tanks Storage), Section 5704 (Storage), Chapter 57 (Flammable and Combustible Liquids) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"5704.2.9.6.1 Special requirements for aboveground tanks located outside of buildings. The storage of flammable and combustible liquids in aboveground tanks located outside of buildings within the fire limits as established by Section 8-2074 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances shall be in accordance with the following regulations: 
a)  Flammable or combustible liquid storage tanks shall be located at the level of fire department vehicle access. 
b)  A storage or a day tank shall be a secondary containment type tank as defined in NFPA 30. 
c)  A flammable or combustible liquid storage tank, 12,000 gallon maximum capacity, shall be located inside a vault constructed in accordance with Section 3404.2.8 or inside a tank building constructed in accordance with the following regulations: 
1.  Tank building shall be constructed of walls, floor and top having a fire-resistive rating of not less than four hours with the walls bonded to the floor. 
2.  Tank building shall contain 100 percent of the total capacity of all tanks, and provided with a liquid-tight noncombustible sill raised not less than six inches above the floor. 
3.  There shall be three feet clearance around the tank and between the top of the tank and ceiling of the tank room for movement of fire-fighting personnel and fire protection equipment. 
4.  Tank building shall be provided with a ventilation system per NFPA 30. 
5.  Tank building shall be provided with a leak-detection system providing audible and visual alarm. 
6.  Tank building containing tanks with an aggregate capacity of more than 500 gallons of flammable or combustible liquids shall be protected with an automatic suppression system designed in accordance with one of the following standards: 
a)  NFPA 11, Standard for Low Expansion Foam; 
b)  NFPA 12, Standard for Carbon Dioxide Extinguisher System; 
c)  Automatic suppression system approved by the fire marshal. 
7.  The individual capacity of any tank in a tank building shall not exceed 12,000 gallons. 
8.  Warning placard shall be conspicuously posted on the door into the tank room. The sign shall read "Flammable Liquids, No Smoking or Open Flame". 
9.  Spill containment shall be provided for the fuel delivery vehicle. The fuel delivery vehicle's spill containment shall be able to contain 110 percent of the vehicle's largest compartment. 
EXCEPTION: Aboveground storage tanks shall be permitted at new commercial construction sites within the fire limits as established by Section 8-2074 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances shall be in accordance with the following regulations: 
a)  The design, construction and capacities of containers for the storage of Class I, II and Class IIIA liquids shall be in accordance with NFPA 30 and dispensing operations shall be in accordance with NFPA 30A. 
b)  Aboveground storage tanks containing Class I, II and Class IIIA liquids, shall not exceed 660 gallons (2498L) individual capacity. The aggregate capacity of the aboveground storage tanks shall not exceed 1320 gallons (4996 L) at any construction site. 
c)  Aboveground storage tanks at new commercial construction sites shall be double walled type or single walled with a dike. 
d)  Aboveground storage tanks at new commercial construction sites shall not be required to be in a vault. 
e)  A permit shall be required for the temporary storage and use of the aboveground storage tanks at construction sites. 
f)  Plans submission shall be required for the installation of any aboveground storage tank at a construction site, and the aboveground storage tanks shall not be installed until plans have been approved by the Atlanta Fire Rescue department. 
g)  Aboveground storage tanks shall be approved for aboveground storage of flammable and combustible liquids. 
h)  Skid tanks shall be prohibited within the City of Atlanta limits. 
i)  Spill containment shall be provided for the fuel delivery vehicle." 
(37)  Paragraph 5706.4 (Bulk Plants or Terminals), Section 5706 (Special Operations) in Chapter 57 (Flammable and Combustible Liquids) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"Section 5706.4 Bulk plants or terminals. 
(1)  Portions of properties where flammable or combustible liquids are received by tank vessels, pipelines, tank cars, or tank vehicles and which are stored or blended in bulk for the purpose of distributing such liquids by tank vessels, pipelines, tank cars, tank vehicles or containers shall be in accordance with Sections 5706.4.1 through 5706.4.10.4. 
(2)  No new bulk plant shall be constructed within 300 feet of any school, church amusement, instruction, religious worship or other meetings. Separation limits for other occupancy types shall be set by the authority having jurisdiction. No new bulk plant shall be constructed within the fire limits established by section 8-2074 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances." 
(38)  Paragraph 6104.2 (Maximum capacity within established limits), Section 6104 (Location of LP-Gas containers) in Chapter 57 (Liquified Petroleum Gases) of the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Atlanta shall read as follows: 
"6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. Within the fire limits as established by section 8-2074 of Code of Ordinances, the aggregate capacity of any one installation for storage of liquefied petroleum gas shall not exceed 200 gallons water capacity; except that in particular installations this capacity may be altered at the discretion of the fire official, after considerations of special features such as topographical conditions, nature of occupancy and proximity to buildings, capacity of proposed tanks, and degree of private fire protection to be provided." 
(Code 1977, § 11-3091; Ord. No. 1992-42, § 2, 7-9-92; Ord. No. 1994-68, § 1, 12-9-94; Ord. No. 1998-69, § 2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2000-58, § 1, 10-24-00; Ord. No. 2002-15, § 1, 3-12-02; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 2004-76, 10-22-04; Ord. No. 2004-78, 10-22-04; Ord. No. 2008-26(08-O-0488), § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 2010-51(10-O-1450), § 1, 9-16-10; Ord. No. 2013-02(12-O-0397), § 1, 1-16-13; Ord. No. 2016-36(15-O-1170) , § 1, 6-24-15; Ord. No. 2017-01(16-O-1701) , § 1, 1-12-17) 
Charter reference— Adoption of standard codes of technical regulations by reference, § 2-404. 
State Law reference— Adoption of codes by reference, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); minimum required standards, O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-20(9)(B)(VIII), 8-2-25(a). 
Sec. 78-58. - Cooperation with state officials. 
The fire marshal for the city, together with all other city officials, department heads and employees, shall lend their cooperation to the state safety fire commissioner, state fire marshal and deputies or assistants whenever called upon by the fire marshal or such state officials in the enforcement of O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.) and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3022) 
Sec. 78-59. - Fire prevention week; teaching of fire prevention. 
The department shall prepare a tentative program for fire prevention week each year. It shall devise means of acquainting the personnel of institutions, as well as the public at large, with the teachings and practices of fire prevention. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3023) 
Sec. 78-60. - Smoke abatement. 
It shall be unlawful to burn yard rubbish, leaves, dried trash, rubber, zinc, lead or sulfuric acid or any other substance which emits smoke or noxious or poison gases within the city limits. Any person in violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided for in section 1-8. This excludes all large grubbing operations and the abatement of major storm debris where plans have been submitted and approved by the department of public works for the use of air curtain destructors, only in instances where chipping of the debris is not possible with chipping to be considered the city's priority. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3024) 
Sec. 78-61. - Obstructing fireplugs, cisterns. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct with building material or otherwise any cistern or fireplug, such as would obstruct approaches thereto by the department. No person shall place any post nearer than 18 inches to any fire hydrant. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3027) 
Cross reference— Fire hydrants, § 154-91 et seq. 
Sec. 78-62. - Injury to or interference with fire alarm system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, destroy or in any manner interfere with the electric fire alarm system of the city or with the batteries, boxes, stations, wires or other apparatus or appurtenances belonging thereto or used in connection therewith. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3029) 
Sec. 78-63. - Fire protection system for multifamily houses, trailer or mobile home camps, commercial properties. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Auto trailers, mobile homes or relocatable homes means vehicles designed to be used as homes or as living facilities which are movable or relocatable from one premises to another. 
Commercial property means all property situated upon lots or plots of land within the city in which any type of business or warehousing is carried on or transacted. 
Multifamily house, where located on any lot or plot of ground within the limits of the city, means a building designed for or occupied as a residence and having three or more dwelling units under one roof. 
Owner of property means the owner of an apartment house project, trailer camp or commercial property who is declared to be any person who: 
(1)  Holds and declares that such person is the owner of the lot or plot of land; 
(2)  Returns the lot or plot of land for taxation; 
(3)  Has a recorded deed to the lot or plot of land; 
(4)  Is a lessor or lessee of the lot or plot of land; or 
(5)  Acts as agent in behalf of the owner, lessor or lessee of the property. 
Person who controls the property means any person who acts in any regard for any person who has an interest in the property. 
Trailer camp means any area used for the accommodation of two or more auto trailers, mobile homes or relocatable homes used as living facilities of two or more families, couples or any number of individuals. 
(b)  Duty to provide system. Any person who manages or controls any multifamily house, trailer camp or mobile home camp with ten or more dwelling units or commercial properties exceeding 10,000 square feet gross area, shall at such person's expense provide the following: 
(1)  Fire hydrants which shall be so located that all parts of any building on the premises of this owner of private property are within 500 feet of one or more fire hydrants as measured along the center of paved driveways or streets, public or private. 
(2)  Access to all fire hydrants via driveways which shall be not less than 20 feet in width and shall have minimum radii of 32 feet. 
(3)  Reasonable accessibility of the width and radii and maintain them 24 hours a day to allow the firefighting equipment of the city to enter upon the premises to effectively fight such fire or conflagration. 
(c)  Maintenance of accessibility. The owners of the properties described in this section shall take such protective measures as may be necessary to maintain the accessibility in width and turning radii, whether it be by parking devices, by fencing, by watchpersons or otherwise. 
(d)  Installation. Installation of the fire protection system shall be under the supervision of and shall conform to the standards of the department of water, including the following: 
(1)  Type of hydrants, valves and meters; 
(2)  Type of pipe; and 
(3)  Arrangement of system, including size of pipe, dead end, loop or gridiron system of water mains. 
(e)  Performance test. 
(1)  Tests of the department of fire protection system, including hydrants, valves and water supply, shall be conducted by the department of fire and rescue with periodic frequency conforming to the practices of the department of fire and rescue. 
(2)  The fire protection systems shall be maintained in conformance with standards of the fire and rescue department. If, upon tests, defects are discovered, the property owner or person who controls the property shall repair any defects within five days of notice from the fire and rescue department to the owner or person who controls the property. 
(3)  If after five days the defects have not been repaired, the city or a city designee may go onto the property and repair the fire protection systems with no additional notice to the property owner or person who controls the property. 
(4)  In the event the repairs are made by the city or its designee, the city shall bill the property owner or person who controls the property for repairs and shall be authorized to seek a judgment against the property owner and thereafter place a lien on the property if payment is not made within ten days. 
(5)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as giving the fire department or fire and rescue department employees any additional authority to enter into any buildings. 
(f)  Water supply. When the water supply is to be furnished by other than the city water distribution system, this water supply shall be subject to the approval of the department of water. 
(g)  Nonconforming property declared fire hazard. Any of the property described in this section which is not in conformity with this section is declared to be a fire hazard. 
(h)  Posting property constituting fire hazard. The fire chief is authorized to conspicuously post the property described in this section with a sign four feet by four feet reading: 
THIS PROPERTY CONSTITUTES A 
SPECIAL HAZARD IN EVENT OF FIRE. 
ATLANTA FIRE CHIEF 
All signs in place on the adoption date of this Code that complied with section 11-3032 of the 1977 edition of the Code of Ordinances, City of Atlanta, Georgia are ratified and confirmed. 
(i)  Noncompliance. Noncompliance with this section shall be dealt with in the following manner: 
(1)  The fire chief or a deputy shall inspect each property within the city limits to determine compliance or noncompliance. 
(2)  Upon determination being made of noncompliance, the fire chief or a deputy is authorized and directed to charge the owner, the person in control or the person who manages the property with a violation of this section. 
(j)  Determination of property as fire hazard by court. The court may, upon hearing the evidence of any charges so made, determine the property a fire hazard within the terms of this section and order the property closed until the terms of this section are complied with or may subject the persons responsible for the violation to punishment as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3032; Ord. No. 1999-46, 5-26-99; Ord. No. 2004-74, § 2, 10-20-04) 
Sec. 78-64. - Supplemental fire and life safety provisions for new and existing hotels. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Corridor smoke detection and compartmentation system means an approved smoke detection system installed in public (exit access) corridors on typical floors. Such system shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72E, but in no case shall smoke detectors be installed more than 30 feet on centers or more than 15 feet from any wall. The system shall be electrically interconnected to the building manual alarm system and in buildings seven stories or more in height shall have an annunciator panel located in an approved location to visually indicate the floor of actuation. Corridor compartmentation shall mean approved smoke partitions or doors in exit access corridors which divide such exit access corridors into at least two compartments. Doors used for compartmentation shall be of the swinging type having a fire protection rating of at least 20 minutes. 
Existing hotel means a hotel which is already in existence at the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
Hotel means a dwelling or group of buildings under the same management in which there are more than 15 sleeping accommodations for hire, primarily used by transients who are lodged with or without meals, whether designated as a hotel, inn, club, motel or by any other name, including apartment hotels. 
Limited automatic sprinkler system means an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in corridors along the corridor ceiling with one head installed opposite the center of and inside the room/corridor door opening onto exit access corridors. The sprinkler system shall be electrically interconnected to the building alarm system. The sprinkler system main valve shall be provided with a tamper switch which shall be electrically interconnected to a separate alarm system with a distinctive sound. 
Self-closing device means, as applied to an interior room/corridor door, a device that will ensure door closing after having been opened for use. 
Single-station smoke detector means an approved single-station smoke detector installed within each guestroom suite, continuously powered by the house electrical service and installed in an approved manner in accordance with room layout. When actuated, the detector shall initiate an audible alarm (rated at 85 decibels at ten feet) within the room. 
Smokeproof tower means an approved stairway enclosure so designed that the movement into the smokeproof tower of products of combustion, produced by a fire occurring in any part of the building, shall be limited. Open air balconies which provide direct access from rooms to at least two remote exits may be considered as equivalent to smokeproof towers. 
Sprinklered means an approved complete automatic sprinkler system installed throughout the entire building. The system shall be installed in accordance with the 1989 edition of NFPA pamphlet no. 13 pertaining to installation of sprinkler systems, except that sprinkler installation may be omitted in small compartmented areas such as closets not over 24 square feet and bathrooms not over 55 square feet. The sprinkler system shall be electrically interconnected to the building alarm system. The sprinkler system main valve shall be provided with a tamper switch which shall be electrically interconnected to a separate alarm system with a distinctive sound. 
(b)  New hotels. 
(1)  New hotels six stories or less in height shall be equipped with single-station smoke detectors and self-closing devices on room/corridor doors. 
(2)  New hotels seven stories or more in height shall be equipped with single-station smoke detectors, complete automatic sprinkler systems, self-closing devices on room/corridor doors. 
(3)  Such protection shall be in addition to all other requirements of the city's building code. 
(c)  Existing hotels. 
(1)  Existing hotels six stories or less in height which are not provided with a complete automatic sprinkler system shall be equipped with self-closing devices on all room corridor doors and with at least one of the following: 
a.  A limited automatic sprinkler system. 
b.  A corridor smoke detection and compartmentation system. 
c.  Single-station smoke detectors. 
d.  Smokeproof towers. 
(2)  Existing hotels seven stories or more in height which are not provided with a complete automatic sprinkler system shall be equipped with self-closing devices on all room corridor doors and at least two of the following: 
a.  A limited automatic sprinkler system. 
b.  A corridor smoke detection and compartmentation system. 
c.  Single-station smoke detectors. 
d.  Smokeproof towers. 
(3)  Existing hotels seven stories or more in height that are provided with a complete automatic sprinkler system shall be equipped with one of the following: 
a.  A corridor smoke detection and compartmentation system. 
b.  Self-closing devices on all room corridor doors. 
c.  Single-station smoke detectors. 
d.  Smokeproof towers. 
(4)  Such protection shall be in addition to all other requirements of the city's building code. 
(d)  Equivalent methods. The specific requirements of this section may be altered or modified to allow alternative design systems that will provide equivalent safety to life. 
(e)  Hotel emergency organization. 
(1)  Designated employees of hotels shall be instructed and drilled in the duties they are to perform during fire, panic or other emergency. Approved evacuation procedures shall be prepared by the hotel management. 
(2)  Drills shall be conducted on quarterly intervals by the entire complement. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3033(1)—(5)) 
Sec. 78-65. - High-rise residential occupancy for the elderly and handicapped. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, the term "high-rise residential structure" means any structure six stories or more in height, whose primary purpose is residential occupancy for the elderly and handicapped. 
(b)  Access to room. Any person who or any corporation or any group which owns, manages or controls any high-rise residential structure shall at their expense provide access to all rooms by maintaining keys on the premises for all rooms used or occupied by tenants for living quarters. However, occupants who have installed locks that are other than those provided by the management shall be responsible for providing a duplicate key to the management, and the management shall notify the department of fire of refusals by occupants to provide duplicate keys. Each tenant shall upon occupancy be informed by the management of this chapter. 
(c)  Nonambulatory residents. All high-rise residential structures for the elderly and handicapped shall have the room numbers of all nonambulatory residents posted in fire panels located in the building and placards of not less than four inches by eight inches shall be placed on the doors of residents indicating that they are not ambulatory and will need assistance to evacuate the building in an emergency. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3034) 
Sec. 78-66. - Responsibility and authority of fire (arson) investigators. 
(a)  Fire (arson) investigators shall be responsible for investigating all cases of arson and other suspected incendiary fires within the city. 
(b)  Fire (arson) investigators shall also be authorized to execute general law enforcement powers limited to the arrest and imprisonment of arson offenders where in their judgment such arrest and confinement is necessary to secure the offender's appearance in court to answer the offender's offense. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3035) 
Sec. 78-67. - Fire lanes; authority to prevent blocking of private ways and alleys. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fire lane means an area designated by a fire official which provides access for department of fire vehicles to buildings, department of fire connections and fire hydrants. This includes all alleys, including private alleys, private ways or driveways, where parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions can interfere with ingress or egress of department of fire vehicles and equipment. 
Fire official means a fire officer or other designated authority or the fire officer's or authority's duly authorized representative charged with the administration and enforcement of the fire prevention code adopted in this chapter. 
Master plat means an original plat drawn in accordance with this section. 
Plat means a map created by the property owner and approved by the fire official which depicts the location and boundaries of land and all existing fire lanes in accordance with this section. Maps shall be drawn to scale. 
Property owner means each person, possessing any estate or leasehold right in the property being designated as a fire lane. 
(b)  Authority. The fire chief or the chief's duly authorized fire official may properly designate fire lanes and prevent the blocking of any private alley, private way or driveway in the city by the parking of automobiles or otherwise. 
(c)  Posting of signs. The property owner is required to post signs meeting the following criteria in areas designated as fire lanes: 
(1)  Signs shall read: "No Parking—Fire Lane." 
(2)  Signs must meet design specifications furnished by the department of fire. 
(3)  One sign shall be posted at the beginning of the fire lane and one at the end of the fire lane and at intervals not more than 50 feet apart. 
(4)  Signs posted shall not be more than four feet from the edge of the curb and shall be visible from both directions of the driving surface. 
(d)  Painting of curbs. The fire chief or the chief's duly authorized fire official may order curbs adjacent to a fire lane to be painted red or another distinctive color. 
(e)  Parking in fire lane. No person shall park any motor vehicle or place any other property in a fire lane; however, this section shall not apply to the parking of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(f)  Obstructing posted, private alley or driveway. Any person who shall park any vehicle of any character or place any other property in any private alley, private way or driveway which has been posted in accordance with this section and any person owning or occupying property abutting the private alley, private way or driveway who shall cause or permit the placing of anything therein which would impede or block the passage of fire trucks and equipment shall be guilty of an offense. 
(g)  Plats. Property which falls within the corporate limits of the city upon which fire lanes have been designated shall have all fire lane delineations visually depicted on a plat. These plats shall be designed by the property owner and submitted to the department of fire when notified to do so by a fire official. Each plat shall identify all building exterior walls, traffic and parking lanes and sidewalks. The areas to be designated as fire lanes shall be delineated in red ink. The plat shall state a scale of measurement and shall be on paper or series of pages of 8½ inches by 11 inches. The plat shall specify the name of the property, the location of the property, a brief legal description of the property and the length and width of the fire lanes, as approved by the fire official with whom all master plats shall be filed. 
(h)  Enforcement officials. Fire officials, police officers or other duly authorized law enforcement officials shall have the authority for enforcement of fire lanes. Fire officials, police officers or other duly authorized officials may cause to be removed to the nearest authorized place of impound or other place of safety any unattended vehicle or other property left standing in violation of this section. 
(i)  Summons, notice of violation. Enforcement of this section shall be through an action in municipal court by the issuance of a summons, which notice shall be given to property owners by registered mail. If the owner is not in compliance of such notice within 60 days of such notice, the owner will be in violation of this section. The notice shall be either left with the vehicle or other property or delivered to the property owner or person in possession thereof. For the purpose of such action, it shall be presumed that the registered owner of a vehicle is in control or possession thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3007) 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking, § 150-86 et seq. 
ARTICLE IV. - FEES FOR FIRE RESCUE SERVICES 

Sec. 78-68. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Deployment means a response of fire department resources to an incident for the purpose of mitigating the situation. 
Hazardous condition means a situation involving a spill, leakage, or debris which presents a danger to the community or environment. 
Level "0" means incidents which have: (1) no billing for services, (2) no value including no actions and (3) cancellations enroute or on scene. 
Level "1" means incidents having minimal actions such as investigations and minor scene clean up. The amount charged for this type of action is a flat rate and shall not exceed $150.00.00. 
Level "2" means incidents having actions such as basic emergency medical treatment, removal of minor debris and minor spill cleanups. The amount charged for this type of action is a flat rate and shall not exceed $300.00. 
Level "3" means incidents having moderate actions with medium impact on resources, staffing and apparatus. The amount charged for this type of action is a flat rate and shall not exceed $500.00. 
Level "4" means incidents having extensive demand on resources, staffing, and apparatus. The fee charged for this level of action shall be determined from fee schedule (Exhibit B). 
Motor vehicle crash commonly referred to as an accident, which has been classified by the department of transportation as crash involving a vehicle with another or fixed object. 
Non-emergency alarm means an incident that presents no immediate threat to human life. 
Privately owned EMS means an emergency medical service that provides non-emergency transportations for profit and not supported by taxpayers. 
(Ord. No. 2009-30(09-O-0800), § 2, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 78-69. - Fee schedule. 
(a)    

 
(b)    
Federal Emergency Agency (FEMA)  Schedule of Apparatus Rates 

 
(c)    

 
(d)    
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL EQUIPMENT 

 
(Ord. No. 2009-30(09-O-0800), § 3, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 78-70. - Non-resident vehicle accident and roadway fire fees. 
(a)  The City of Atlanta is hereby authorized to impose fees for services provided by the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department to insurance companies for accidents involving motor vehicles where the insured is determined to be at fault, and where; 
(1)  The coverage for such services is expressly provided by an insurance company to the insured and the services are lawfully billed to the insured; or where 
(2)  Emergency medical services are provided to the insured by the county or municipal corporation, whenever the insured's medical insurance covers the service provided and the insured assigns the right to collect to the service provider; or where 
(3)  Other services are provided to the insured by the county or municipality which are expressly authorized by state or federal law to be billed directly to an insurance company. 
(b)  The imposed fees shall be assessed for fire department responses to mitigate a hazardous condition caused by a vehicle crash or roadway fire. The responsible party of the vehicle crash or fire shall produce a valid auto insurance card and the department will bill the insurance company of the responsible party. Level 1—3 are flat rates determined by the services rendered. 

 
(Ord. No. 2009-30(09-O-0800), § 4, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 78-71. - Commercial negligence hazardous materials fee. 
(a)  The City of Atlanta is hereby authorized to impose fees for services provided by the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department to commercial contractors or privately owned companies who have been determined by the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department to have caused a hazardous condition as the result of negligence. 
(b)  The imposed fees shall be assessed for fire department responses to mitigate a hazardous condition shall be determined per incident and shall be billed in accordance with the fee schedule contained in section 78-69. 
(Ord. No. 2009-29(09-O-0799), § 1, 6-23-09) 
Sec. 78-72. - Private emergency management service company assistance fee. 
(a)  The City of Atlanta is hereby authorized to impose a fee for providing privately owned emergency medical service companies assistance loading, unloading, or moving patients on non-emergency calls. 
(b)  The imposed fees shall be assessed for fire department assistance provided to privately owned emergency medical service companies shall be determined per incident and shall be billed in accordance with the fee schedule contained in section 78-69. 
(Ord. No. 2009-31(09-O-0801), § 1, 6-23-09) 
Chapter 86 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Health powers of city, § 1-102(c)(21), (29). 
Cross reference— Clean city commission, § 2-1876 et seq.; mayor's committee on drug control, § 2-1956 et seq.; animals, ch. 18; food establishments, § 30-691 et seq.; cemeteries, ch. 38; environment, ch. 74; social services, ch. 126; solid waste, ch. 130; sewage disposal, § 154-196 et seq. 
Land development code reference— Swimming pools, § 8-2078. 
Related laws reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 5. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; specific constitutional grant of powers relative to public health facilities and services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Toilets on trains. 
(a)  All railroad and sleeping car companies running cars into the city shall keep their toilets securely locked and shall not permit them to be used by anyone while the cars are within the city limits; provided, however, that those toilets may be opened for use while the cars are standing in a station, if they are provided with proper watertight, flyproof receptacles of a design approved by the director, bureau of sanitary services which are properly kept in place. The toilets so used shall be served by the bureau of sanitary services at times and places specified by the director for the removal of excrement. 
(b)  Responsibility for failure to comply with this section shall be upon the persons operating trains and the persons having control of the tracks, together with all the officers, employees and agents of persons operating railroads who have it within their power or authority to comply or to enforce compliance with this section, and any of these persons may be convicted and punished for violation of this section. 
(Code 1977, §§ 14-10012, 14-10013) 
Sec. 86-2. - Adoption of regulations promulgated by Fulton County board of health and DeKalb County board of health. 
The regulations promulgated by the Fulton County board of health are adopted by the city to apply in those portions of the city lying within Fulton County and to apply outside the city on any property owned by the city for airport purposes. The regulations promulgated by the DeKalb County board of health are adopted by the city to be applied in that section of the city lying within DeKalb County. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9-6002, 14-7001) 
Sec. 86-3. - Disposition of bodies of unidentified persons. 
(a)  Removal to hospital. Any unidentified person who shall die in the city, whose relatives are unknown by the person assuming to take charge of the body, shall be immediately removed to Grady Hospital, where the dead body shall be placed in a room subject to the orders of the medical examiner of Fulton County or DeKalb County, whichever has jurisdiction of the body. 
(b)  Examination of remains. The authorities of Grady Hospital shall, on receipt of the remains, examine them for identification, place all effects in a proper receptacle and hold the body for a period of eight hours, awaiting identification by relatives. 
(c)  Notice to police. Immediately upon the receipt of the dead body, the superintendent of Grady Hospital shall notify the department of police if it appears that the department has not been previously advised. The department shall immediately make fingerprints of the deceased person and use the prints in an effort to effect the person's identification. The department of police shall record carefully every mark of identification which may be found on the dead body and make a permanent record thereof. The personal description so far as ascertainable shall be entered, which shall include the weight, height, the color of hair, the sex, the race and any other feature which might aid in identification. 
(d)  Delivery to funeral director. Except as otherwise ordered by the medical examiner, if the body should not be identified and claimed by relatives within eight hours, the remains shall be under the direction of the medical examiner, and at the direction of the medical examiner the remains shall be sent to a reputable funeral directing establishment in the city by the hospital authorities for the purpose of embalming and preservation of the remains. 
(e)  Autopsies. No autopsies or postmortems are to be held on the remains of the person, except upon the order of the medical examiner or upon the written order of the nearest of kin, and then only when the order shall have the approval of the medical examiner. 
(f)  Surrender of remains. The remains shall not be surrendered by the hospital to any funeral director, except as provided in this section, for the purpose of embalming, except upon the written order of the medical examiner or upon written order of the next of kin delivered to the hospital with the written approval of the medical examiner. 
(Code 1977, § 14-7002) 
State Law reference— Georgia Death Investigation Act, O.C.G.A. § 45-16-20 et seq. 
Sec. 86-4. - Noise zone around hospitals, surgi-centers. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the term "surgi-center" means a medical facility that provides surgical services to patients who do not require overnight hospital care. The term "hospice" means a facility that provides housing, medical and emotional assistance to the terminally ill. 
(b)  Established. The streets in front of or surrounding hospitals, sanitariums, surgi-centers and hospices shall have what is known as a noise zone within a distance of 300 feet of the grounds thereof, in all directions. Where signs are erected along the street within a distance of 300 feet of the grounds of the hospital, sanitarium, surgi-center or hospice in all directions, this shall constitute the noise zone, whether these signs are erected by the city or by the authorities in charge of the hospitals, sanitariums, surgi-centers or hospices. 
(c)  Quiet to be maintained. It shall be unlawful for any person within a noise zone around a hospital, sanitarium, surgi-center or hospice to cry out the sale of wares therein, to use whistles, radios or other noise-making devices, to drive any vehicle at such rate of speed as shall create a disturbing noise, to drive any motor vehicle with the muffler cutout open or to make or cause to be made any loud noise in any manner whatsoever. 
(Code 1977, § 14-7005; Ord. No. 1997-37, § 1, 6-18-97) 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 106. 
Sec. 86-5. - Condemnation, disposal of decayed fruit, meat, other food. 
(a)  Duty of sanitation inspectors. It shall be the duty of the sanitation inspectors to condemn and require to be sent out of the city as garbage, by the owner or person in possession thereof, under direction of the director, bureau of sanitary services, all decayed or stale melons, fruits and vegetables and all unsound, tainted, offensive or unwholesome meats, fish, poultry, game or other articles of food kept or stored in any box or refrigerator, held or offered for sale at any of the fruit stands, stores or markets in the city or offered for sale from any car on any of the railroad tracks in the city. 
(b)  Violations. Any merchant, trader, dealer or other person who shall refuse to allow the sanitation inspectors opportunity to inspect such person's stock of melons, fruits, vegetables and meats, fish, poultry, game or foodstuffs of any kind or who shall, when any of this stock is condemned, refuse to remove it from the city as garbage shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 14-7006) 
State Law reference— Food generally, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 86-6. - Duty of owner to clean property; violations; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant of any lot or tract of land to allow the accumulation of garbage, rubbish, trash, debris or discarded articles or materials or to allow the excessive growth of grass, weeds or vines on any such lot or tract of land. 
(b)  Should any owner or tenant fail to completely clean and clear the premises within 14 days from the date of receipt of a notice of violation, such owner or tenant shall be charged with a violation of this section, and if convicted shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00. 
(c)  The notice required in subsection (b) above, shall be delivered personally or by certified mail. 
(d)  No notice shall be required for repeated violations of this code section at the same location in which case the owner or tenant may be charged with a violation of this section and a citation may be immediately issued. 
(e)  If the owner or tenant of a lot or tract of land has been found charged and convicted in violation of this code section within the immediately preceding twelve month period at the same location, such owner or tenant shall be punished by a fine of $1,000.00. 
(Code 1977, § 14-7091; Ord. No. 1998-79, § 1, 11-9-98) 
Charter reference— Authority relative to nuisances, § 1-102(c)(30). 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 130; vegetation, ch. 158. 
Land development code references— Commercial, institutional and building maintenance code, § 8-2079 et seq.; housing code, § 8-2221 et seq. 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; municipal nuisance abatement, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Secs. 86-7—86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INDOOR AIR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Smoking at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International, § 22-68; businesses, ch. 30; environment, ch. 74; smoking on MARTA buses, trains and rail cars, § 106-8; smoking in certain areas within city buildings and facilities, § 106-9. 

Sec. 86-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bar means: 
(1)  An enclosed area which is primarily devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages, wine, malt beverages and/or distilled spirits, for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages; and 
(2)  Any adult entertainment premises as defined in this Code. 
Although a food service establishment may contain a bar, the term "bar" shall not include the food service establishment dining area. The terms "wine," "malt beverages" and "distilled spirits" are defined in section 10-1. 
Designated smoking area: 
(1)  In a food service establishment means an area of contiguous seating where smoking is permitted and which: 
a.  Is situated so existing barriers and ventilation systems are used to minimize the toxic effects of smoke; 
b.  Is marked by appropriate signs; and 
c.  Does not include service lines or cashier areas. 
(2)  In all other areas means any enclosed indoor area in which smoking is permitted. Such smoking area shall be clearly designated and separate from any area in which smoking is not permitted. In a place of employment, the designated smoking area shall be separated from a smoke-free work area by floor-to-ceiling walls or ventilation technology effective in reducing the effects of smoke on the smoke-free area other than portable air cleaning devices; provided, however, that no restrooms or employee lounges shall be "designated smoking areas." 
Dining area means any enclosed area containing a counter or tables upon which food is served. 
Employer means any person who employs one or more persons, including the legislative, executive and judicial branches of city government. 
Food service establishment means any establishment for the preparation and serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts or other edible products. The term includes restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short-order cafes, luncheonettes, taverns, lunchrooms, places which manufacture retail sandwiches, soda fountains, institutional cafeterias, both public and private, food carts, industrial cafeterias, both public and private, food carts, industrial cafeterias, catering establishments, food vending vehicles and operations connected therewith, and similar facilities by whatever name called. The term "food service establishment" shall not mean an establishment which does not provide seating or facilities for consumption of food on premises or a "food sales establishment" shall not include any dining area located within a health care, educational or child care facility. Food courts within enclosed shopping malls shall be treated as food service establishments under this article. When determining food service establishment seating capacity, outdoor seating will not be included in the total number. 
Health department means the Fulton County health department. 
Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees frequent during the course of employment including, but not limited to, work areas, restrooms, employee lounges, conference and meeting rooms, lobbies and reception areas. 
(1)  A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a child care facility or a health care facility. 
(2)  The dining area of a food service establishment shall not be treated as a "place of employment" under this article. 
Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, restaurants, stores, offices, waiting rooms, lobbies, public transit, restrooms, enclosed shopping malls, educational, recreational and health care facilities, child care facilities, auditoriums, theaters, sports arenas, service lines, airports, and meeting rooms. A private residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a child care facility or a health care facility. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store in which the sale of tobacco products designed for smoking comprises more than 50 percent of its receipts. 
Service line means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other smoking equipment in any manner or form. 
Sports arena means enclosed sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports events. 
Tobacco business means a sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership, or other enterprise in which the primary activity is the sale, manufacture or promotion of tobacco, tobacco products or accessories, and in which the sale, manufacture or promotion of other products is merely incidental. 
Work area means an area in a place of employment where one or more employees are routinely assigned and perform services for their employer. 
(Code 1977, § 9-8001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-32. - Regulation of smoking. 
(a)  Smoking in public places. Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking is prohibited in all public places within all of Fulton County. 
(b)  Smoking in places of employment. Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking in all places of employment is prohibited in the following manner: 
(1)  Smoking shall be prohibited in auditoriums, gymnasiums, rest rooms, elevators, classrooms, hallways, employee medical facilities and rooms or areas which contain photocopying equipment or other office equipment used in common, and in company vehicles occupied by more than one person unless the occupants of such vehicle agree that smoking may be permitted. 
(2)  Smoking shall be prohibited in conference rooms and meeting rooms, unless everyone in that room agrees that smoking may be permitted. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the prohibitions in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, employers in places of employment shall: 
a.  Provide nonsmoking employees with a smoke-free work area. 
b.  Provide for contiguous nonsmoking areas in employee cafeterias and lunch rooms. The contiguous nonsmoking areas in employee cafeterias and lunchrooms shall be sufficient to meet employee demand. An employer may not determine that no such demand exists. 
c.  Not be required to make any expenditures or structural changes to create a smoke-free work area. If an employer cannot, after using its best efforts, comply with an employees' request for a smoke-free work area, the employer shall designate that employee's work area as a smoke-free work area. 
(Code 1977, § 9-8002) 
Sec. 86-33. - Exceptions. 
The regulations of smoking pursuant to this article shall not apply in the following areas: 
(1)  Private homes, private residences, and private automobiles. 
(2)  Bars. 
(3)  Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests, except for those rooms designated by such hotels and motels as no-smoking rooms. 
(4)  Retail tobacco stores and tobacco businesses. 
(5)  A designated smoking area in a food service establishment, provided that such designated smoking area shall not comprise more than 50 percent of a food service establishment's seating capacity. 
(6)  A designated smoking area in place of employment, except that no designated smoking area shall be permitted in any health care or child facility. 
(7)  Work areas in any place of employment so long as: 
a.  The work area is exclusively occupied by smokers; 
b.  Everyone in the work area reaches an agreement that smoking may be permitted; 
c.  The work area is subject to regular entrance by the public or nonsmokers; and 
d.  The work area is separate from a smoke-free work area by floor-to-ceiling walls or some other means, equally effective in reducing the effects of smoke on the smoke-free work area, other than portable air cleaning devices. 
(8)  A designated smoking area in a public place. 
(9)  Banquet or meeting rooms when these rooms are being used for private functions. 
(10)  Persons residing within long-term care facilities, as that terms is defined by state law, so long as the resident does not interfere with the rights of others or unless prior to admission the resident, guardian, or representative is informed of written admission policies which limit or ban smoking. 
(11)  Jails, prisons, municipal, county and state places of incarceration wherein persons who are charged with the commission of criminal offenses or have been convicted of criminal offenses are housed. 
(12)  Wholly or partially enclosed private boxes in indoor sports arenas and in such designated smoking areas of the sports arena. 
(13)  Limousines under private hire by an individual or corporation. 
(Code 1977, § 9-8003) 
Sec. 86-34. - Declaration of smoke-free environment. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed, interpreted or construed to restrict or prohibit any person in charge of any public place or place of employment form designating that place a smoke-free facility and prohibiting smoking in areas which otherwise would be permitted by this article. 
(Code 1977, § 9-8004) 
Sec. 86-35. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  Because ordinances regulating smoking are primarily self-enforcing, adequate signage is important. 
(b)  "Smoking," "No Smoking," or the international symbol for no smoking, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle, with a red bar across it, whichever are appropriate, shall be conspicuously posted in every public place and place of employment where smoking is regulated by this chapter by the person in charge of such facility. Such signs shall be configured with a minimum size requirement of four inches by four inches and containing letters not less than one inch in height. 
(c)  Every food service establishment shall have posted at each entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that a nonsmoking section is available, and that smoking is allowed only in the designated smoking area. 
(Code 1977, § 9-8005) 
Sec. 86-36. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Although smoking ordinances are primarily self-regulating, enforcement of this article shall be the ultimate responsibility of the department of police. 
(b)  The city solicitor may initiate any action seeking enforcement of this article on the solicitor's own motion or upon information provided by any citizen. Any officer of the city police department also may initiate an action for violation of this article if a violation occurs in such officer's presence. Any other police officer whose jurisdiction is located within the city may initiate an action for violation of this article if a violation occurs in such officer's presence provided that the violation occurs within that officer's jurisdiction. 
(c)  Any owner, operator or manager of any establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of this article's provisions. 
(d)  In any dispute arising under this article, the need to breathe smoke-free air shall be given precedence over the need to smoke. 
(Code 1977, § 9-8006) 
Sec. 86-37. - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted or prohibited by other applicable laws, regulations or policies. 
(Code 1977, § 9-8007) 
Sec. 86-38. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who smokes or any person who allows smoking violation of this article, or any person who violates any provision of this article, shall be guilty of an offense punishable pursuant to section 1-8. Each and every violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 9-8009) 
Chapter 94 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to foster human relations, § 1-102(c)(12). 
Cross reference— Equal employment opportunity clause in municipal contracts, § 2-1200; assistance to small and disadvantaged businesses, equal employment opportunity and purchasing and contracting, §§ 2-1356 et seq., 2-1411 et seq.; equal business opportunity, § 2-1441 et seq.; community relations commission, § 2-2046 et seq.; equal employment opportunity for city personnel, § 114-51 et seq. 
Land development code reference— Barrier free dwelling for physically disabled persons, § 8-2182. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 94-1—94-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Boards and commissions, § 3-401. 
Cross reference— Boards, councils, commissions and authorities, § 2-1851 et seq. 

Sec. 94-10. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aggrieved person or person aggrieved means any person alleging an act of discrimination or an unlawful practice under articles I, II, III, IV, V or VI of this chapter, or any person who believes that he or she will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory practice or act or unlawful practice that is about to occur. 
Chair refers to that person elected by the majority of the members of the human relations commission to supervise the administration of the human relations commission. In the event of a vacancy or in the absence of the chair so elected, the vice chair shall serve as chair. 
Commission refers to the human relations commission of the city established in article II of the human relations code. 
Disability, which includes physical and mental impairments, shall be interpreted co-extensively with the meaning given to that term under the Americans With Disabilities Act, codified at 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq., except that if a person would be considered to have a disability but for the use of a mitigating measure, that person shall nevertheless be considered to have a disability within the meaning of this chapter. 
Discrimination or discriminatory practice or act means any action or failure to act, whether by a single act or part of a practice, the effect of which is to adversely affect or differentiate between or among individuals, because of an individual's, or the perception of an individual's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. 
Domestic relationship status means the presence or absence of a domestic partnership or marital relationship and includes the status of married, separated, divorced, engaged, widowed, single, cohabitating, or domestic partnership, without regard for whether such relationship is between persons of the same or opposite sex. Domestic partnership shall have the meaning designated in section 94-131 of this chapter. 
Familial status means the state of being a person who is domiciled with one or more minor children, with the permission of the parent or person with legal custody of such minor child or children. 
Family includes a single individual. 
Gender identity a person's gender identity can be shown by providing evidence, including, but not limited to, medical history, care or treatment of the gender identity, consistent and uniform assertion of the gender identity, or other evidence that the gender identity is sincerely held, as part of a person's core identity, and not being asserted for an improper purpose regardless of the individual's assigned sex at birth. 
National origin includes ancestry. 
Owner includes any person who owns, leases, subleases, rents, operates, manages, has charge of, controls or has the right of ownership, possession, management, charge or control of real property on their own behalf or on behalf of another. 
Parental status means being a parent, step-parent, adoptive parent, guardian, foster parent or custodian of a minor child or children. 
Person means one or more individuals, partnerships, associations, political subdivisions, labor unions, organizations, cooperatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, unincorporated organizations, trusts, trustees, or receivers, legal representatives, for-profit and not-for-profit associations and corporations, and business associations of whatever kind including without limitation general partnerships, limited liability partnerships, corporations, limited liability companies, business trusts, and joint ventures. 
Senior citizen means, for purpose of this chapter, individuals as old or older than an age set for a senior category. The minimum age for the senior category may be set at 55 years or higher. 
Sex shall be interpreted to include pregnancy, childbirth or related medical conditions. 
Sexual orientation means heterosexuality, bi-sexuality or homosexuality. 
(Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2004-72, § 1, 10-8-04; Ord. No. 2016-47(16-O-1617) , §§ 1, 2, 12-14-16) 
Sec. 94-11. - Policy. 
In the city, with its great cosmopolitan population consisting of large numbers of people of every race, color, creed, religion, sex, marital status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, and age, many of them with physical and mental disabilities, there is no greater danger to the health, morals, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants than the existence of groups prejudiced against one another and antagonistic to each other because of differences of race, color, creed, religion, sex, marital status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, and disability. The council finds and declares that prejudice, intolerance, bigotry and discrimination and disorder occasioned thereby threaten the rights and proper privileges of its inhabitants and menace the very institutions, foundations and bedrock of a free democratic society. 
(Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-12. - Retaliatory conduct prohibited. 
It is an unlawful practice under this chapter for any person, owner, employer, labor organization, employment agency, or joint labor-management committee to: 
(1)  Aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce the doing of any act defined in articles III, IV and V of this chapter as an unlawful practice; or to intimidate, harass, retaliate, obstruct or discriminate against a person in any manner because such person has (i) complied with or proposes to comply with provisions of articles I through VI of this chapter or (ii) has filed a complaint with the human relations commission pursuant to this article or (iii) has taken other legal action provided for by this article or (iv) has testified or assisted in any proceeding under this article, or any order issued thereunder or (v) has opposed any practice made an unlawful practice under this chapter; or to attempt, either directly or indirectly, to commit any act defined in this chapter to be an unlawful practice; or to apply any economic sanctions or to deny accommodations or membership privileges because of a persons' compliance with the provisions of this chapter; or 
(2)  Coerce, intimidate, threaten, or otherwise interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-13. - Severability clause. 
In the event that any provision, section, subsection, clause, or right set forth in articles I through VI of this chapter is found to be unenforceable by a court of law, such provision shall be severed from the remainder of this chapter and such action shall not affect the enforceability of the remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Secs. 94-14—-94-35. - Reserved. 
Sec. 94-36. - Created. 
There shall be a human relations commission which shall be the official protector of the human relations principle. 
(Code 1977, § 5-9004; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-37. - Composition; appointment; terms. 
The human relations commission shall consist of seven members, divided into three classes—Class A, Class B, and Class C. Class A shall contain three members, and Class B and Class C shall each contain two members. After the phase-in period, members shall hold office for a three-year term staggered so that the membership terms of only one class of members shall expire each year. The initial members shall he appointed and designated to a class by the president of the council no later than January 1, 2001. The term of office of the initial Class A members shall expire on January 1, 2002, the term of office of the initial Class B members shall expire on January 1, 2003; and the term of office of the initial Class C members shall expire on January 1, 2004. After January 1, 2002, at the expiration of the terms of the initial Class A members, one Class A member shall be appointed by the president of council, one shall be appointed by the Mayor and one shall be appointed by the at-large councilmember in Post 1 in coordination with the councilmembers for Districts 1 through 4. At the expiration of the terms of the initial two Class B members, one Class B member shall be appointed by the mayor and one shall be appointed by the at-large councilmember in Post 2 in coordination with the councilmembers for Districts 5 through 8. At the expiration of the terms of the initial two Class C members, one Class C member shall be appointed by the president of council and one shall be appointed by the at-large councilmember in Post 3 in coordination with the councilmembers for Districts 9 through 12. At least one of the commission members appointed by the president of the council shall possess, in addition to the general qualifications set out in the Charter regarding members of the commission, a license to practice law in the State of Georgia and shall be an active member of and in good standing with the State Bar of Georgia. No person shall be appointed for more than two consecutive three-year terms. The membership of the commission shall reflect as nearly as practicable, the diversity of individuals protected under this ordinance and shall be comprised without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, or gender identity. 
(Code 1977, § 5-9004; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 1, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 2004-72, § 2, 10-8-04; Ord. No. 2005-59, § 1, 9-27-05) 
Sec. 94-38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-72, § 2, approved Oct. 8, 2004, repealed § 94-38 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to qualifications of chair as enacted by Code 1977, § 5-9005; as amended. 
Sec. 94-39. - Compensation. 
All members of the human relations commission shall be non-salaried. The human relations commission is authorized to seek and procure pro bono assistance for its investigations from appropriate community and business organizations. 
(Code 1977, § 5-9004; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 2, 9-24-02) 
Sec. 94-40. - Meetings; conduct of business. 
(a)  The human relations commission shall hold meetings once every six months and as necessary to accomplish the timely resolution of pending complaints. 
(b)  The commission shall conduct business in the manner generally provided by the Charter, and shall have the power to enact its own regulations to the extent such regulations are not inconsistent with this term of the Charter and this chapter. 
(c)  The city's law department shall provide legal assistance at the request of the human relations commission. 
(d)  The presence in person, telephonically, or by proxy of a majority of active commission members shall constitute a quorum at commission meetings. 
(e)  The director of the mayor's office of constituent services shall assign a constituent services specialist to serve as an administrative assistant to the human relations commission in the conduct of its business. 
(Code 1977, § 5-9004; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 3, 9-24-02) 
Sec. 94-41. - Functions. 
The human relations commission shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Receiving, investigating and making recommendations to the Mayor and to appropriate city agencies for the resolution of complaints alleging violations of article(s) III (public accommodation), IV (fair housing), and V (private employment) of this chapter and within 30 days to secure a response. The procedures for handling such complaints are set forth in article VI, section 94-121 of this chapter. 
(2)  Upon its own motion, testing, investigating, making and filing complaints alleging violations of the human relations code. 
(3)  Making studies, conducting research and preparing recommendations as to needed ordinances and resolutions. 
(4)  Developing human relations plans and policies for the city and assisting in their execution and making investigations and studies appropriate to effectuate this article and to issue such publications and such results of investigations and research as in its judgment will tend to inform persons of the rights assured and remedies provided under this article, to promote goodwill and minimize or eliminate discrimination because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. 
(5)  Inquiring into incidents of the conditions which may lead to tension and conflict among racial, religious and nationality groups and to take such action within the authority granted by law to this office, as may be designed to alleviate such conditions, tension and conflict. 
(6)  Calling conferences of persons in the industries of housing, public accommodations, and employment to acquaint them with the requirements of articles I through VI of this chapter, and to endeavor with their advice to develop programs of voluntary compliance and enforcement. 
(7)  Furnishing any person with such technical assistance as the commission deems appropriate, and requiring the production for examination of any documents or items relating to any matter under investigation or in question before the commission. 
(8)  Receiving, investigating and making recommendations to the Mayor and to the appropriate city agencies for the resolution of complaints alleging instances of racial profiling and within 30 days to secure a response. 
(Code 1977, § 5-9004; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 4, 9-24-02) 
Secs. 94-42—94-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NON-DISCRIMINATION IN PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, approved Dec. 12, 2000, amended the title of art. III to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Discrimination in admission fees or membership fees by premises at which alcoholic beverages are served, § 10-224; discrimination by lessee of Atlanta Cyclorama prohibited, § 46-1; discrimination by lessees of Civic Center, § 46-37. 

Sec. 94-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Distinctly private does not include any club, institution or membership organization that has more than 50 members, provides regular meal service and regularly receives payment for dues, fees, use of space, facilities, services, meals or beverages directly or indirectly from or on behalf of nonmembers for the furtherance of trade or business. 
Furtherance of trade or business means: 
(1)  Payment by or on behalf of a trade or business organization. 
(2)  Payment made by an individual from an account which the individual uses primarily for trade or business purposes. 
(3)  Payment made by an individual who is reimbursed for the payment by the individual's employer or by a trade or business organization or other payment made in connection with an individual's trade or business, including entertaining clients or business associates, holding meetings or other business-related events. 
(4)  Payment made by an individual which is deducted from the individual's federal or state tax returns as a business expense. 
Public accommodation shall mean and include any place, legal entity, store or other establishment, either licensed or unlicensed, which supplies goods or services to the general public and shall include, but not be limited to, the following types of services or facilities: hotels, or other establishments which provide lodging to transient guests, restaurants, cafeterias, lunchrooms, lunch counters, soda fountains or other facilities principally engaged in selling or offering for sale food for consumption upon the premises, financial and brokerage institutions, insurance carriers, motion picture houses, theaters, concert halls, sport arenas, stadiums or other places of exhibition or entertainment, swimming pools, bowling alleys and amusement parks, all retail establishments, all transportation carriers and mobile home parks, barber shops, beauty shops, other personal care facilities, and bars or taverns or other facilities engaged in selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages for consumption upon the premises, and shall include public burial facilities when such facilities are owned and operated by any cemetery corporation or burial association. The term shall also mean any club, institution or membership organization that has more than 50 members either locally or nationally, and provides regular meal service, or regularly receives payment for dues, fees, use of space, facilities or services, without regard for whether such club, institution or membership organization has a permanent physical location. 
Regularly receives payment means accepting as many payments during the course of a year as the number of weeks, any part of which a club, institution or membership organization is available for use by members or nonmembers per year, such payment being for dues, fees, use of space, facilities, services, beverages or meals. 
(Code 1977, § 5-9002; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-67. - Policy. 
(a)  This article vesting authority in the human relations commission to investigate and make recommendations to the mayor and to the appropriate city agency is an exercise of the police power of the city for the protection of the public welfare, health, peace and safety of the residents of the city. The council hereby finds and declares that the practice of discrimination against any person on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal in places of public accommodation constitutes matters of local concern and are contrary to the public welfare, health, peace and safety of the residents of the city. The human relations commission established in article II of this chapter is vested with authority to investigate and make recommendations to the mayor and appropriate city agency and to secure a response within 30 days pursuant to the provisions of this article in furtherance of this policy and in accordance with the procedures set forth in article VI of this chapter. 
(b)  No institution, club, organization or place of accommodation which sponsors or conducts any amateur athletic contest or sparring exhibit and advertises or bills such contest or exhibition as a Georgia state championship contest or uses the words "Georgia state" in its announcements shall be deemed a private exhibition within the meaning of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 5-9001; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 5, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 2016-47(16-O-1617) , § 2, 12-14-16) 
Sec. 94-68. - Unlawful discrimination. 
(a)  Except as is exempted in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person, whether acting for himself/herself or another, being the owner, lessee, proprietor, manager, superintendent, agent or employee of a public accommodation, to engage in or cause another to engage in any of the following prohibited acts, or to allow a subordinate employee of the public accommodation to engage in any of the following prohibited acts, in any public accommodation in the legal limits of the City of Atlanta: 
(1)  Denial, refusal, rejection, or granting or any privilege, service, goods, merchandise, advantage, facility, membership, commodity or accommodation because of an individual's, or the perception of an individual's, race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. 
(2)  Segregation of an individual, or requiring the placement of an individual in any separate group or subgroup of a club, institution or organization, or any separate section or area or time of usage of the premises or facilities of the public accommodation because of the individual's, or the perception of an individual's, race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. 
(3)  Publication, circulation, issuance, display, posting, placing, mailing, and/or maintenance of any written or printed communication, notice or advertisement or sign to the effect that any of the privileges, services, goods, merchandise, advantages, facilities, membership, commodities or accommodations of any public accommodation shall or may be refused, withheld from or denied any individual because of that individual's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. 
(4)  Publication, circulation, issuance, display, posting, placing, mailing, and/or maintenance of any written or printed communication, notice or advertisement or sign to the effect that the patronage or membership by any individual belonging to or purporting to be of any particular race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability status is unwelcome, objectionable or not acceptable, desired or solicited. 
(5)  Engaging in a prohibited act as defined in subsections (a)(1)—(4) against an individual or entity on the basis of the race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability of an individual with whom the discriminated-against individual or entity has a known relationship. 
(b)  Exemptions: Nothing in this section shall: 
(1)  Require any club, institution or membership organization to take action in violation of the associational rights granted by the Constitutions of the United States and the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Be construed to prevent children's clubs, institutions or membership organizations from restricting non-commercial accommodations, advantages, facilities, membership, and privileges to persons of the same sex, if such sex restriction is fundamental to the nature or purpose of the club, institution, or membership organization. 
(3)  Be construed to prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting its non-commercial accommodations, advantages, facilities, membership, and privileges to persons of the same religion. 
(4)  Be construed to prohibit treating disabled persons more favorably than non-disabled persons or to prohibit treating senior citizens more favorably than non-senior citizens. 
(5)  Be construed to prohibit offering discounts, special prices, or other special arrangements to children or families. 
(6)  Be construed to prohibit imposing age limits up to 21. 
(Code 1977, § 5-9003; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2016-47(16-O-1617) , § 2, 12-14-16) 
Sec. 94-69. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, approved Dec. 12, 2000, repealed § 94-69 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to complaint procedure as related to discrimination. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 94-70—94-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FAIR HOUSING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Bureau of housing and redevelopment, app. IV, § 25. 
State Law reference— Fair housing, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-200 et seq. 

Sec. 94-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 94-94 through 94-97. 
Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the conservation or location therein of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
To rent means to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1977, § 8-7001; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-92. - Policy. 
The council declares that it is the policy of the city, in the exercise of its police powers for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare, and for the maintenance of peace and good government, to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the city, free from restrictions and prejudice based upon race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, and disability. The human relations commission established in article II of this chapter is vested with authority to investigate allegations of discrimination in housing and to make recommendations to the mayor and city's housing agencies and to secure a response within 30 days pursuant to the provisions of this article in furtherance of this policy and in accordance with the procedures set forth in article VI of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 8-7001; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 6, 9-24-02) 
Sec. 94-93. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, approved Dec. 12, 2000, repealed § 94-93 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to the administration of fair housing regulations. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 94-94. - Unlawful practices in selling or renting dwellings. 
(a)  Except as exempted by subsection (b) or (d) of this section or section 94-97, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of the person's, or a perception of the person's, race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provisions of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of the person's, or a perception of the person's, race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. 
(3)  To make, print, or publish or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling, that indicates any preference, limitation, or differential treatment, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or differential treatment based on a person's, or the perception of a person's, race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. 
(4)  To represent to any person because of the person's, or a perception of the person's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; 
(5)  For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. 
(6)  To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability of: 
a.  That buyer or renter; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with that buyer or renter; or 
(7)  a. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a disability of: 
1.  That person; 
2.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
3.  Any person associated with that person. 
b.  For purposes of this subsection, discrimination includes: 
1.  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the disabled person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; 
2.  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
3.  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner that: 
i.  The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by disabled persons; 
ii.  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by disabled persons in wheelchairs; and 
iii.  All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: 
A.  An accessible route into and through the dwelling; 
B.  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations; 
C.  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and 
D.  Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 
c.  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usableness for physically disabled people, commonly cited as ANSI A117.1, suffices to satisfy the requirements of subsection (a)(7)b.3.iii. of this section. 
d.  In regard to disabled persons, discrimination includes, in connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct dwellings in such a manner that the dwellings have at least one building entrance on an accessible route, unless it is impracticable to do so because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. 
(b)  (1) Nothing in this section, other than section (a)(3) of this section, shall apply to: 
a.  Any single-family dwelling sold or rented by an owner, if: 
1.  Such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family dwellings at any one time; and 
2.  Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on such owner's behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family dwellings at any one time; and 
3.  Such dwelling is sold or rented: 
i.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesperson or person; and 
ii.  Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection (c) of this section; but nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or 
b.  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as the owner's residence. 
(2)  For the sale of any such single-family dwelling by a private individual owner not residing in such dwelling at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such dwelling prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if the person: 
(1)  Has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; 
(2)  Has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of such person's own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  Is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by five or more families. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall require that a dwelling be made available for rental or lease to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(Code 1977, § 8-7003; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2016-47(16-O-1617) , § 2, 12-14-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-202. 
Sec. 94-95. - Unlawful denial of or discrimination in membership or participation in service or organization relating to selling or renting dwellings. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation on account of the person's, or a perception of the person's, race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. 
(Code 1977, § 8-7005; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2016-47(16-O-1617) , § 2, 12-14-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-203. 
Sec. 94-96. - Discrimination in residential real estate related transactions; appraisals. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term residential real estate related transaction means any of the following: 
(1)  The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance: 
a.  For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or 
b.  Secured by residential real estate; or 
(2)  The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in residential real estate related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction because of a person's, or the perception of a person's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. 
(Code 1977, § 8-7004; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2016-47(16-O-1617) , § 2, 12-14-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-204. 
Sec. 94-97. - Permissible limitations in sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings by religious organizations or private clubs; housing for older persons. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, creed, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or the use of a service animal. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(b)  (1) As used in this subsection, the term housing for older persons means housing: 
a.  Provided under any state or federal program that the commissioner determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons as defined in the state or federal program; 
b.  Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older; or 
c.  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit. In determining whether housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this subsection, the commissioner shall develop regulations which require at least the following: 
1.  The existence of significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons, or, if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable, that such housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons; 
2.  That at least 80 percent of the units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit; and 
3.  The publication of and adherence to policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older. 
(2)  Nothing in this article limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. The provisions in this article regarding familial status shall not apply with respect to housing for older persons. 
(3)  Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older persons because of: 
a.  Persons residing in such housing as of March 12, 1989, who do not meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(1)a. or (b)(1)b. of this section; provided, however, that new occupants of such housing meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(1)a. or (b)(1)b. of this section; or 
b.  Unoccupied units; provided, however, that such units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(1)a. or (b)(1)b. of this section. 
(4)  Nothing in this article prohibits conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance. 
(c)  Nothing in this article prohibits age limits up to 21 years of age. 
(Code 1977, § 8-7006; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2016-47(16-O-1617) , § 2, 12-14-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-205. 
Sec. 94-98. - Educational, conciliatory activities. 
The human relations commission shall commence such educational and conciliatory activities as in the commission's judgment will further the purposes of this article. The human relations commission shall call conferences of persons in the housing industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with this article and the human relations commission's suggested means of implementing this article, and shall endeavor with their advice to work out programs of voluntary compliance and of enforcement. The human relations commission shall consult with state and local officials and other interested parties to learn the extent, if any, to which housing discrimination exists in this city and whether and how enforcement programs might be utilized to combat such discrimination. In connection therewith, the human relations commission shall issue reports on such conferences and consultations as the human relations commission deems appropriate. 
(Code 1977, § 8-7008; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 7, 9-24-02) 
Secs. 94-99—94-103. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, approved Dec. 12, 2000, repealed §§ 94-99—94-103 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to filing of complaints; investigations; civil actions by aggrieved persons; civil actions and cooperation with other agencies, respectively, as related to fair housing regulations. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 94-104. - Coercion prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of or on account of such person's having exercised or enjoyed or on account of such person's having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by sections 94-94 through 94-97. 
(Code 1977, § 8-7015; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-105. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, approved Dec. 12, 2000, repealed § 94-105 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to public hearing authorized as related to fair housing regulations. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 94-106—94-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FAIR PRIVATE EMPLOYMENT 

Sec. 94-110. - Policy. 
The council declares that it is the policy of the city, in the exercise of its police powers for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare, and for the maintenance of peace and good government, to assure equal employment opportunity to all persons, free from restrictions and prejudice based upon race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, and disability. The human relations commission established in article II of this chapter is vested with authority to investigate alleged incidents of discrimination and make recommendations to the mayor and appropriate city agency and to secure a response within 30 days pursuant to the provisions of this article in furtherance of this policy and in accordance with the procedures set forth in article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 8, 9-24-02) 
Sec. 94-111. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Employer means any person who has ten or more employees, or the employer's designee or any person acting in the interest of such employer, but shall not include any municipal, county, state, or federal governmental entity. 
Employee means many person employed by, or applying for employment with, an employer, and shall include traditional workers, temporary workers, and part-time workers. 
Employment agency means any person regularly undertaking with or without compensation to procure employees for an employer or to procure for employees opportunities to work for an employer and includes an agent of such a person. 
Labor organization means any organization of any kind, any agency, or employee representation committee, group, association, or plan so engaged in which employees participate and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours, or other terms or conditions of employment, and any conference, general committee, joint or system board, or joint council so engaged which is subordinate to a national or international labor organization. 
(Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-112. - Unlawful employment practices. 
(a)  Employer practices. It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer: 
(1)  To fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to his or her compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such individual's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability; or 
(2)  To limit, segregate, or classify his or her employees or applicants for employment in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any individual of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect his or her status as an employee, because of such individual's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. 
(b)  Employment agency practices. It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employment agency to fail or refuse to refer for employment, or otherwise to discriminate against, any individual because of his or her race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability, or to classify or refer for employment any individual on the basis of his or her race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. 
(c)  Labor organization practices. It shall be an unlawful employment practice for a labor organization: 
(1)  To exclude or to expel from its membership, or otherwise to discriminate against, any individual because of his or her race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability; 
(2)  To limit, segregate, or classify its membership or applicants for membership, or to classify or fail or refuse to refer for employment any individual, in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any individual of employment opportunities, or would limit such employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect his or her status as an employee or as an applicant for employment, because of such individual's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability; or 
(3)  To cause or attempt to cause an employer to discriminate against an individual in violation of this section. 
(d)  Training programs. It shall be an unlawful employment practice for any employer, labor organization, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including on-the-job training programs to discriminate against any individual because of his or her race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability in admission to, or employment in, any program established to provide apprenticeship or other training. 
(e)  Printing or publication of notices or advertisements indicating prohibited preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination; occupational qualification exception. It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer, labor organization, employment agency, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including on-the-job training programs, to print or publish or cause to be printed or published any notice or advertisement relating to employment by such an employer or membership in or any classification or referral for employment by such a labor organization, or relating to any classification or referral for employment by such an employment agency, or relating to admission to, or employment in, any program established to provide apprenticeship or other training by such a joint labor-management committee, indicating any preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination, based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability, except that such a notice or advertisement may indicate a preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination based on religion, sex, or disability when religion, sex, or disability is a bona fide occupational qualification for employment and, in the case of disability, the employer, labor organization, employment agency, or joint labor-management committee has made reasonable accommodation for the disability to the full extent required by the Americans With Disabilities Act, codified at 42 U.S.C. § 12101. 
(f)  Prohibition of discriminatory use of test scores. It shall be an unlawful employment practice for a respondent, in connection with the selection or referral of applicants or candidates for employment or promotion, to adjust the scores of, use different cutoff scores for, or otherwise alter the results of, employment related tests on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability. 
(g)  Impermissible consideration of protected factors in employment practices. Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, an unlawful employment practice is established when the complaining party demonstrates that race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, or disability was a motivating factor for any employment practice, even though other factors also motivated the practice. 
(Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-113. - [Violation.] 
A violation of this Code section shall not be deemed a crime. 
(Ord. No. 2001-20, § 3, 3-13-01) 
Sec. 94-114. - Exclusions from unlawful employment practices. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article: 
(1)  It shall not be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to hire and employ employees, for an employment agency to classify, or refer for employment any individual, for a labor organization to classify its membership or to classify or refer for employment any individual, or for an employer, labor organization, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining programs to admit or employ any individual in any such program, on the basis of his or her religion, sex, or disability in those certain instances where religion, sex, or physical or mental ability is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of that particular business or enterprise, provided that in the case of disability, the employer, labor organization, employment agency, or joint labor-management committee has made reasonable accommodation for the disability to the full extent required by the Americans With Disabilities Act, codified at 42 U.S.C. § 12101; and 
(2)  It shall not be an unlawful employment practice for a school, college, university, or other educational institution or institution of learning to hire and employ employees of a particular religion if such school, college, university, or other educational institution or institution of learning is, in whole or in substantial part, owned, supported, controlled, or managed by a particular religion or by a particular religious corporation, association, or society, or if the curriculum of such school, college, university, or other educational institution or institution of learning is directed toward the propagation of a particular religion. 
(Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2001-20, § 2, 3-13-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-20, § 2, approved March 13, 2001, redesignated former section 94-113 as section 94-114. 
Secs. 94-115—94-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 94-120. - Prosecution of ordinance violations in Atlanta Municipal Court. 
(a)  In addition to or in lieu of filing a complaint with the human relations commission, an aggrieved person may seek prosecution of alleged violations of the human relations ordinance in Atlanta Municipal Court as in other cases of alleged ordinance violations pursuant to section 62-26, et seq., of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  In the event that the human relations commission has obtained a settlement or conciliation agreement with the consent of the aggrieved party, the basis for an ordinance violation is limited to the enforcement of the terms of the agreement or settlement. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to invalidate or restrict or deny any right or remedy any person may have under state or federal law or preclude any cause of action in court otherwise provided for the violation of any person's civil rights. 
(Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2001-20, § 1, 3-13-01; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 9, 9-24-02) 
Sec. 94-121. - Filing of complaints with the human relations commission. 
(a)  Person aggrieved. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful discriminatory practice may, by such person or such person's attorney at law, make, sign and file with the director of the mayor's office of constituent services a verified complaint in writing which shall state the name and address of the person alleged to have committed the unlawful discriminatory practice complained of and which shall set forth the particulars thereof and contain such other information as may be required by the commission. 
(b)  Who may file complaint. Any person or organization claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged unlawful discriminatory practice which allegedly occurred in the City of Atlanta may, or by an attorney, make, sign and file a complaint. If a complainant lacks mental capacity, the complaint may be filed on the complainant's behalf by a person with a substantial interest in the welfare of the complainant. 
(c)  Form of complaint. The complaint shall be in writing either on a form promulgated by the commission or on any paper suitable for a complaint. The original shall be signed and verified before a notary public or other person duly authorized by law to take acknowledgments. Nunc pro tunc verifications of a complaint or an answer thereto may be made at any time that the absence of a signed verification is noted. 
(d)  Contents. A complaint shall contain the following: 
(1)  The full name and address of the person making the complaint (referred to as the complainant). 
(2)  The full name and address of each respondent against whom the complaint is made. 
(3)  The alleged unlawful discriminatory practice and a statement of the particulars thereof. A respondent may reply in writing to the complainant, after the service of a notice of hearing, for a more definite or detailed statement, and such application shall state, with specificity, the instances in which the complaint is insufficiently definite and detailed. If the complainant or complainant's attorney believes that the complaint is not sufficiently definite or detailed, complainant or the complainant's attorney shall provide such a statement. Otherwise the application shall be referred to the chair after the hearing has commenced, who shall issue such directions, if any, as may be appropriate. 
(4)  The date of the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice and, if the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice is of a continuing nature, the dates between which the continuing acts of discrimination are alleged to have occurred. 
(5)  A statement as to any other action, civil or criminal, instituted in any other forum and as to any pending administrative proceeding based on the same grievance as is alleged in the complaint, together with a statement as to status or disposition of such other action. 
(e)  Time of filing. A complaint must be filed within 180 days from the date of the occurrence of the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice. If the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice is of a continuing nature, the date of its occurrence shall be deemed to be any date subsequent to its inception, up to and including the date of its cessation. 
(f)  Manner of filing. The complaint may be filed by personal delivery, ordinary mail, registered mail or certified mail, addressed to the office of the director of the mayor's office of constituent service. 
(g)  Service. A copy of the complaint shall be promptly served by the complainant on the respondents and all persons the commission deems to be necessary parties, on its own motion or on application of a respondent. A copy of all amendments to the complaint shall be served by the commission on all parties to the proceeding, except such amendments to the complaint as are made to more correctly identify a respondent or necessary party previously served. A copy of any complaint filed against any respondent who has previously entered into a conciliation agreement or as to whom findings of the commission have been rendered shall be delivered to the mayor, president and the head of the city department having jurisdiction over the subject matter of the controversy. 
(h)  Investigation and recommendation. 
(1)  Within 30 days after receiving a complaint, the director of the mayor's office of constituent services shall conduct an initial investigation and report the findings to the commission. Such investigation may be made by field visit, written or oral inquiry, conference, or any other method or combination thereof deemed suitable in the discretion of the director of the mayor's office of constituent services or other designee. The commission shall receive the report and attempt to eliminate any unlawful discriminatory practice complained of by further investigation, conference, conciliation and/or persuasion. In the event that the director of the mayor's office of constituent services finds no basis for continuing an investigation, he or she shall report this finding to the commission which may either dismiss or continue the investigation. 
(2)  In conducting an investigation the director of the mayor's office of constituent services or other designee as well as the commission shall have access at all reasonable times to records, documents, individuals and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record and copy such materials and take and record the testimony or statements of such persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation. 
(i)  Conciliation: The terms of a conciliation agreement may include provisions requiring the respondent to refrain from the commission of unlawful discriminatory practices in the future and may be agreed upon by the members of the commission and the respondent. 
(k)  Successful conciliation. 
(1)  If the respondent agrees to the terms of conciliation, the chair shall prepare a proposed conciliation agreement and serve it upon the complainant. 
(2)  If the complainant agrees to the terms of the agreement or fails to object to such terms within 15 days after its service, the commission may formally enter into the proposed conciliation agreement by issuing its findings embodying such conciliation agreement. The commission shall serve a copy of such findings order upon all parties to the proceeding. 
(l)  Consideration of complainant's objections. 
(1)  An objection by a complainant to a proposed conciliation agreement must be written and shall be delivered or mailed within 15 days of the service of the proposed agreement. If the agreement is served by mail, service shall be accomplished by registered mail or certified mail. The objections shall be specific and in detail. 
(2)  Unless such objections are met or withdrawn within ten days after service thereof, the commission shall notice the complaint for hearing. 
(3)  However, the commission, when it finds the terms of a conciliation agreement to be in the public interest, may execute such agreement if the respondent is still willing to execute it by issuing its findings. The commission may either dismiss the objections as being without substance or may hold a hearing limited to the objections of the complainant, unless the respondent demands a hearing on the merits of the charges of unlawful discriminatory practice by serving an answer including such a demand. 
(m)  Notice of hearing and answer. A notice of hearing with the complaint shall be served upon the respondent and the procedures for filing an answer shall be as follows: 
(1)  Time of filing answer. At least three business days prior to the hearing, the respondent may file a written answer to the complaint, sworn to and subject to the penalties of perjury. 
(2)  Place and manner of filing answer. The answer must be filed with the commission in the office of the director of the mayor's office of constituent services and a copy served upon each attorney of record and upon each party not represented by an attorney. 
(3)  Form of answer. The answer shall be in writing, the original being signed and sworn to subject to the penalties of perjury. The answer shall contain the party's address, telephone number and, if made by an attorney, the name, address and telephone number of the attorney. The answer shall contain a separate and specific response to each and every particular of the complaint or a denial of any knowledge or information thereof sufficient to form a belief. Any allegation in the complaint which is not denied shall be deemed admitted. 
(4)  Failure to answer. If the respondent fails to answer the complaint, the hearing shall proceed on the evidence in support of the complaint. 
(n)  Procedure of hearings. 
(1)  The chair shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity. All relevant evidence shall be admitted, unless privileged or excessively cumulative. 
(2)  The chair shall have full authority to control the procedure of the hearing, subject to this article, and to rule upon motions and objections. 
(i)  In conducting an investigation under this article, the chair shall have access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record and copy such materials and take and record the testimony or statements of such persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation, provided that the chair first complies with the provisions of the fourth amendment to the Constitution of the United States relating to unreasonable searches and seizures. The chair may request that the committee on council exercise its subpoena power on behalf of the commission to compel access to or the production of such materials or the appearance of such persons and may issue interrogatories to a respondent. The chair or the chair's designee may administer oaths. 
(ii)  Upon written application to the chair, a respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the chair to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as subpoenas issued by the chair. Any subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on its face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that it was issued at the respondent's request. 
(iii)  Within five days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the chair to revoke or modify the subpoena. The chair shall grant the petition if the chair finds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous or for other good reason. 
(iv)  In the event that a person refuses to obey a subpoena, the chair or other person at whose request it was issued may request that the committee on council petition for its enforcement in the Atlanta Municipal Court. 
(3)  All oral testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation, and a record of the proceeding shall be made and kept. 
(4)  Attempts at conciliation shall not be received in evidence. 
(5)  Evidence shall not be received in camera. However, where desirable, the chair, in consultation with counsel, may provide for the use of devices such as deletion of names and coding in order to protect personal privacy or information, including trade secrets. 
(6)  No person shall communicate with the chair subsequent to the commencement of a hearing on any matter relating to the case, other than a status inquiry, unless a copy of such communication is sent to all parties to the proceeding. 
(o)  Findings after hearing. 
(1)  Form and content. Findings shall be issued after hearing and shall set forth the findings of fact of the commission, the determination and, in the discretion of the chair, an opinion containing the reasons for the decision. 
(2)  Service. Copies of findings signed by the chair shall be sent to the complainant, to the respondent by certified mail and all other parties, with copies also sent to the mayor, president and the head of the appropriate department of city government. 
(3)  The mayor and the appropriate department of city government shall have 30 days in which to respond to the commission's findings. The Mayor may respond to a finding of discrimination by taking any of the following actions or a combination thereof, or other actions as deemed appropriate: 
(a)  In the event of a finding of discrimination in either public accommodations, housing or employment. A letter may be sent asking the alleged offender desist from the actions complained of. 
(b)  In the event of a finding of discrimination in public accommodations where the alleged offender holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages, the mayor may ask the police licenses and permits unit to conduct an investigation to determine whether due cause exists to recommend revocation of such license pursuant to Code of Ordinances section 10-109. 
(c)  In the event of a finding of discrimination in either public accommodations, housing or employment where the alleged offender holds a professional or business license issued by the city or is doing business with the city pursuant to a contract, the mayor may inquire whether due cause exists to revoke such license or contract. 
(d)  In the event of a finding of discrimination in either public accommodations, housing or employment, the mayor may request that any city agency conduct an investigation into whether the alleged offender has complied with any other city ordinance which applies to the alleged discriminatory conduct. 
(e)  In the event of a finding of discrimination in either public accommodations, housing or employment, the mayor may request that any appropriate community agency conduct an investigation into whether the alleged offender has complied with any state or federal law which applies to the alleged discriminatory conduct. The director of the mayor's office of constituent services shall maintain current information pertaining to public accommodation, housing and employment resources in the metropolitan Atlanta area so that a timely response may be made by the mayor to the commission's finding, of discrimination. 
(p)  Compliance investigation. 
(1)  Investigation. Not later than one year from the date of a conciliation agreement, findings after hearing or after stipulation and at any other times in its discretion, the commission shall investigate whether the respondent is complying with the terms of such agreement or recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00; Ord. No. 2002-70, § 10, 9-24-02) 
Secs. 94-122—94-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIPS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, approved Dec. 12, 2000, renumbered former art. V as art. VII to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Domestic partners eligible for certain employee benefits, § 2-858. 

Sec. 94-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Declaration of domestic partnership means a form provided by the city business license office in which two people agree to be jointly responsible for the necessities of life incurred during the domestic partnership and that all qualifications for domestic partnership are met when the declaration is signed. The form will require both partners to provide reasonable proof of their primary, regular and permanent residence address. The form must be signed under penalty of perjury and must be witnessed and notarized. The business license office shall, within 30 days of the effective date of this article (June 29, 1993), make such forms available. To help defray costs associated with the providing and filing of these forms, the business license office is authorized to charge a fee as set forth in section 94-134 for each completed form. 
Domestic partnership means two people of the opposite or same gender who live together in the mutual interdependence of a single home and have signed a declaration of domestic partnership in which they attest that: 
(1)  They share the same primary, regular and permanent residence and have lived together for the previous six months (documentation must be submitted verifying joint residency); 
(2)  They have a committed personal relationship with each other that is mutually interdependent and intended to be lifelong; 
(3)  They agree to be jointly obligated and responsible for the necessities of life for each other; 
(4)  They are not married to anyone or legally separated from anyone; 
(5)  They are 18 years of age or older; 
(6)  They are competent to enter into a contract; 
(7)  They are not related by blood closer than would bar marriage in the state; 
(8)  They are each other's sole domestic partner; 
(9)  They agree to file a termination of domestic partnership within 30 days if any of the facts set out in this definition change; and 
(10)  Any prior domestic partnership in which their domestic partner participated with a third party was terminated not less than six months prior to the date of such affidavit, and, if such earlier domestic partnership had been acknowledged under provisions of this section, that notice of termination of such earlier domestic partnership was provided to the city in writing to the business license division of the department of finance not less than six months prior to the date of said affidavit. If the prior domestic partnership was terminated by the death of the partner, there shall be no waiting period. 
Live together means that two people claiming domestic partnership status share the same primary, regular and permanent residence. It is not necessary that the legal right to possess the residence be in both names. Domestic partners do not cease to live together if one leaves the shared residence for a period not to exceed one year, but intends to return. Whether the relationship between these two people is or is not sexual is in no way relevant for the purposes of determining eligibility under this article. 
Necessities of life means the cost of basic food, shelter, clothing and medical care. The individuals need not contribute equally or jointly to the cost of these expenses as long as they agree that both are responsible and obligated for the cost. 
(Code 1977, § 14-13001; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-132. - Legal effect of declaration of domestic partnership. 
(a)  Rights and duties created. Neither this article nor the filing of a declaration of domestic partnership shall create any legal rights or duties from one of the parties to the other, except those which specifically refer to domestic partnership. Nothing in this article shall be construed to explicitly or implicitly create a marital relationship. This chapter does not attempt to alter or affect the laws in the state that regulate any private or civil relationships. 
(b)  Duration of rights and duties. Once a domestic partnership ends, the partners will incur no further obligations to each other under this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-13002; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-133. - Establishing existence of domestic partnership. 
(a)  Generally. Domestic partners who are residents of the city or who are employees of the city may establish the existence of their domestic partnership by presenting an original declaration of domestic partnership to the business license office of the city along with reasonable proof of residence such as, but not limited to, a driver's license, utility bill, or state I.D. card. The business license office will file the declaration and provide the partners with a certificate showing that the declaration was filed with the business license office. The standard declaration form will be available in the business license office during normal business hours. 
(b)  Limitations. The business office shall only accept for filing declarations of domestic partnership submitted by domestic partners who have residence in the city or who are employees of the city. 
(c)  Amendments to the declaration. A partner may amend a declaration of domestic partnership filed with the business license office at any time to show a change in such partner's primary residence address. 
(d)  New declarations of domestic partnership. No person who has created a domestic partnership may create another until six months after a notice of termination has been signed and filed with the business license office; provided, however, that if the domestic partnership ended because of the death of the other party, a new declaration may be filed any time after the notice of termination has been filed. 
(e)  Evidence of domestic partnership. Any person who requires a person to provide evidence of the existence of a domestic partnership must accept the declaration of domestic partnership, but may choose not to require the declaration, as complete proof of the existence of a domestic partnership. The declaration of domestic partnership may be considered reasonable proof for qualifying for any present or future domestic, partner benefits that private corporations or public institutions offer. 
(Code 1977, § 14-13003; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-134. - Records, copies, filing fees. 
(a)  Records of the city's business license office. The clerk at the city's business license office shall keep a record of all declarations of domestic partnerships, amendments to declarations of domestic partnership, and all notices of termination. The records shall be maintained so that amendments and notices of termination shall be filed with the declaration of domestic partnerships to which they pertain. 
(b)  Filing fees. The business license office shall charge a fee of $30.00 for the filing of a declaration of domestic partnership and shall charge a fee of $5.00 for providing certified copies of declarations, amendments or notices of termination. There will be no charge for the filing of amendments or notices of termination. 
(Code 1977, § 14-13004; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-135. - Visitation in jail/prison/detention facilities. 
Where visitation to persons held in detention, prison or jail facilities operated or controlled by the city is restricted, such detained person's domestic partner shall be allowed visitation privileges identical to a married person's spouse, and the children of the domestic partner or the parents of the domestic partner, and shall be afforded visitation on the same terms, hours and conditions as immediate family members. 
(Code 1977, § 14-13005; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Cross reference— Correctional facility rules, § 98-176 et seq. 
Sec. 94-136. - Ending domestic partnerships. 
(a)  Termination. A domestic partnership ends when: 
(1)  One partner sends the other partner written notice that such partner has ended the domestic partnership; 
(2)  One of the partners dies; or 
(3)  The partners no longer meet one or more of the qualifications or conditions for domestic partnership. 
(b)  Notice of termination. 
(1)  To domestic partners. When a domestic partnership ends, the partners must execute a notice of termination naming the partners and stating that the partnership has ended. The notice of termination must be dated and signed under penalty of perjury by at least one of the partners. The notice of termination must be filed with the business license office. 
(2)  To third parties. A domestic partner who has given a copy of a declaration of domestic partnership to any third party in order to qualify for any benefit or right must, whenever the domestic partnership ends, give that third party a copy of the notice of termination. If a partner has died, the surviving partner must give notice of termination to those third parties such partner knows were given copies of the declaration by the deceased partner in order to qualify for a benefit or right. The notice of termination must be sent to the parties identified in this section within 60 days of the termination of the domestic partnership. 
(3)  Failure to give notice. Failure to give notice as required by this subsection will neither prevent nor delay termination of the domestic partnership. 
(4)  Termination by city. Notwithstanding any of the above, the city shall terminate a domestic partnership if the city finds that the partners no longer meet one or more of the qualifications or conditions for domestic partnership. The effective date of such termination will be retroactive to the date that such qualifications or conditions were no longer met. 
(Code 1977, § 14-13006; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-137. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any person may apply to the state court of Fulton County or the superior court of Fulton County, or the appropriate courts in DeKalb County for residents of the city in DeKalb County, depending upon jurisdictional requirements for enforcement of the provisions of this article in law or equity. 
(b)  Any action to enforce this article must be commenced no later than two years after the claimed violation. 
(Code 1977, § 14-13007; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 94-138. - Limited effect. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to alter, affect or conflict with the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Code 1977, § 14-13009; Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Secs. 94-139, 94-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ATLANTA COMMISSION ON WOMEN[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-79, § 1, approved Dec. 12, 2000, renumbered former art. VI as art. VIII to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 94-141. - Created. 
There shall be a commission to focus on women issues in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, § 1, 3-28-00) 
Sec. 94-142. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  (1)  To determine the scope and nature of the studies and research to be undertaken by the commission, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Educational needs of and opportunities for women; 
b.  Social security and tax laws as they affect women; 
c.  Women's health issues; 
d.  Political, legal, civil, property, and social rights of women; 
e.  Employment policies in the public and private sector and their impact on the wage earning capacity of women; 
f.  Child care issues; 
g.  Domestic violence and public safety; 
h.  Employee and wage equity; 
i.  Traditional public housing; 
j.  Equity in recreation and sports services; and 
k.  Aging issues. 
(2)  To collect and disseminate information regarding the state of women in the city; 
(3)  To review and analyze the laws of the city and their impact on the lives of the women of the city; 
(4)  To consult with and advise the city council and any agency, board, commission or authority on matters pertaining to women; 
(5)  To promote, encourage, and provide advisory assistance to other state, local and community women's professional, business and civic organizations; 
(6)  To propose to the city through the appropriate city department the application for and acceptance of public or private grants, devices and bequests; and 
(7)  To hold public hearings, conduct studies or take any other action the commission deems necessary to fulfill its responsibilities. 
(b)  All executive departments, agencies, boards, commissions and authorities shall cooperate with the commission in the performance of its duties. 
(c)  The commission on women shall provide a preliminary report to the mayor, president of council and members of Atlanta City Council within 90 days outlining its mission statement and initial areas of focus which shall be related to those issues which are in the purview of the city government. 
(d)  The commission shall publish an annual report summarizing its activities, findings, and recommendations of the commission. The report shall be submitted to the president of council and the members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, § 1, 3-28-00) 
Sec. 94-143. - Composition; appointment; terms. 
(a)  The commission shall be composed of 19 members to be appointed and confirmed by the council as follows: 
(1)  Two members shall be appointed by the mayor; 
(2)  Two members shall be appointed by the president of council; 
(3)  One member by each council member (districts 1 through 12); 
(4)  One member by each council member (at large posts 1 through 3). 
(b)  In the event that appointments are not made within 45 days after the adoption of this legislation, the committee on council can proceed to make appointments to the commission. The lack of full appointment to the commission shall in no way affect the work of said commission provided that a majority of the commission has been appointed. A quorum shall still constitute a majority of the commission. 
(c)  The initial term of the commission members appointed by the mayor shall be for three years; the initial term of the commission members appointed by the president of council shall be for three years; all other appointments shall be for a two years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a two-year term. 
(d)  The commission shall elect a chairperson, vice chairperson and a secretary from among its members for terms of two years, and any member shall be eligible for successive election to such office by the commission. A quorum for transacting business shall be a majority of the members of the commission. 
(e)  Each person appointed to the commission shall be a resident of the City of Atlanta. Any member who ceases to be a resident of the city of Atlanta during the term of their membership shall be removed from the commission and the appointing officials shall appoint a new member to the commission. 
(f)  The commission shall be staffed by the council staff. 
(Ord. No. 2000-18, § 1, 3-28-00; Ord. No. 2008-32(08-O-0999), § 1, 5-27-08) 
Chapter 98 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Mayor's committee on drug control, § 2-1956 et seq.; criminal justice coordinating councils, § 2-2011; bonding agents, § 30-551 et seq.; private security services and private investigators, § 30-1231 et seq.; street patrols, § 30-1341 et seq.; courts, ch. 62; emergency services, ch. 70; burglar or robbery alarm systems, § 70-26 et seq. 
Land development code reference— Impact fees for emergency services, § 19-1001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Code enforcement agents. 
(a)  The police chief or his or her designee shall have the authority to appoint code enforcement agents who shall not be regular police officers in the department of police but who shall have the power to serve subpoenas, citations and summonses for the violation of, or failure to comply with, any section of this Code or ordinance of the city, the requirements thereof or of any order or direction made pursuant to the provisions contained in any section of this Code or ordinance of the city which shall not have been complied with. 
(b)  All persons appointed or who shall desire appointment as code enforcement agents to operate within the city shall apply to the police chief or his or her designee for a permit. The police chief or designee may set an expiration date for the permit. 
(c)  The application for the permit required by subsection (b) shall show the name and address of the applicant, the applicant's job title, place of employment, and department head and shall have attached thereto a photograph of the applicant, together with sufficient fingerprints to definitely identify the applicant. The applicant and his or her department head must sign the application. The department head must attest to the applicant's training for the job and the physical and mental qualifications to be a code enforcement agent. The police chief or his or her designee is specifically authorized to require additional information from the applicant or department head. Upon receipt of the application, the police chief or designee shall cause a criminal history check to be made of the applicant and shall thereafter grant or deny the permit. 
(d)  Only city employees in job classifications that require enforcement of the City Code are eligible to become code enforcement agents. The chief of police and the commissioner of human resources or their designees will create and maintain a list of such job classifications. 
(e)  The city solicitor will train applicants in enforcement procedures prior to their being sworn in. 
(f)  On satisfactory completion of the enforcement training, the police chief or designee will issue badges and identification cards to the code enforcement agents and swear them in. 
The police chief or the chief's designee is authorized, in accordance with Georgia law, to administer the oath of office to all code enforcement agents employed by the City of Atlanta. When taken, the agent shall sign the official oath and copies thereof shall be filed with the Fulton county Probate court and in the personnel records of the agent so sworn. That oath shall take the following form: 
I, ___________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am duly qualified, according to the City Code of Ordinances and the policies of my department of employment, to perform the duties imposed upon me as a Code Enforcement Agent of the City of Atlanta, Georgia, and that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the duties thereof. 
I further swear that I will enforce the ordinances of the City of Atlanta that are particular to my job assignment, abide by the direction given me by the Office of the City Solicitor and the Atlanta Police Department, and uphold the Ethics Code of the City of Atlanta. In doing so, I will be mindful of the trust that has been placed in me to improve the quality of life and make every effort to live up to that trust. I will not persecute the innocent, nor help to shield the guilty, nor will I be influenced in the discharge of my duties by fear, favor, affection, or reward. 
(g)  Status as a code enforcement agent does not confer any additional benefits or authority other than specified in this section. A code enforcement agent does not have the power of physical arrest. 
(h)  The chief of police or designee will investigate allegations of abuse of authority by a code enforcement agent; the employing department head will cooperate with the investigation. The chief of police or designee may suspend or cancel a person's status as code enforcement agent if he or she fails to meet the requirements or abuses the authority. 
(i)  The department head of a code enforcement agent must return the badge and identification card to the police department if that agent's status is canceled under subsection (h) or if the individual is no longer employed by that department in a qualifying classification. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any person, not authorized as a code enforcement agent, to act as a code enforcement agent or to represent such person as a code enforcement agent or to wear the badge of a code enforcement agent. 
(Ord. No. 2004-66, § 1, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 2006-71, § 1, 10-11-06) 
Sec. 98-2. - Criminal justice coordinating council. 
(a)  There is hereby created a criminal justice coordinating council to study, monitor, assess, and make recommendations for improving all aspects of the city's criminal justice system. 
(b)  The criminal justice coordinating council shall consist of the following members: the mayor or his/her designee, the president of the city council or his/her designee, the chief of police or his/her designee, the chief of the department of corrections or his/her designee, the chief judge of the municipal court or his/her designee, the chair of the city council public safety and legal administration committee or his/her designee, the city solicitor or his/her designee, the public defender or his/her designee, the director of the office of code compliance or his/her designee, and two (2) members of the community appointed by a majority of the members of the criminal justice coordinating council. 
(c)  (1)  Each associate judge of the municipal court shall serve as an ex officio nonvoting member. 
(2)  Each member shall serve during the term of his/her service to the city, or at the pleasure of his/her appointing authority. 
(d)  The criminal justice coordinating council shall meet no less than four times annually. A majority of its members shall constitute a quorum for conducting business. The chairperson shall be elected from among the council's members. The members shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(e)  The criminal justice coordinating council shall undertake and fulfill the following duties: 
(1)  To develop, encourage and coordinate communication and cooperation among all components of the city's criminal justice system, and all law enforcement agencies operating within the city; and between the criminal justice system and the citizens of this city; 
(2)  To study, research, investigate, monitor, evaluate, and report objectively all aspects of the criminal justice system; 
(3)  To take steps to ensure the maximum possible appearance rate for police officers for all hearings on all charges of violations of the city; 
(4)  To put in place an effective system for reporting to the police chief any absences from scheduled court appearances by police officers; 
(5)  To take steps to educate the court system and judges as to appropriate alcohol and substance abuse facilities for repeat offenders of the Atlanta City Code's public intoxication or substance abuse ordinances, including but not limited to sections 10-8 and 10-9 of the city Code, and to encourage the use of alcohol and substance abuse treatment facility rehabilitation as alternative sentencing measures for such repeat offenders; 
(6)  To study the effectiveness of the probation office in monitoring and supervising repeat offenders of violations of the Atlanta City Code; 
(7)  To create, when directed by council and the mayor, a public report which reflects the performance of the criminal justice system for the city, including convictions and dismissal rates, reasons for dismissals, if any, numbers of repeat offenders and sentencing for such repeat offenders, including the numbers of repeat offenders convicted of public intoxication or substance abuse ordinances referred to alcohol or substance abuse program, as well as having mentally impaired persons referred to the appropriate evaluation and diagnostic facility for care and treatment; 
(8)  To make findings and recommendations to the mayor, the city council, the police chief, department of corrections, the chief judge and administrator of the court, and the public, no less than annually as to needed changes in the criminal justice system, and legislation required to effectuate such changes; and 
(9)  To develop recommendations for innovative programs that may be undertaken to address identifiable problems with the objective of preventing and reducing crime and enforcing and properly prosecuting violations of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1996-86, § 1, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 1997-09, § 1, 2-25-97; Ord. No. 1998-20, §§ 1, 2, 3-23-98; Ord. No. 2000-1, §§ 1, 2, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 9, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2011-55(11-O-1766), § 1, 12-14-11; Ord. No. 2013-15(13-O-0640), §§ 1, 2, 5-15-13) 
Sec. 98-3. - Mattie's Call. 
The chief of police and or his/her designee shall have the authority to establish the implementation of a "Mattie's Call" in the City of Atlanta. This authority shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The chief of police and/or his/her designee to establish criteria to determine when a missing person case justifies the activation of a "Mattie's Call." 
(2)  Coordination and support by Metro Atlanta Law Enforcement, emergency management and broadcasters to issue an urgent bulletin in missing persons cases that involved persons with Alzheimer, Dementia, and other mental disabling conditions. 
(3)  Development of a contact list for the immediate dissemination of information regarding the missing person to agencies that shall include, but not be limited to: the Emergency Alert System (EAS), all broadcast media, Metro Atlanta Homeless Shelters and Facilities, hospitals, jails, area law enforcement agencies such as MARTA, state, college, university, downtown ambassadors, private security agencies, mayor's office of constituents services, mayor's office of communications, as well as, city field personnel through various departments (watershed, public works, planning, traffic and transportation, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 2004-39, § 1, 6-24-04) 
Secs. 98-4—98-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 98-10. - Atlanta Public Safety and Judicial Facilities Authority. 
(a)  [Created]. There is hereby created an authority to be known as the "Atlanta Public Safety and Judicial Facilities Authority", hereinafter called the authority. 
(b)  Directors. 
(1)  The authority shall consist of five voting directors who are residents of the City of Atlanta and two ex-officio non-voting members, who shall be the Chief Operating Officer of the City of Atlanta and Chief Financial Officer of the City of Atlanta. 
(2)  Four directors will be appointed by a majority of council members present and voting on these appointments. The appointments will be made in the following manner: 
Council Districts 1, 2, 3, 4 and Post 1; 
Council Districts 5, 6, 7, 8 and Post 2; 
Council Districts 9, 10, 11, 12 and Post 3; 
Council President. 
One director shall be appointed by the mayor. No appointment may be a current member of the city council. 
(3)  All appointments shall be for a term of four years with the option to be reappointed for another four year term. The directors shall receive no compensation for their services but shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(4)  The authority may make bylaws and regulations for the governing of the authority and may delegate to one or more officers, agents, and employees of the authority such powers and duties as may be deemed necessary and proper. 
(5)  A majority of the full board of voting directors shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business of the authority; further, any action with respect to any project of the authority must be approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of the voting directors. 
(c)  Officers. The authority shall hold an organization meeting in January of every year to elect one of the directors as chairperson and one as vice chairperson. The authority shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer or a secretary-treasurer, either of who may be a director. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The authority shall have all of the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power: 
(1)  To bring and defend actions; 
(2)  To adopt and amend a corporate seal; 
(3)  To acquire, construct, improve, or modify, to place into operation, and to operate or cause to be placed into operation, either as owner of all or of any part in common with others, a project or projects within the political subdivision in which the authority is activated and within other political subdivisions, and to pay all or part of the cost of any such project or projects from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms, or corporations or any other contribution, all of which the authority is authorized to receive, accept, and use; 
(4)  To acquire, in its own name, by purchase on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper or by gift, grant, lease, or otherwise, real property or rights and easements therein and franchises and personal property necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, which purposes shall include, but shall not be limited to, the constructing or acquiring of a project, the improving, extending, adding to, reconstructing, renovating, or remodeling of any project or part thereof already constructed or acquired, or demolition to make room for such project or any part thereof, and to insure the same against any and all risks as such insurance may, from time to time, be available; the authority may also use such property, rent or lease the same to or from others, make contracts with respect to the use thereof, or sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, or otherwise dispose of or grant options for any such property in any manner which the authority deems to the best advantage of itself and its purposes; provided, however, that the powers to acquire, use, and dispose of property as set forth in this paragraph shall include the power to acquire, use, and dispose of any interest in such property, whether divided or undivided, which acquisition may result in the ownership of such property or any part thereof in common with any other party or parties, public or private; and title to any such property of the authority, however, shall be held by the authority exclusively for the benefit of the public; 
(5)  To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be acquired or constructed; provided that all private persons, firms, and corporations, this state, and all political subdivisions, departments, instrumentalities, or agencies of the state or of local government are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and without limiting the generality of the above, authority is specifically granted to counties and municipal corporations and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relative to the furnishing of project activities and facilities or either of them by the authority to such political subdivisions and by such political subdivisions to the authority for a term not exceeding 50 years; 
(6)  To exercise any one or more of the powers, rights, and privileges conferred by this Code section either alone or jointly or in common with one or more other public or private parties or public and private parties; in any such exercise of such powers, rights, and privileges jointly or in common with others with respect to the construction, operation, and maintenance of project facilities, the authority may own an undivided interest in such facilities with any other party with which it may jointly or in common exercise the rights and privileges conferred by this chapter; the authority may enter into an agreement or agreements with respect to any such project facility with the other party or parties participating therein; any such agreement may contain such terms, conditions, and provisions, consistent with this chapter, as the parties thereto shall deem to be in their best interests; any such agreement may include, but need not be limited to, provisions for the construction, operation, and maintenance of such project facility by any one or more party of the parties to such agreement, which party or parties shall be designated in or pursuant to such agreement as agent or agents on behalf of itself and one or more of the other parties thereto, or by such other means as may be determined by the parties thereto, and may include provisions for a method or methods of determining and allocating, among or between the parties, costs of construction, operation, maintenance, renewals, replacements, improvements, and disposals with respect to such facility; in carrying out its functions and activities as such agent with respect to construction, operation, and maintenance of such a facility, such agent shall be governed by the laws and regulations applicable to such agent as a separate legal entity and not by any laws or regulations which may be applicable to any of the other participating parties; provided, however, the agent shall act for the benefit of the public; notwithstanding anything contained in any other law to the contrary, pursuant to the terms of any such agreement, the authority may delegate its powers and duties with respect to the construction, operation, and maintenance of such facility to the party acting as agent; and all actions taken by such agent in accordance with the provisions of such agreement may be binding upon the authority without further action or approval of the authority; 
(7)  To extend credit or make loans to any person, firm, corporation, or other industrial entity for the planning, design, construction, acquisition, or carrying out of any project, which credit or loans shall be secured by loan agreements, mortgages, security agreements, contracts, and all other instruments or fees or charges, upon such terms and conditions as the authority shall determine reasonable in connection with such loans, including provision for the establishment and maintenance of reserves and insurance funds, and in the exercise of powers granted by this Code section in connection with a project for such person, firm, corporation, or other industrial entity, to require the inclusion in any contract, loan agreement, security agreement, or other instrument of such provisions for guaranty, insurance, construction, use, operation, maintenance, and financing of a project as the authority may deem necessary or desirable; 
(8)  To acquire, accept, or retain equitable interests, security interests, or other interest in any property, real or personal, by mortgage, assignment, security agreement, pledge, conveyance, contract, lien, loan agreement, or other consensual transfer in order to secure the repayment of any moneys loaned or credit extended by the authority; 
(9)  To accept, receive, and administer gifts, grants, appropriations, and donations of money, materials, and property of any kind, including loans and grants from the United States of America, this state, or a unit of local government or any of their agencies, departments, authorities, or instrumentalities upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America, this state, or a unit of local government or any of their agencies, departments, authorities, or instrumentalities shall impose; to administer trusts; and to sell, lease, transfer, convey, appropriate, and pledge any and all of its property and assets; 
(10)  To invest any accumulation of its funds in any fund or reserve in any manner that public funds of this state or its political subdivisions may be invested; 
(11)  To do any and all things necessary or proper for the accomplishment of the objectives of this chapter and to exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state, including the power to employ professional and administrative staff and personnel and to retain legal, engineering, fiscal, accounting, and other professional services; the power to purchase all kinds of insurance, including, without limitation, insurance against tort liability and against risks of damage to property; the power to borrow money for any of the corporate purposes of the authority; the power to indemnify and hold harmless any parties contracting with the authority or its agents from damage to persons or property; and the power to act as self-insurer with respect to any loss or liability; provided, however, that obligations of the authority other than revenue bonds, for which provision is made in this chapter, shall be payable from the general funds of the authority and shall not be a charge against any special fund allocated to the payment of revenue bonds; 
(12)  To mortgage, convey, pledge, or assign any properties, revenues, income, tolls, charges, or fees owned or received by the authority; 
(13)  To borrow money and issue its revenue bonds and bond anticipation notes from time to time and to use the proceeds thereof for the purpose of paying all or part of the cost of any project, including the cost of extending, adding to, or improving such project, or for the purpose of refunding any such bonds of the authority theretofore issued; and to otherwise carry out the purposes of this chapter and to pay all other costs of the authority incident to, or necessary and appropriate to, such purposes, including the providing of funds to be paid into any fund or funds to secure such bonds and notes, provided that all such bonds and notes shall be issued in accordance with the procedures and subject to the limitations set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-63-9; provided, however, that the maximum aggregate amount of bonds issued shall be $50,000.000.00; and 
(14)  As security for repayment of authority obligations, to pledge, mortgage, convey, assign, hypothecate, or otherwise encumber any property, real or personal, of such authority and to execute any trust agreement, indenture, or security agreement containing any provisions not in conflict with law, which trust agreement, indenture, or security agreement may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default on such obligations either in payment of principal or interest or in the performance of any term or condition contained in such agreement or indenture; this state, on behalf of itself and each county, municipal corporation, political subdivision, or taxing district therein waives any right which it or such county, municipal corporation, political subdivision, or taxing district may have to prevent the forced sale or foreclosure of any property of the authority so mortgaged or encumbered, and any such mortgage or encumbrance may be foreclosed in accordance with law and the terms thereof. 
(e)  No bond or other obligations of and no indebtedness incurred by the authority shall constitute an indebtedness or obligation of the State of Georgia or of the City of Atlanta, nor shall any act of the authority in any manner constitute or result on the creation of an indebtedness of the State of Georgia or the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2005-71, § 1, 11-14-05) 
Secs. 98-11—98-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF POLICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Department of police, app. IV, §§ 1(k), 43 et seq. 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-301 et seq.; personnel, ch. 114. 
Related laws reference— Police pensions, § 6-221 et seq. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; specific constitutional grant of authority to provide for police protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; police officer training, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-26. - Duties of police chief. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police chief to formulate and implement rules and regulations for the operations of the department of police. The police chief shall have the authority to promulgate departmental rules and regulations that are consistent with the terms or intent of the laws and ordinances relating to the department. Any changes in the rules and regulations for the operation of the department of police, including the employee work rules, shall be executed by the police chief in writing. The chief of police shall provide the municipal clerk with a copy of the Police Department Work Rules from time to time whenever the same are amended. 
(b)  It is also the duty of the police chief to: 
(1)  Administer corrective and disciplinary action for violation of rules and regulations of the department of police. Such action may include but is not limited to formal counseling, oral or written reprimands, retraining and suspension without pay or with or without a monetary fine not to exceed $500.00, which shall be deducted from the employee's salary, or termination. 
(2)  Suspend any employee with or without pay pending an investigation in which the employee is accused of misconduct if the police chief or the police chief's designee determines that the suspension is in the best interest of the department, the public welfare or accused employee. 
(3)  Cause an investigation into an employee's conduct when the employee's conduct indicates probable cause for disciplinary action. 
(4)  Develop other necessary procedures for the implementation of the rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2002-80, §§ 1, 2, 11-8-02) 
Sec. 98-26.1. - Community policing training and preparedness program (CoPTAP). 
Notwithstanding the foregoing section 98-26 and any and all contrary ordinances, rules, regulations, policies, practices, or procedures, all members of each class of graduates from the police academy, shall be assigned to foot patrol duty for a period of not less than eight weeks. In cases of public emergency which threatens life, health, property or public safety, said police officers may be temporarily reassigned in response to such extreme emergency in the discretion of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2008-29(07-O-2137), § 1, 5-19-08) 
Sec. 98-27. - Functions and duties of department. 
The functions and duties of the department of police are as follows: 
(1)  Preserve the public peace and good order of the city by the enforcement of applicable laws and ordinances. 
(2)  Conduct community relations programs. 
(3)  Conduct crime prevention programs. 
(4)  Protect the rights of persons and property. 
(5)  Administer licensing procedures for all licenses issued under the police powers of the city. 
(6)  Enforce all ordinances applicable to licenses and permits issued under the police powers of the city. 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, app. IV, § 45. 
Sec. 98-28. - Hiring and firing authority; qualifications of chief. 
(a)  The police chief is the hiring and firing authority for the department of police, subject to applicable ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(b)  In addition to the qualifications set out in Charter, appendix IV, section 3(a), the police chief shall possess experience at a senior supervisory level in the administration and management of police services. The experience must have been gained by virtue of previous government employment. 
Charter reference— Additional qualifications of police chief, app. IV, § 43. 
Sec. 98-29. - Bureau of taxicabs and vehicles for hire. 
(a)  The department of police shall contain the bureau of taxicabs and vehicles for hire. 
(b)  The functions and duties of the bureau of taxicabs and vehicles for hire shall include all matters related to inspecting, licensing and regulating taxicabs and vehicles for hire and enforcing provisions of law pertaining to such vehicles. 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, app. IV, §§ 44, 46. 
Cross reference— Vehicles for hire, ch. 162. 
Sec. 98-30. - Qualifications of director, bureau of taxicabs and vehicles for hire. 
In addition to the general qualifications set out in Charter, appendix IV, section 3(a), the director, bureau of taxicabs and vehicles for hire shall have the following qualifications: 
(1)  Graduation from an accredited college or university with a baccalaureate degree and one year of graduate study in business administration, public administration or a related field and three years of supervisory or subsupervisory experience. Experience must have included fleet management, transportation maintenance, management or administration of a regulatory agency or a related area; 
(2)  Eight years of experience at a supervisory level which include five years in the areas specified in subsection (1) of this section; or 
(3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications stated in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
Sec. 98-31. - Police recruits. 
(a)  The police chief or a designee shall select police recruits from the eligible list, in the order of grade rating on this list, and these selections shall be made in accordance with applicable civil service laws, rules and regulations. 
(b)  Any person selected as a police recruit shall be duly notified and, upon accepting and reporting for duty, shall be appointed for a probationary period that shall commence upon appointment and continue until six months after the completion of the required training at the police academy. 
(c)  If the conduct and efficiency shall at any time during the probationary period be unsatisfactory to the police chief or the chief's designee, the person shall be notified in writing, relieved from duty and the person's name stricken from the list. If the person's services during this probationary period shall have been satisfactory to the chief, the person shall be so notified in writing, and the person's name shall be placed on the list of regular police officers. 
Sec. 98-32. - Assignments to certain positions without competitive examination. 
The police chief or the chief's designee is authorized, in that official's discretion, to make assignments to the positions of investigator, senior police officer, major or deputy chief, without reference to competitive examination or eligible lists. Any investigator, senior police officer, major or deputy chief so designated may be removed or transferred at the pleasure of the police chief. Such person so removed or transferred shall thereupon resume the nondiscretionary rank or title in the department of police held immediately prior to such person's discretionary assignment as an investigator, senior police officer, major or deputy chief. Such person shall be notified in writing of the removal or transfer. 
Sec. 98-33. - Chaplains. 
(a)  The police chief or the chief's designees shall have the authority to allow chaplains in the department of police to utilize city-owned vehicles so long as the use is in the performance of the functions and duties of the department. 
(b)  Chaplains in the department of police who are authorized by the police chief to utilize city-owned vehicles shall be subject to chapter 2, article XII of this Code. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, a chaplain in the department of police is a person who is appointed by the police chief to perform designated services in regard to the functions and duties of the department without remuneration. 
Sec. 98-34. - Police guards. 
(a)  Classification created. The classification of police guard is created in the department of police. 
(b)  Status, qualifications, compensation. A police guard shall be a temporary employee of the department of police of good character and good health, who shall serve at the pleasure of the police chief. 
(c)  Uniform, badge. A police guard shall be permitted to wear the regular uniform of the department of police together with a badge of the department of police and a shoulder patch marked "police guard" while engaged in the performance of duties. 
(d)  Control, supervision, function. When employed, a police guard shall be subject to control and direction by the superior officers of the department of police and shall at all times obey any lawful command or order issued by them. A guard may be assigned to guard duty anywhere in the city, to assist the regular police officers in the performance of regular duties. 
(e)  Employment by police chief. The police chief shall have the power and authority to employ as many police guards as there are regular position vacancies existing in the department of police from time to time, subject to any ordinance or civil service regulation governing temporary appointments. 
(f)  Ineligibility for benefits. A police guard shall be employed only on a part-time and a temporary basis and shall not be entitled to any of the benefits of civil service, group insurance, pension benefits or other benefits accorded regular police officers. 
Sec. 98-35. - Uniforms. 
(a)  Sworn employees. The city council shall provide a uniform or uniform allowance each year to the sworn uniformed employees of the department of police, the costs thereof, or the sum to be paid, not to exceed $800.00. In lieu of providing uniforms to sworn employees who do not wear uniforms as a result of their assignments, the city council shall pay the sum of $800.00 per year, half all sums payable pursuant to this section to be paid in April of each year and half in October. 
(b)  Civilian employees. The city council shall provide for a uniform or uniform allowance each year to non-sworn personnel of the police department who are required to wear uniforms the cost thereof not to exceed $300.00 per year, to be provided at the discretion of chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1997-43, § 2, 8-11-97; Ord. No. 2015-52(15-O-1452), § 1, 10-28-15 ) 
Sec. 98-36. - Evaluation of employee's mental or physical fitness. 
The police chief is authorized to order an employee of the department of police to submit to an evaluation of the employee's mental or physical fitness for duty, when there is an articulable basis to suspect that an employee may be physically or mentally impaired. If such an evaluation reveals possible impairment, the police chief may make whatever administrative reassignment deemed necessary by the police chief and seek approval from the commissioner of personnel and human resources to invoke the disability process set forth in chapter 114, article IV, division 12 of this Code. 
Sec. 98-37. - Employee grievances. 
It is the policy of the department of police to process and, hopefully, resolve all employee grievances in a manner that is fair and equitable, within as short a timeframe as reasonably possible. To that end, grievances filed by employees of the police department will be addressed pursuant to the procedures and timeframes set out in chapter 114, article VI, division 2 of this Code. 
Sec. 98-38. - Arrest powers. 
The police shall have arrest powers in accordance with local, state and federal law. 
Sec. 98-39. - Crimes manifesting evidence of prejudice. 
(a)  The police chief or the chief's designee shall acquire data on the incidence of criminal acts that manifest evidence of prejudice based on based upon the victim's, or the perception of the victim's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, HIV/AIDS infection, or disability. The crimes with respect to which such data shall be acquired are as follows: homicide, involuntary manslaughter, aggravated assault, simple assault, simple battery, robbery, armed robbery, aggravated battery, burglary, disorderly conduct, aggravated sodomy, rape, theft, arson, vandalism, trespass, criminal defamation, false imprisonment, terroristic threats, damage to or vandalism of property and such other crimes the police chief considers appropriate. 
(b)  The police chief or the chief's designee shall establish guidelines for the collection of such data, including the necessary evidence and criteria that must be present for finding of evidence of prejudice, and establish procedures for carrying out the purposes of this section. 
(c)  The police chief shall provide training for police officers in identifying, responding to and reporting all criminal offenses motivated by prejudice based on based upon the victim's, or the perception of the victim's race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, HIV/AIDS infection, or disability. 
(d)  The police chief or the chief's designee shall quarterly publish a statistical summary of data acquired under this section. A copy of the data shall be made available for public review at the office of the municipal clerk of the city and at the central branch of the county public library. 
(Ord. No. 1997-17, 4-14-97; Ord. No. 2000-77, 12-12-00) 
Sec. 98-40. - Authority to claim compensation or property due because of information provided to federal or state agencies. 
(a)  The police chief shall be authorized to act on behalf of the city to claim compensation or property due to the city by virtue of information provided to the Internal Revenue Service, the state department of revenue or similar agencies, by agents of the department of police, pursuant to 26 USC 7623 or any similar provisions under state law or due to the city pursuant to state and federal forfeiture statutes or any similar state or federal statute. 
(b)  Any such information or evidence provided or secured through investigations conducted by agents or officers of the department of police shall remain the property of the state or city or the United States in accordance with state and United States law. 
(c)  Any such compensation paid to the city by virtue of information provided or secured through investigations conducted by agents of the department of police shall be paid directly into such account maintained for the benefit of law enforcement activities by the department of police, and all property so received shall be entrusted to disposal or utilization by the police chief or the chief's designee. 
Sec. 98-41. - Reward fund for drug convictions. 
(a)  The police chief is authorized to establish a reward fund for persons who provide the department of police with information which results in the arrest and conviction of persons for violation of the drug laws of the state, when such arrest and conviction is investigated and prosecuted by the department of police. The reward to any such person claiming such reward shall be in an amount not to exceed $500.00 for each case for which information is provided. 
(b)  The police chief is authorized to receive on behalf of the city donations from the public to establish this reward fund and to pay such rewards in accordance with the exhibit B attached to the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(c)  The identity of any person who provides information pursuant to this section shall be confidential. The chief financial officer, in conjunction with the police chief or the chief's designee, shall establish methods of payment of any such rewards so as to maintain the confidentiality of any such person; further, all donations received on behalf of the city for this reward fund shall be deposited in the city trust fund and held for disbursement in accordance with the methods of payment determined by the chief financial officer and the police chief or the designees of those officials. 
Sec. 98-42. - Physical fitness program. 
(a)  There is established a program of physical fitness for all officers and employees of the department of police. The police chief, after having consulted with professionals in the field of physical fitness, shall be responsible for the implementation and administration of the program. The program may include but not be limited to voluntary participation by officers and employees in organized sports activities such as basketball, football, baseball, softball and individual sports such as boxing, wrestling, golf, bowling and tennis. 
(b)  The police chief is authorized to establish and implement a program of organized calisthenics which shall be supplemental to any voluntary activities on the part of department of police employees, and these calisthenics shall be engaged in under the direction of the chief or the chief's designee during regular hours of duty and shall be carried on only at those locations designated by the chief. 
(c)  The departments and agencies of the city are authorized and directed to cooperate and assist, upon the request of the police chief, in the implementation and conduct of the physical fitness program. 
(d)  The police chief shall ascertain a valid test standard respecting individual physical fitness and shall, annually, examine all officers and employees of the department of police participating in the program and shall maintain records in a manner so as to reflect individual and departmental employee improvements in physical fitness. 
(e)  All donations and contributions received from participants in the program and from others shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. All funds to be used for implementing and conducting the program shall be appropriated in the same manner as other city funds, and the expenditures for the purposes of the program shall be first approved as provided by the Charter. 
(f)  The police chief or the chief's designee shall require of every person participating in the program with respect to team or individual sports, as provided for in this section, prior to such person so participating and in consideration of allowing such person to so participate, the execution by such participant of a written release, waiver and renouncement of any and all liability, claims and causes of action against the city, the officers and employees of the city, which such participant may have with respect to any injury or damage such participant might receive or incur while so participating, including but without limitation disability in line of duty or death in line of duty benefits under the pension laws governing the pension fund of which such participant may be a member. 
(g)  Should any temporary total disability result from such voluntary participation by an officer or employee of the city in the program of supervised activity, as provided for in this section, the police chief is authorized to provide for medical care and treatment the same as for on-duty injuries and shall further be authorized to designate, pursuant to written medical authorization, that the temporary absence from regular duty is physical fitness injury (P-F-I), and the employee shall be so designated upon the payroll records and entitled to salary benefits as provided employees injured while on duty. 
Sec. 98-43. - Police benevolent association. 
(a)  Authority to establish. The department of police is authorized to provide for the establishment and creation of an association for benevolent purposes among the employees of the department of police. Five trustees or directors of the association shall be elected from the employees of the department of police, and they shall serve as the governing body of the association. 
(b)  Source of funds. The police chief is authorized to direct all revenues from vending machines located in police facilities to the benevolent association and to provide that these funds will be used only for retirement gifts and other similar purposes. 
(c)  Use of funds. The governing body of the association shall be authorized to direct the use of the revenue for retirement gifts and other benevolent purposes that benefit all employees of the department of police. 
Sec. 98-44. - Fees for copying records. 
(a)  The charges for copying records of the department of police shall be as established in chapter 2, article XIV of this Code. 
(b)  Fees so collected shall be accounted for and paid into the city treasury. 
(c)  Persons designated as victims in the victim data section of the police report shall not be required to pay a fee for the first copy of the offense reports. 
Cross reference— Records management, § 2-1781 et seq. 
Sec. 98-45. - Fees for furnishing information about criminal history record. 
(a)  The police chief is authorized to make a charge as established in chapter 2, article XIV of this Code for furnishing information as to criminal history records created by or in the custody of the department of police. 
(b)  Fees so collected shall be accounted for by the department of police and shall be forwarded to the department of finance to be paid into the city's treasury through the medium of a miscellaneous receipt. 
(Code 1977, § 11-2017) 
Cross reference— Records management, § 2-1781 et seq. 
Sec. 98-46. - Fees for fingerprinting services. 
(a)  The department of police is authorized to charge a fee of $20.00 for each set of fingerprint cards produced and authenticated by the department. 
(b)  Fees so collected shall be accounted for by the department of police and shall be forwarded to the department of finance to be paid into the city's treasury though the medium of a miscellaneous receipt. 
(c)  Persons requiring fingerprinting services due to their status as applicants for employment with the City of Atlanta shall not be required to pay a fee for these fingerprinting services. 
(Ord. No. 2008-55(08-O-0878), § 2, 7-14-08) 
Sec. 98-47. - Candidates addressing employees at police facilities. 
It shall be unlawful for candidates for any office, public or private, to address employees of the department of police at any police facility. The police chief, deputy chiefs, majors or other officers in charge of the facility are directed to prevent and prohibit any speaking by candidates advocating their election to office. It is not the intention of this section to prevent candidates for office from visiting any facility and speaking to individual employees of the department of police, but it shall be unlawful for them to make public speeches or to converse with the members to such an extent as to interfere with the discharge of their duties. It shall be the duty of the police chief, deputy chief or majors and other officers in charge of the facility to see that compliance with this section is enforced and that no one, by public speaking, personal consultation or otherwise, shall obstruct or interfere with any police officer in the discharge of the officer's duties. 
(Ord. No. 2008-55(08-O-0878), § 1, 7-14-08) 
Note— Formerly § 98-46. 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 66. 
Sec. 98-48. - Issuance and revocation of press or media identification cards. 
(a)  Issuance. The police chief or the chief's designee is authorized to issue press or media identification cards entitling the holder thereof to pass police lines for the purpose of gathering and editing spot news or photographing news events in the city. Such press or media identification cards shall be issued to those engaged in gathering reports, editing or photographing current news events for newspapers, press associations, newsreels, television stations and radio stations. 
(b)  Revocation. 
(1)  The police chief or the chief's designee is vested with the authority to revoke any press or media identification card for improper use thereof by the holder, and upon notice thereof to the employer it shall be the duty of the holder and the employer to immediately surrender the press or media identification card so revoked. 
(2)  Any abuse or willful violation of these stipulations by the holder or the employer may result in revocation of the card. 
(3)  A revoked card may not be reinstated to a media representative without a letter from the representative's employer stating why the card should be reinstated. Reinstatement of a revoked media identification card will then be left to the discretion of the police chief or the chief's designee. 
(c)  Penalty. No person shall counterfeit or imitate or attempt to counterfeit or to imitate any such press or media identification card so issued by the police chief or the chief's designee nor shall any person use or exhibit or attempt to use or exhibit any such press or media identification card or any card similar in appearance thereto for the purpose of obtaining press privileges or of passing police lines without authority of the police chief or the chief's designee nor shall any person represent that such person is a holder of such press or media identification card, unless such person is the actual authorized holder. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be subject to a fine up to $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2008-55(08-O-0878), § 1, 7-14-08) 
Note— Formerly § 98-47. 
Sec. 98-49. - Destruction of dangerous or deadly weapons used in commission of crimes. 
(a)  Any bludgeon, metal knuckles, firearm or knife, designed for the purpose of offense and defense, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like kind used in the commission of a crime is declared to be a nuisance per se. 
(b)  The police chief is authorized and directed to destroy all dangerous or deadly weapons used in the commission of a crime. The police chief or a designee shall wait one year from date of conviction or after the exhaustion of any appeals related to the case before destroying the weapon. 
(c)  Whenever the department of police or any of the officers thereof receive or take pistols, knives, metal knuckles and similar weapons as unclaimed property or from prisoners or others, these weapons shall not be sold by the department of police or any of the officers thereof, but they shall be destroyed. The police chief or the chief's designee shall be authorized to destroy these weapons. 
(Ord. No. 2008-55(08-O-0878), § 1, 7-14-08) 
Note— Formerly § 98-48. 
Sec. 98-50. - Disposal of stolen property. 
Any property which may be obtained or received by the police from persons who have stolen it or otherwise shall be disposed of in the following manner: 
(1)  Sale authorized. The police chief or the chief's designee is authorized to sell unclaimed property at public auction pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section. All the property shall be taken to the property management section and safely kept for 60 days. If after that time it shall be unclaimed by persons making satisfactory proof of title, the police chief shall, for two days, put an advertisement in the newspaper in which the city's advertisements are published, describing the property to be sold in lots, and giving such information about the property as will put the owner or other persons having knowledge thereof on notice that, at the expiration of 20 days, the property will be subject to sale. The advertisement shall also state the time and place the property shall be sold and that the proceeds shall be turned in to the city treasury. The advertisement shall also state that, within 20 days of the last advertisement provided for in this subsection, any person making satisfactory proof of title or any person who shall claim title to the property advertised shall have the right to request a hearing before the police chief or a designee to establish, by evidence, proof of title to the property claimed. Upon request for a hearing, the police chief or a designee, shall, within ten days, set a time and place for the hearing and shall notify the person claiming title to the advertised property of the hearing. If there is no request for a hearing within the time specified in this subsection, or if at the time set for a hearing there is no satisfactory proof of ownership, the police chief is authorized to proceed with a sale of the property. 
(2)  Records required. The police chief shall keep a complete record showing when the property came into the possession of the department of police, where it was found or from whom it was taken, a description of the property, when it is claimed and by whom or when advertised and when and for what amount sold. 
(3)  Disposition of proceeds. All money arising from these sales shall be turned over to the chief financial officer. 
(4)  Police use of unclaimed property. The property which has been processed, for sale at public auction, as provided by this section, may in the discretion of the police chief be utilized by the department of police with records of the property's disposition maintained as provided by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2008-55(08-O-0878), § 1, 7-14-08) 
Note— Formerly § 98-49. 
Sec. 98-51. - Donations of horses and dogs for police purposes. 
(a)  The police chief is authorized to accept donations of horses and dogs from private donors on behalf of the city for legitimate police uses and purposes, after suitability has been established by the department of police, and to institute appropriate inventory controls which allow for practical and humane disposition of animals which are determined to be no longer suited to police uses and purposes. 
(b)  The police chief shall develop an appropriate standard operating procedure governing the acceptance of horses and dogs from private donors and the humane disposition of such horses and dogs. 
(Ord. No. 2008-55(08-O-0878), § 1, 7-14-08) 
Note— Formerly § 98-50. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 
Sec. 98-52. - Authorization for the chief of police to administer oath of office for sworn police officers. 
The police chief or the chief's designee is authorized, in accordance with Georgia law, to administer the oath of office to all sworn police officers employed by the City of Atlanta. When taken, the officer shall sign the official oath and copies thereof shall be filed with the Fulton County Probate Court and in the personnel records of the officer so sworn. That oath shall take the following form: 
I, ___________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am duly qualified, according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia, to perform the duties imposed upon me as a Police Officer of the City of Atlanta, Georgia, and that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the duties thereof, and preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States of America and the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
I swear that I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I am prohibited from holding by the laws of the State of Georgia, nor am I the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof. 
I further swear that I will enforce the criminal laws of the State of Georgia and the ordinances of the City of Atlanta, abide by the rules and standard operating procedures governing the Atlanta Police Department, adhere to the Law Enforcement Code of Ethics published by the International Association of Chiefs of Police, and uphold the Ethics Code of the City of Atlanta. In doing so, I will be mindful of the trust that has been placed in me to improve the quality of life and make every effort to live up to that trust. I will not persecute the innocent, nor help to shield the guilty, nor will I be influenced in the discharge of my duties by fear, favor, or affection, reward, or the hope thereof. So help me God. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 74, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2004-15, § 1, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 2006-70, § 1, 10-11-06; Ord. No. 2008-55(08-O-0878), § 1, 7-14-08) 
Note— Formerly § 98-51. 
Sec. 98-53. - Office of code enforcement. 
(a)  The department of police shall contain the office of code enforcement. 
(b)  The functions and duties of the office of code enforcement shall include: 
(1)  Administration and enforcement of The Atlanta Housing Code; 
(2)  Administration and enforcement of The Atlanta Commercial, Institutional, and Industrial Building Maintenance Code; 
(3)  Administration and enforcement of housing demolition and in rem activities. 
(Ord. No. 2011-57(11-O-1768), § 4, 12-14-11) 
Secs. 98-54—98-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROMOTION POLICY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Supplemental provisions pertaining to police promotions, § 114-226 et seq. 

Sec. 98-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appointing authority means the police chief. 
Appointing rule means the process by which selections are to be made from among candidates on an eligible list. 
Atlanta Police Leadership Institute means a program of the Atlanta Police Department focused on developing an Atlanta Police Department sworn employee's leadership skills through the provision of advanced law enforcement leadership training and employee development opportunities throughout a sworn employee's progression through the ranks of the Atlanta Police Department. 
Discretionary ranks means ranks to which appointments are not controlled by this division and to which appointments can be made at the discretion of the police chief. 
Eligible means a sworn employee who meets requirements for a rank and whose name is on an eligible list. 
Eligible list means a list of the names of employees who have competed for a rank of employment and are qualified to be appointed, listed in rank order according to the results of the examination process. 
Examinations means selection procedures used to determine the relative qualifications of applicants for promotion. 
Minimum qualifications means the requirements established in the rank specification for experience and demonstration of the necessary proficiencies in a lower rank in order to compete for promotion. 
Probationary employee means an employee who has been appointed to a rank from an eligible list but who has not successfully completed a 12-month probationary period in the rank. 
Probationary period means a period of 12 months following a promotional appointment during which the police chief, in consultation with designated subordinate commanders, determines whether or not the probationary employee has the requisite knowledge, skills and abilities necessary to perform the work behaviors of the rank at an acceptable level. The probationary period is considered a noncompetitive part of the examination for the rank. 
Rank means a group of positions which have similar duties and responsibilities, require similar qualifications, can be designated by a single title indicative of the level of responsibility of the positions and for which the same schedule of pay is applicable. 
Rank specification means a written document based upon an applicable job analysis which shall include but not be limited to descriptions of the responsibilities and work of the rank; illustrative examples for each of the major functional responsibilities within the rank; a description of the critical work behaviors of the rank and the knowledge, skills and abilities necessary for the performance of such work behaviors; and the minimum qualifications necessary in order to compete for the rank. 
Status means the condition of a sworn member who has acquired a rank in the manner established by this division and by the overall provisions of Chapter 114, which condition is retained by a probationary employee in the employee's lower rank unless the probationary period for the new rank is completed successfully and status in the new rank is gained. Sworn employees who fail their probationary period shall be returned to a position in their rank in which they have continued to have status during the probationary evaluation portion of the examination. 
Sworn member means an employee in the department of police, as established by the definition of the unclassified service contained in section 114-76. 
( Ord. No. 2015-19(15-O-1172), § 1, 5-27-15 ) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-62. - Scope. 
This division sets forth the rules and procedures to be followed by the police chief in making promotional decisions within the department of police. The rules and procedures are designed to establish a promotional system that provides for the selection of superior officers based solely upon merit and fitness for promotion, as ascertained by job-related and valid selection procedures developed in accordance with the governing legal guidelines and appropriate professional standards. 
Sec. 98-63. - Applicability. 
The rules and procedures in this division shall apply to promotions in the department of police to the ranks of police sergeant and lieutenant. 
(Ord. No. 2010-34(10-O-0952), § 1, 6-30-10) 
Sec. 98-64. - Ranking of members. 
(a)  Sworn members of the department of police in the nondiscretionary ranks of police officer, sergeant, lieutenant and captain on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be given status in the nondiscretionary ranks they hold as of that date. Sworn members of the department of police holding discretionary ranks on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be given status in the nondiscretionary ranks they held at the time they were appointed to the most recent discretionary ranks. 
(b)  Effective July 1, 2010, the rank of Police Captain was reclassified as a discretionary rank. 
(Ord. No. 2010-34(10-O-0952), § 2, 6-30-10) 
Sec. 98-65. - Amendments. 
Amendments to this division may be recommended to the city council by the police chief or initiated by the city council. In determining such recommendations the police chief, at the chief's discretion, may hold hearings at which time both proponents and opponents of proposed amendments can be heard. Notice of any hearing shall be posted by the police chief at least two weeks in advance of such hearing at all permanent installations of the department of police, in such a manner as to ensure that notice is readily accessible to everyone in the department of police. 
Sec. 98-66. - Rank specification. 
For each rank covered by this division there shall be created a document known as the rank specification, which shall be approved by the police chief. A rank specification shall not be inconsistent with the written job description developed by the commissioner of personnel and human resources in compliance with chapter 114, article IV, division 2, of the civil service rules and regulations; however, the rank specification shall go beyond the written job description in defining the work behaviors of the rank and the knowledge, skills and abilities required to perform those work behaviors as may be required in the development of content-valid examinations, in that the written job description is primarily a classification and pay document, while the rank specification is primarily an examination document. 
Sec. 98-67. - Review and amendment of rank specification. 
Prior to the announcement of an examination process for a rank, the police chief shall thoroughly review the rank specification and make any amendments to the rank specification deemed appropriate. The rank specification in effect at the time an examination procedure is announced shall be provided to all eligible candidates, along with the examination announcement. 
Sec. 98-68. - Notice of examination. 
The police chief, under this division, shall give notice of each examination, at least 120 days in advance of the date of administering the first competitive part of the examination, by posting a notice thereof in all permanent installations of the department of police. The announcement shall state the rank for which the examination is being held, the official announcement posting date, the last date and manner for making application for admission to the examination, the examination parts to be used in the competition and the weights for each part, the study lists and any other information which the police chief considers pertinent and useful. A copy of the current rank specification shall also be posted with the announcement in each permanent installation. 
Sec. 98-69. - Application for examination. 
All sworn members of the department of police who wish to apply for a promotional examination must file a written application on the form prescribed by the police chief within 30 days of the date the announcement is officially posted. 
Sec. 98-70. - Qualifications for eligibility. 
(a)  The rank specification, defined in section 98-61, shall designate the lower ranks from which promotions can be made provided that: 
(1)  To be eligible to compete for the rank of police sergeant, an applicant must have had at least five years continuous service as a sworn member with the department of police immediately prior to the last date for filing an application; and 
(2)  To be eligible to compete for all nondiscretionary ranks above police sergeant, the sworn member must have had at least two years continuous service in the department of police immediately prior to date of administering the first competitive part of the examination, in a lower rank from which promotions can be made, as set forth in the rank specifications. 
(b)  The years of continuous service needed to be eligible to compete can be achieved by service either in a nondiscretionary rank, as set forth in the rank specification, or in a discretionary rank, as long as the total service equals or exceeds the requisite minimum number of years to compete and the time in the discretionary rank is being served immediately prior to date of administering the first competitive part of the examination. 
(c)  A sworn member holding a discretionary rank who wishes to compete in an examination shall be eligible to take an examination only for the next highest rank above the nondiscretionary rank in which such sworn member holds status. 
(d)  In addition to the requirements contained in this section, a sworn member holding either a discretionary or non-discretionary rank, who wishes to compete in an examination, must successfully complete the Atlanta Police Leadership Institute's leadership development program prior to the application period for an examination process. It shall be the duty of the police chief to issue administrative regulations governing the Atlanta Police Leadership Institute. 
(Ord. No. 2009-44(09-O-1177), s; 1, 7-28-09; Ord. No. 2011-23(11-O-0939), § 1, 6-29-11; Ord. No. 2011-36(11-O-1141), § 3, 8-24-11; Ord. No. 2015-19(15-O-1172), § 2, 5-27-15 ) 
Sec. 98-71. - Disqualification from examination process. 
(a)  The police chief shall disqualify a sworn member from an examination process under this division when the police chief has determined that: 
(1)  The application was not filed within the period specified by the examination announcement; 
(2)  The sworn member lacks the required length of continuous service at a lower rank necessary to be eligible to compete; 
(3)  The sworn member, after sufficient and proper notification, did not properly appear at the time and place designated for each part of the examination; or 
(4)  The sworn member has been suspended five or more days, whether consecutive or not, for violation of the rules and regulations of the department of police within 24 months of the last date for filing applications, and all administrative appeals relating to such suspension have been adjudicated. 
(b)  Should the police chief disqualify a sworn member, written notification of the reasons for that action shall be given to the sworn member by the police chief no later than 30 days before the first competitive part is scheduled or five days before the next competitive part is scheduled in the case of disqualification under subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
Sec. 98-72. - Merit and fitness of members. 
All promotions to ranks covered by this division shall be made in accordance with the relative merit and fitness of the sworn members competing. Merit and fitness shall be ascertained by competitive examination. All examinations and examination parts shall be fair, impartial and developed in accordance with professional standards and legal guidelines and shall relate to those matters which will fairly test the relative capacities and fitness of the sworn members to discharge efficiently the duties of the rank to be filled. 
Sec. 98-73. - Concealing identity of member taking examination. 
The identity of every sworn member taking a written test under this division shall be concealed by the use of a numbered identification system. The identity of any candidate shall not be revealed until all written test papers have been scored and the minimum passing score set in accordance with this division. Any sworn member whose written test paper bears the member's name or any other identifying mark or any sworn member who reveals an identification number to the police chief or to any employee of the department of police shall be disqualified from further competition and shall be so notified. 
Sec. 98-74. - Methods for rating results of examinations. 
Appropriate scientific techniques, developed in accordance with professional testing standards, shall be used in rating the results of all examination parts and interpreting the relative ratings of the competitors under this division. 
Sec. 98-75. - Effect of failure to pass all parts of examination. 
Under this division, in order for the name of a sworn member to appear on an eligible list, the sworn member must pass each part of the examination. Each sworn member who fails to attain the minimum passing score on any part of the examination shall be considered to have failed the examination and shall not be eligible to compete in any further part of the examination or to attain a rank on the eligible list. 
Sec. 98-76. - Establishment of minimum passing score on examination. 
A professional in test development shall determine the minimum passing score on any written multiple-choice test used as part of an examination under this division. The determination will be based on appropriate scientific and professional procedures and will be reported to the police chief. The police chief shall approve the minimum passing score and shall do so before the identity of any competitor is known. The minimum passing score on formal, structured oral interviews or other separately scored assessment exercises shall be defined by the rating scale used. 
Sec. 98-77. - Weighting parts of examination. 
If the examination process under this division has more than one competitive part, the official announcement shall state the weight to be assigned to each part. The weights shall be stated as percentages, and the total weight of all parts of an examination process shall equal 100 percent. Each candidate passing all parts of the examination process shall have the final score computed in accordance with these weights and in accordance with appropriate scientific procedures, so that the stated weights are accurately reflected. 
Sec. 98-78. - Order of names for eligible list. 
Under this division, the order of names of passing candidates on the eligible list shall be determined by the final examination score computed as set forth in section 98-76. Final examination scores will be rounded off to three decimal places. If, thereafter, a tie still exists it will remain unbroken. 
Sec. 98-79. - Notice of results of examination. 
A sworn member who competes in any part of an examination under this division shall be given written notice of the results of each part and of the entire examination. The notice shall include the sworn member's score for each part, and, if the member passes, the member's rank on the eligible list shall be given after the eligible list is established. A sworn member who fails an examination part shall be notified of that fact, along with the score, before the next examination part is administered. 
Sec. 98-80. - Maintenance and contents of active eligible list. 
The police chief shall maintain an active eligible list for all ranks covered by this division. Each list shall contain the names of those candidates who passed the entire examination process and each such candidate's final examination score and rank on the eligible list. Eligible lists become effective on the date approved by the police chief. 
Sec. 98-81. - Expiration of eligible list. 
Eligible lists under this division, unless earlier exhausted, shall be in effect for 24 months from the date the list was approved by the police chief in accordance with section 98-79. Eligible lists shall not be extended beyond their expiration date, and all vacancies existing on the expiration date shall be filled from the eligible list; however, section 98-83(b) shall still apply. A new examination announcement, as provided for in section 98-67, will be published within a reasonable time after a list is exhausted as determined by the commissioner of human resources 180 days before the expiration of a list or after a list is exhausted, which ever shall be earlier. When a new examination announcement has not been published following the expiration of a list, a written notice explaining the reasons for such failure to publish a new announcement shall be given to all members of the department of police, the mayor and the appropriate legislative oversight committee within 30 days after a list has expired. 
(Ord. No. 2011-36(11-O-1141), § 4, 8-24-11) 
Sec. 98-82. - Member's review of examination; appeal and correction of incorrect answers. 
(a)  A sworn member of the department of police who competes in a written multiple choice test, as provided by this division, shall have the right to review a photocopy of the member's answer sheet, along with a copy of the written test booklet and a copy of the correct answer to each written test question. The review shall be held under the direct supervision of a professional in test development used by the police chief to administer the written test, and it shall be held as soon as practicable after the written test administration date, but, in any case, it shall occur within no more than ten days after the written test has been administered. 
(b)  Sworn members will be allowed to appeal to the test developer, in writing, any answer to a written test question other than the one specified as being the correct answer. The professional developing the test shall consider all such appeals and, if it is deemed justified, make such necessary corrections to the scoring key before reporting the final written scores to the police chief. The testing professional shall be required to document the reasons for recommending any changes to the original scoring key, as well as the reasons for rejecting any appeal submitted by a sworn member. 
(c)  The police chief may approve or disapprove the recommendations of the testing professional. If the police chief's action requires that the answer sheets be rescored, such rescoring will be done for all candidates by the professional test developer and reported back to the police chief before the identity of any candidate is made known to anyone. The police chief shall notify all candidates of both the professional test developer's recommendations regarding all appeals and the police chief's determination. 
(d)  Because of the need to use written tests which have been professionally developed and validated in accordance with both professional standards and legal guidelines, all sworn members reviewing test papers are expressly forbidden from taking any test material, review material or any written notes from the review room. To the extent practicable, reference material used in developing the written test will be made available to members during the review period. 
Sec. 98-83. - Certification of top five eligible members. 
(a)  When a vacancy exists in a rank covered by this division, the police chief shall certify the names of the five members who stand highest on the eligible list. The names of all members who, after seniority is applied, still remain in an unbroken tie with the five highest members certified shall also be certified. If more than one vacancy exists, the police chief shall certify one additional sworn member for each additional vacancy, including all members in unbroken ties with the last additional member to be certified. The police chief may appoint any of the certified members as the police chief deems to be in the best interest of the department of police. 
(b)  When the number of names remaining on an eligible list is less than five, the police chief may decline to make an appointment and may request that a new examination procedure be administered. If this occurs, the eligible list shall be considered exhausted in accordance with section 98-80, notwithstanding the fact that there are still vacancies in existence. 
Sec. 98-84. - Removal from eligible list. 
(a)  The police chief shall remove the name of a sworn member from an eligible list under this division due to any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Receipt of a written request from the sworn member. 
(2)  Refusal to accept a promotional appointment. 
(3)  Termination of the sworn member's employment with the department of police. 
(4)  Suspension of five or more days, whether it is consecutive or not, for a violation of the rules and regulations of the department of police. 
(5)  The discovery, after the eligible list has been established, that the sworn member would have been rejected under other sections of this division had the information so discovered been known before the eligible list was promulgated. 
(6)  Failure to complete the probationary period as provided in section 98-85. 
(b)  Whenever a sworn member's name is removed from an eligible list, written notice of such action and the reason for that action shall be given to the sworn member by the police chief within five days of the date the action is taken. 
(c)  Removal from eligible lists established under this division is not appealable through the civil service board. 
Sec. 98-85. - Probationary period. 
(a)  Every promoted sworn member of the department of police shall serve a 12-month probationary period to be regarded as an integral noncompetitive part of the examination process. 
(b)  A sworn member filling a discretionary rank at the time of promotion to a nondiscretionary rank, in accordance with this division, shall have the time successfully served in the discretionary rank count toward the required 12-month probationary period, provided such service was immediately prior to promotion to the nondiscretionary rank. Time successfully served in the discretionary rank after the date of promotion to the nondiscretionary rank shall also be credited as part of the 12-month probationary period required to attain status in the nondiscretionary rank. 
(c)  The probationary period shall be utilized for closely observing how well a probationary employee performs the work and responsibility of the higher level rank and for securing the most accurate judgments as to whether or not the probationary employee's performance meets required work standards at the higher level rank. It shall be the duty of the police chief to issue administrative regulations governing the probationary evaluation process. 
(d)  At least 30 days prior to the completion of the 12-month probationary period, the police chief shall determine whether or not the probationary employee should receive status in the higher rank. If the probationary employee is deemed to have passed the probationary period and is to be given status in the rank, the employee shall be notified of such decision no later than 15 days before the expiration of the 12-month probationary period. 
(e)  At any time during the probationary period, the police chief may remove a promoted sworn member whose performance does not meet the required work standards and return that member to the rank in which the member has retained status. If such occurs, the police chief shall notify the member in writing that the probationary evaluation part of the examination has been failed and the reason for such failure. Such notification shall be given at least 15 days in advance of the date the action is to be official and in no case later than 15 days before the 12-month probationary period is to expire. Thereafter, the name of a sworn member who failed the probationary evaluation part of the examination shall be removed from the eligible list. 
Secs. 98-86—98-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUXILIARY POLICE UNIT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-301 et seq. 

Sec. 98-106. - Created; composition. 
An auxiliary police unit is created and established as an organization which shall be composed of persons who shall be appointed and sworn in as members thereof. Members shall be volunteer workers only and shall not be deemed to be employees of the city or of the department of police for any purpose and shall serve gratuitously as such for no compensation and without any other benefits of employment as are afforded other city employees, except as specifically set forth in this article. 
Sec. 98-107. - Qualifications of members. 
(a)  The police chief shall establish the requirements to be met by persons to qualify to become members of the auxiliary police unit. Such requirements shall include but need not be limited to physical, mental, aptitude, personality inventory and character standards and the mandatory training of such persons, for a minimum of 80 hours, in the field of police work. It shall be the duty of the police chief to provide such training for such persons and also any further training for members which the police chief may deem to be necessary or desirable. 
(b)  Whenever all of the requirements to qualify to become a member shall have been met by any person, the person may be appointed and sworn in as a member by the police chief or by a person designated by the police chief for such purpose. However, the police chief or any such designated person, with or without cause therefor, need not appoint and swear in any particular person as a member. 
(c)  The police chief, with or without cause, may terminate any member at any time without a hearing, and any member may resign as such at any time by written notification thereof to the police chief. Any member who shall cease to be such shall immediately surrender all property of the city issued to the member pursuant to this article or otherwise. 
(Code 1977, § 11-2086) 
Sec. 98-108. - Training. 
In order to provide special training, including but not limited to professional, technical, physical and academic training, for members of the auxiliary police unit and for the development of morale and esprit de corps, the police chief is authorized and directed to inaugurate and conduct such training and other activities within the department of police to the end that the members of the auxiliary police unit may most efficiently perform their duties as members of the auxiliary police unit. 
Sec. 98-109. - Equipment. 
(a)  Each member of the auxiliary police unit shall be issued, at city expense and at no expense to the member, items as follows: 
(1)  A uniform, which shall not be identical to that issued to a regular police officer; 
(2)  Equipment, which shall include but need not be limited to handcuffs, and a badge, except the badge shall not be identical to those issued to a regular police officer; and 
(3)  An identification card, which shall show the person as being a member. 
(b)  A member shall not be issued a police baton, a firearm or other instrument capable of inflicting deadly force. Further, such members shall not carry any firearm or instrument capable of inflicting deadly force. 
(c)  Each member, while serving as such, shall wear, display or carry, as the case may be, every item, except as provided in this section, which shall have been issued to the person as a member, whether or not mentioned in this section. No member while off duty shall wear, display or carry, as the case may be, any such item of the uniform or equipment, except going to and from duty. No member shall be authorized to wear or display any item of the uniform or equipment for any off-duty function, whether paid or unpaid. 
(d)  Each item which shall be issued to a member, whether or not mentioned in this section, shall remain and be the property of the city. 
Sec. 98-110. - False impersonation. 
It shall be unlawful, punishable as provided in section 1-8, for any person, not a member of the auxiliary police unit to: 
(1)  Wear, display or carry, as the case may be, any item which shall have been issued to any member of the unit. 
(2)  Represent, identify or hold such person out, in any manner whatsoever, to be a member of the unit or to have any connection with the unit. 
Sec. 98-111. - Workers' compensation. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section only, each member of the auxiliary police unit shall be an employee of the city only while serving any assigned shift as a member of the auxiliary police unit or while receiving training as such. 
(b)  If any such member or any such person were to suffer or sustain any illness or injury approximately caused by arising out of and in the course of such member's service or training while an employee of the city, as limited in this section, the member shall be entitled to all of those workers' compensation benefits, no more or no less, as those provided to volunteer firefighters in the state. 
(c)  If any such member or any such person were to die as a result of any illness or injury approximately caused by, arising out of and in the course of such person's service or training while an employee of the city, as limited in this section, such person shall be entitled to all of those workers' compensation benefits, no more or no less, as those workers' compensation benefits provided to volunteer firefighters in the state. 
Sec. 98-112. - Arrests. 
Members of the auxiliary police unit shall not have the general power of arrest accorded regular police officers. Members shall have the power to arrest accorded private persons generally in the state in that they may arrest an offender if the offense is committed in their presence or within their immediate knowledge, or if the offense is a felony and the offender is escaping or attempting to escape, members may arrest upon reasonable and probable grounds of suspicion. 
Sec. 98-113. - Powers to direct traffic. 
Members of the auxiliary police unit shall have the authority to direct, control and regulate traffic as instructed by the police chief or the chief's designee. 
Secs. 98-114—98-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CORRECTIONAL SERVICES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Authority of municipal judge to order persons convicted of offenses to perform work on public property, § 62-41; personnel, ch. 114. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-136. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief means the chief of corrections. 
Department means the department of corrections. 
Detention facilities means city facilities in which inmates are detained, including the pretrial detention center, corrections center, Grady Hospital and city courts. 
Inmate means any person who is confined to a detention facility. 
Jail means the city jail or pretrial detention center. 
Prison means the city prison. 
(Ord. No. 1995-07, § 18, 3-8-95; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-137. - False representation of identity to corrections officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent or identify such person as another person to a sworn corrections officer upon a lawful detention or arrest of the person, with the intent to evade the process of the court or to evade the proper identification of the person by the corrections officer if: 
(1)  The false information is given while the corrections officer is engaged in the lawful discharge of the officer's official duties; and 
(2)  The person providing false information knows or should have known that the person receiving the information is a corrections officer. 
(Code 1977, § 17-12001) 
Sec. 98-138. - Fees for copying of records. 
(a)  The charges for copying records of the department of corrections shall be as established in Chapter 2, Article XIV of this Code. 
(b)  Fees so collected shall be accounted for and paid into the city treasury. 
(Ord. No. 2009-20(09-O-0804), § 1, 5-26-09) 
Secs. 98-139—98-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-301 et seq. 

Sec. 98-151. - Functions and duties. 
The functions and duties of the department of corrections shall include the administration of all city detention facilities as detention, correctional and treatment agencies. 
(Code 1977, § 11-5001(b); Ord. No. 1995-07, § 17, 3-8-95) 
Sec. 98-152. - Hiring and firing authority; qualifications of chief of corrections. 
(a)  The chief of corrections is the hiring and firing authority in the department of corrections, subject to applicable rules and regulations. 
(b)  In addition to the general qualifications set out in Charter, appendix IV, section 3(a), the chief of corrections shall have the following qualifications: 
(1)  Graduation from an accredited college or university with a baccalaureate degree and one year of graduate study in penology, criminal justice, public administration or in a closely related field and three years supervisory experience prison administration, correctional facilities maintenance and management, or in a related area; or 
(2)  Eight years of experience at a supervisory level which included five years in the areas specified above; or 
(3)  Any equivalent combination of the above. 
(Code 1977, § 11-5001(a); Ord. No. 1995-07, § 17, 3-8-95; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-153. - Duties of chief of corrections. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of corrections to formulate and implement rules and regulations for the operations of the department of corrections. The chief of corrections shall have the authority to promulgate departmental rules and regulations that are consistent with the terms or intent of the laws and ordinances relating to the department. Any changes in the rules and regulations for the operation of the department of corrections, including the employee work rules shall be executed by the chief of corrections in writing. The chief of corrections shall provide the municipal clerk with a copy of the Corrections Department Work Rules from time to time whenever the same are amended. 
(b)  It is also the duty of the chief of corrections to: 
(1)  Administer corrective and disciplinary action for violation of rules and regulations of the department of corrections. Such action may include but is not limited to formal counseling, oral or written reprimands, retraining and suspension without pay or with or without a monetary fine not to exceed $500.00, which shall be deducted from the employee's salary, or termination. 
(2)  Suspend any employee with or without pay pending an investigation in which the employee is accused of misconduct if the commissioner or the commissioner's designee determines that the suspension is in the best interest of the department of corrections, the public welfare or the accused employee. 
(3)  Cause an investigation into an employee's conduct when the employee's conduct indicates probable cause for disciplinary action. 
(4)  Develop other necessary procedures for the implementation of the rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2002-80, §§ 3, 4, 11-8-02) 
Sec. 98-154. - Additional powers and duties of the chief. 
(a)  Generally. The chief shall be responsible for all conditions at the city's correctional facilities, in the buildings connected with the facilities and upon the surrounding grounds. The chief shall have control of correctional officers and other employees of the department. The chief shall be responsible for discipline thereat, for all persons under his/her jurisdiction and for the sanitary condition of the facilities. 
(b)  Weekly report required. Detailed weekly reports shall be made to the chief by the deputy commissioners of all the conditions existing in the department with reference to detainees and prisoners and the buildings and grounds, showing briefly the events during the preceding week, including such things as the number of detainees and prisoners, complaints, care and changes of food, condition of clothing, bedding and buildings, as to cleanliness, sanitation and the like. 
(c)  Inspection of detainees and prisoners; facilities. The chief shall make inspections of the correctional facilities and grounds and also of detainees and prisoners. These inspections shall be made at least once every month and shall be as thorough, complete and exhaustive as practicable. 
(Code 1977, § 11-5002; Ord. No. 1995-07, § 19, 3-8-95; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-155. - Assignments to certain positions without competitive examination. 
The chief of corrections or that official's designee is hereby authorized, in the chiefs discretion, to make assignments to the positions of (corrections assistant chief), corrections deputy chief, major and (captain), without reference to competitive examination or eligible lists. Any (corrections assistant chief), corrections deputy chief, major, or (captain) so designated may be removed or transferred at the pleasure of the chief of corrections. Such person so removed or transferred shall thereupon resume the nondiscretionary rank or title in the department of corrections held immediately prior to such person's discretionary assignment as a (corrections assistant chief), deputy chief, major or (captain). Such person shall be notified in writing of the removal or transfer. 
(Ord. No. 1996-69, § 1, 9-23-96; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2011-09(11-O-0316), § 1, 3-30-11) 
Sec. 98-156. - Evaluation of employee's mental or physical fitness. 
The chief of corrections is authorized to order an employee of the department of corrections to submit to an evaluation of the employee's mental or physical fitness for duty, when there is an articulable basis to suspect that an employee may be physically or mentally impaired. If such an evaluation reveals possible impairment, the chief may make whatever administrative reassignment deemed necessary by the chief and seek approval from the commissioner of personnel and human resources and the chief operating officer to invoke the disability process set forth in chapter 114, article IV, division 12 of this Code pertaining to the civil service rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-157. - Uniform allowance for employees. 
The city council shall provide a uniform or uniform allowance each year to the uniformed employees of the department of corrections, the costs thereof not to exceed $600.00. In lieu of providing uniforms to employees who perform correctional duties but who do not wear uniforms, the city council shall pay the sum of $600.00 per year, half of this sum to be paid in March of each year and half in September. 
(Ord. No. 1997-43, § 3, 8-11-97) 
Sec. 98-158. - Physicians; examination of inmates. 
(a)  Physicians selected by the chief of corrections shall examine all inmates when they are received by the department of corrections through any detention facility and as frequently thereafter as may be necessary to ascertain whether they are suffering from any infectious or contagious disease. A physician shall see that no healthy inmate shall be furnished or shall occupy a bed previously occupied by a diseased inmate, until the bed is cleaned or sterilized, and that no healthy inmate is furnished with or shall use eating or drinking vessels previously used by a diseased inmate, unless such vessel has been thoroughly cleaned or sterilized. 
(b)  A physician shall assist in the planning and developing of such programs that are necessary and proper for the treatment of alcoholic and other inmates and shall participate in programs, conferences and other like meetings consistent with treatment programs, any and all expenses to be compensated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-159. - Food for inmates. 
The chief of corrections shall prescribe the character and quality of food to be furnished to inmates at all detention facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-160. - Custody of clothing and effects of inmates. 
The chief of corrections shall provide for the custody of clothing and other effects of inmates. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-161. - Sanitation and health. 
(a)  The general sanitary conditions of detention facilities shall meet the minimum health requirements prescribed by law. 
(b)  The chief of corrections shall prescribe the quantity of bedding to be furnished city inmates and how it shall be kept clean and sanitary and in compliance with subsection (a) of this section, as well as how it shall be used by the inmates. 
(c)  The chief shall provide for the separation of healthy and unhealthy inmates when the health of other inmates may be threatened. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-162. - Records and reports of work details. 
(a)  The correctional officer in charge of the work detail shall keep a book showing the name of each inmate turned over to that officer from the municipal court, the time for which each inmate is sentenced, when the inmate was received, when the inmate was discharged and the number of days worked. 
(b)  The chief shall make a monthly report to the chief operating officer showing the facts required to be kept of record by subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-163. - Inmates working for city or housing authority. 
(a)  The chief of corrections may deliver to the various departments of the city and the housing authority municipal inmates incarcerated in detention facilities for the purpose of work useful to the city or the housing authority, except those inmates needed for the maintenance, construction, improvement or operation of detention facilities. 
(b)  The authority to decide all questions as to the assignment of inmates is vested in the chief. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-164. - Release on recognizance. 
The mayor or the mayor's designee shall be authorized to establish regulations under which the chief of corrections may release persons charged with violations of city ordinances on their own recognizance pending trial. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 98-165. - Records. 
The department of corrections shall keep a book showing the name of each offender turned over to the department from the city's courts for work details, the time for which each offender is sentenced, dated received, date discharged from city custody, and number of days worked. The deputy commissioner shall make a monthly report to the commissioner showing the facts above required to be kept of record. 
(Code 1977, § 11-5011; Ord. No. 1995-07, § 23, 3-8-95; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 10, 1-10-05) 
Secs. 98-166—98-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CORRECTIONAL FACILITY RULES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Domestic partners allowed visitation privileges, § 94-135. 

Sec. 98-176. - Rules for discipline of inmates. 
(a)  The mayor or the mayor's designee shall prepare, promulgate, publish and enforce rules and regulations concerning the discipline of inmates in detention facilities. These rules shall enable the correctional officers to maintain order and to prevent activities detrimental to the treatment and safety of inmates and employees. These rules shall also govern, as far as possible, the method, time and infliction of punishment and shall require that records be kept thereof. 
(b)  The mayor may promulgate standards by which the mayor might reduce the term of an offender for good behavior and faithful performance of duties while confined. 
Sec. 98-177. - Punishment of inmates. 
No inmate shall be punished, except upon order of the commissioner of corrections. This punishment shall be pursuant to the rules promulgated for the discipline of inmates pursuant to section 98-176, but no inmate shall be so disciplined until a hearing has been held for the purpose of determining whether that punishment is fairly warranted. The hearing shall be granted automatically for the inmate, except in cases of emergency. 
Sec. 98-178. - Inmate's refusal to carry out orders or instructions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any inmate in a city detention facility or any person under arrest and in the custody of any duly authorized officer of the city to fail or refuse to promptly carry out the lawful orders or lawful instructions given by that officer or any sworn correctional officer. 
(b)  Violations of this section shall be tried in the municipal court. 
Sec. 98-179. - Clothing for inmates. 
(a)  The chief of corrections shall prescribe the character and quality of clothing to be furnished for inmates and the means to be used whereby this clothing shall be kept clean and how it shall be worn. 
(b)  The chief shall cause to be purchased a supply of clothing, of suitable texture and color, which shall be worn by male and female inmates during their confinement under sentence from the city's courts. At the end of the term of imprisonment of the inmate, the city clothes shall be removed, and the personal effects of the inmate shall be returned to the inmate. Thereafter, after the correctional officials shall thoroughly cleanse and fumigate the city clothing that was worn by the inmate. 
(c)  It shall be an offense for an inmate under the control of the chief to take, convert or otherwise permanently remove from city control city-issued clothing while in the process of escaping the lawful control of the department of corrections. 
(Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 11, 1-10-05) 
Sec. 98-180. - Inmate possession of contraband items. 
It shall be unlawful for any inmate to knowingly possess any item, paraphernalia, instrument or drug in any detention or corrections facility which is not expressly authorized by the rules, regulations, policies or procedures of the detention or correctional facility, which are conspicuously posted at the facilities and available in written form to inmates and visitors. This section shall not apply to controlled substance violations governed exclusively by state law. 
(Code 1977, § 17-12004) 
Sec. 98-181. - False identification to secure admission to detention or corrections facility. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to give false identification, either verbally or by presenting any fraudulent written instrument, to officers or employees of any detention or corrections facility for the purpose of securing admission to the facility, if such person would not otherwise qualify for admission. 
(Code 1977, § 17-12002) 
Sec. 98-182. - Bringing or sending contraband to detention or correctional facilities. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly assist, bring or send into any detention or correctional facility where prisoners are located under the custody of the city any items which are expressly prohibited and defined as contraband by the rules, regulations, policies or procedures of the detention or correctional facility, which are conspicuously posted at the facilities and available in written form to inmates and visitors. 
(Code 1977, § 17-12005) 
Sec. 98-183. - Furnishing alcohol to prisoners. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, barter or in any other way provide a prisoner of the city with any amount of either methyl alcohol, ethyl alcohol or isopropyl alcohol or any compound containing any of the alcoholic substances stated in this section in any amount. 
(Code 1977, § 14-7004) 
Sec. 98-184. - Tuberculosis testing required. 
Employees of vendors providing services for the detainees at the Atlanta City Detention Center shall be required to obtain a and be cleared by a certified medical authority of tuberculosis at cost to said vendor. 
(Ord. No. 2009-49(09-O-1349), § 1, 9-11-09) 
Secs. 98-185—98-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVE POLICE PROGRAM 

Sec. 98-206. - Created; composition. 
A reserve police program (hereinafter referred to as the "program") is hereby created and established as an organization which shall be composed of retired Atlanta police officers (hereinafter "officers") who shall be appointed and sworn in as members thereof. To be eligible for membership, a retired officer must be Georgia POST certified and must have been in good standing with the city and police department when he or she retired from full-time city employment. Members shall be volunteer workers only and as volunteers, the officers serve as a supplementary force, providing assistance to full-time police officers in a variety of activities in accordance with the procedures outlined herein. 
(Ord. No. 1994-71, § 2, 3-24-94) 
Sec. 98-207. - Authority of chief of police over program. 
The chief of the Atlanta Police Department, subject to the restrictions and limitations contained in this article, shall have complete authority and control over the reserve police program members, and may delegate the exercise thereof, in whole or in part, to any of his or her subordinates. The chief of police shall establish by order the rules and regulations governing this program and all its members. The chief of police shall be responsible for all assignments to be carried out hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1994-71, § 3, 3-24-94) 
Sec. 98-208. - Training. 
(a)  In order to provide training for the members of the reserve police program, the chief of police is hereby authorized to conduct training that will achieve and maintain the requirements of the Georgia Peace Officer's Standards and Training (P.O.S.T.) certification for the officers. 
(b)  The chief of police shall have authority to require each member of the reserve program to satisfactorily complete all requirements of the training. 
(c)  Each reserve officer must satisfactorily perform volunteer service to the city each year. The minimum number of hours is to be determined by the chief of police. 
(d)  Each reserve officer will be subject to all police department rules and regulations and will be expected to maintain the same code of personal and professional conduct as required from full-time city police officers. 
(e)  Failure of a reserve officer to satisfactorily complete all requirements of P.O.S.T. shall result in suspension from the program. 
(Ord. No. 1994-71, § 4, 3-24-94) 
Sec. 98-209. - Uniform and equipment regulations. 
(a)  Each officer, upon his or her retirement from full-time employment with the city police department, shall be permitted to retain city equipment, as determined by the chief. This equipment includes, but is not limited to, uniforms, firearms, badges and handcuffs. 
(b)  The clothing and equipment to be used by reserve police officers shall be determined by the chief of police and may include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A uniform which will be identical to that of the regular city police officer except for modifications, to be determined by the chief of police; 
(2)  A firearm; 
(3)  Handcuffs; and 
(4)  An identification card which identifies the officer as a member of the Atlanta Reserve Police Program. 
(c)  Each officer, while representing himself or herself as an Atlanta Reserve Police Officer shall comply with the dress code of the department and other regulations governing the uniform and equipment. 
(d)  Uniforms and equipment shall remain the property of the city and shall be subject to recall by the chief of police. 
(e)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to instruct employees benefits to withhold pension benefits of any retired officer who fails to return all city-owned equipment to the police department, after being ordered by the chief of police to do so. All pension benefits withheld will be forwarded to the retired officer when he or she has complied with the chief's order. 
(Ord. No. 1994-71, § 5, 3-24-94) 
Sec. 98-210. - Workers' compensation. 
Each officer of the unit while working for the city shall be deemed a volunteer and shall not be afforded workers' compensation benefits. Reserve officers health, dental, and pension benefits will not be affected by participation in the program. 
(Ord. No. 1994-71, § 6, 3-24-94) 
Sec. 98-211. - Arrests. 
A reserve officer shall have the general powers of arrest afforded regular officers provided that he or she satisfactorily completed the training required by P.O.S.T. and the Atlanta Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 1994-71, § 7, 3-24-94) 
Sec. 98-212. - Application for a work permit required. 
(a)  No officer of the reserve police program shall engage in any police work, whether as a volunteer or for pay, within the limits of the city, either in or out of uniform, until he or she has filed an application for a work permit with the chief of the Atlanta Police Department and said application has been approved. 
(b)  The application form for a permit to engage in any police work by the reserve program member shall be furnished by the department and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of location. 
(2)  Name of employer. 
(3)  Name of owner. 
(4)  Physical location of work. 
(5)  Nature of work. 
(6)  Amount of pay. 
(c)  Failure by a reserve police program member to first obtain an approved work permit before engaging in a police related job shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal from the reserve program. 
(Ord. No. 1994-71, § 8, 3-24-94) 
Sec. 98-213. - False impersonation. 
It shall be a violation, punishable by law or by fine not to exceed $1,000.00, for any person not a member of the reserve police program: 
(1)  To wear, display or carry, as the case may be, any item issued the city to a reserve officer in order to perform law enforcement duties; or 
(2)  To represent, identify or hold himself or herself out, in any manner whatsoever, to be a member of the reserve police program. The chief may terminate any reserve officer, with or without cause, without a hearing. A reserve officer may resign at any time by notification to the chief. 
(Ord. No. 1994-71, § 9, 3-24-94) 
Chapter 102 - LIBRARY[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— 1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1017), page 4174 as amended (compiled in pt. I, ch. 26 of the Fulton County Code) creates a Fulton County Library System, in which the city participates. The mayor of the City of Atlanta appoints members to the library board of trustees. 
Cross reference— Civic and cultural affairs, ch. 46; parks and recreation, ch. 110. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; special constitutional grant of authority to provide libraries, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ (3)(a)(10); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; local and regional public libraries, O.C.G.A. § 20-5-20 et seq. 

Sec. 102-1. - Special district for library services. 
(a)  Created. The City of Atlanta/DeKalb County, Georgia, special district is created. 
(b)  Services. There shall be furnished to residents of the special district library services by either Fulton County or DeKalb County. The exact nature of such services shall be determined by contract between the city and the county providing the services. 
(c)  Financing of costs. The cost of furnishing library services in the special district shall be financed from ad valorem taxes levied upon taxable property located in the special district described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 10-3009) 
Chapter 106 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Additional emergency powers of mayor regarding offenses, § 2-181; noise control, § 74-131 et seq.; nuisances, § 74-160 et seq.; noise zone around hospitals and surgi-centers, § 86-4. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 106-1. - Swinging into trains. 
It shall be unlawful to swing onto trains for the purpose of securing a free ride thereon. 
(Code 1977, § 14-10006; Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130), § 1, 3-29-17 ) 
Sec. 106-2. - Solicitation of defense of prisoners or legal business. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to idle and loiter around the station house, municipal judge's courtroom or the entrance thereto for the purpose of soliciting the defense of prisoners in the municipal court or in any way soliciting legal practice from these prisoners, in person or as agent for another, whereby money is attempted to be secured or is secured from these prisoners. However, this shall not prohibit prisoners from summoning attorneys or from conferring with attorneys who have been employed by them or by their relatives for them, and the turnkey and other officers shall promptly telephone for attorneys desired by these prisoners. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the solicitation of legal business or representation either by these persons or their agents or employees in the manner stated in this section. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1085) 
Sec. 106-3. - Gathering near detention facility, jail or courthouse; furnishing items to incarcerated persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to gather in or about the station house, jail, detention facility, courthouse or other city-owned property in violation of the rules and policies of the facility or for the purpose of violating the law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone other than persons duly authorized by the office of corrections to provide, transmit, deliver, give or furnish to anyone held or incarcerated as a defendant, prisoner, arrested person or one being interviewed in connection with a violation of the law at any city jail or detention facility any item, whatsoever, without first obtaining the approval of the person in charge at such facility. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1084(c), (d)) 
Sec. 106-4. - Impersonating or wearing uniform of police officer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, not a police officer in the city, to act as a police officer or represent such person as a police officer. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a police officer, without authority, to wear the uniform or any distinctive part thereof or anything similar to a distinctive part thereof which has been designed and approved by the police chief or the chief's designee as a uniform for police officers of the City of Atlanta. 
(Code 1977, § 11-2051) 
State Law reference— Impersonating a public officer or employee, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23. 
Sec. 106-5. - Furnishing identification containing reference to age. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish to any other person any identification material which contains or makes reference to age, with the intent that such material be used by any person for the purpose of falsely representing the age of such person, so as to violate or foster the violation of an ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17-11001) 
State Law reference— False identification documents, O.C.G.A. § 16-9-4. 
Sec. 106-6. - Registering under assumed name. 
No person shall register at any hotel, motel or other place of lodging requiring registration in the city under an assumed name, or any name other than that by which such person is commonly known. 
(Code 1977, § 17-11002) 
Sec. 106-7. - Passenger stations. 
Any person entering any railroad, bus or rapid rail passenger station and violating its rules or obstructing the business of the authorities in charge thereof may be ordered out by the police officer in charge, and upon refusal to leave shall be arrested and tried for a violation of this section; however, those rules shall be reasonable and approved by the council. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3005) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 106-8. - Smoking and drinking prohibited on MARTA buses, trains, rail cars. 
It shall be unlawful for occupants on Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) buses, trains or rail cars to smoke tobacco or consume alcoholic beverages while such buses, trains or rail cars are transporting passengers within the corporate limits of the city. Charter bus service is excluded from these restrictions. 
(Code 1977, § 17-11003) 
Cross reference— Indoor air, § 86-31 et seq. 
Sec. 106-9. - Smoking in certain areas within city buildings and facilities. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Smoke and smoking mean and include the carrying or possession of any form of burning tobacco. 
(b)  Designation of smoking areas. All city-owned, city-operated or city-leased office space, buildings and facilities of the city shall be designated either smoking or nonsmoking in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The mayor or the mayor's designee shall place signs in all open office areas, employee work areas, restrooms, reception areas, lobbies, conference rooms, elevators, stairwells and any indoor area accessible to the general public designating whether smoking is or is not permitted. 
(2)  No open office area, employee work area, restroom (unless designated as a smoking area), reception area, lobby, conference room, elevator, stairwell or other indoor area accessible to the general public shall be designated as a smoking area. 
(3)  Any area outlined in subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section not explicitly designated and signed in accordance with this section shall be a nonsmoking area. 
(4)  Council chambers and committee rooms shall be designated nonsmoking areas. 
(5)  Private offices, separated entirely from other space by floor-to-ceiling walls and standard doors, may be designated smoking areas. 
(6)  Certain sections of cafeterias may be designated smoking areas if: 
a.  No more than 30 percent of cafeteria seats are within the smoking area. 
b.  The smoking area is separated by at least ten feet from the nearest nonsmoking seat. 
Smoking is not permitted in the cafeteria line. 
(7)  Certain fully enclosed rooms other than private offices may be designated smoking lounges if such rooms are furnished with smokeless ashtrays or other devices which effectively prevent tobacco smoke from entering the general ventilation system, and if no other provision of this section is violated. 
(8)  All outdoor areas shall be designated smoking areas unless safety regulations require otherwise. 
(c)  Violation. It shall be a violation of this section to smoke in any area designated a nonsmoking area under the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Priority. The public health consideration for breathing smoke-free air shall take priority in situations of confusion or ambiguity. 
(e)  Application. The provisions of this section shall only apply to those areas of Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International that are utilized as city offices. All other areas of the airport shall comply with the smoking policy as outlined in section 22-68. 
(Code 1977, § 17-11007; Ord. No. 2004-51, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-04) 
Cross reference— Smoking at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International, § 22-68; indoor air, § 86-31 et seq. 
Sec. 106-10. - Distribution of free tobacco products in public places prohibited. 
(a)  Generally. In order to avoid obstruction and congestion of public ways and places, to protect pedestrians from annoyance and invasion of privacy, to avoid litter and to avoid facilitating the availability of cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products to minors, no person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products for commercial purposes, or any agent or employee of any such person, shall, in the course of such business, distribute any cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products free to any person on any public street or sidewalk, or in any park or playground, or any other public ground, or in areas open to the public in any publicly-owned or -operated building. 
(b)  Violation. Any person who violates the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $20.00 nor more than $50.00 for each violation. Every hour or part thereof in which a person engages in such conduct shall constitute a single and separate violation. 
(Code 1977, § 17-11008) 
Sec. 106-11. - Use of drinking water reservoir prohibited. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person not employed by, or authorized to act on behalf of, the city, to use any drinking water reservoir or water treatment structure operated or maintained by the city for swimming, bathing or otherwise immersing a person or such person's clothing. 
(b)  Violation. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the city jail or stockade for not more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1977, § 17-11011) 
Sec. 106-12. - Urban camping and improper use of public places. 
(a)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section 106-12, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
" Bridge " means a structure, including the approaches thereto, erected in order to afford passage over any obstruction in any public road, railroad, or other right-of-way; or to afford passage under or over existing public roads, railroads, or other rights-of-way. As used in this section the definition of "Bridge" shall include a controlled access highway overpass as defined herein. 
" Camp " or " camping " means the use of a street, sidewalk, other right-of-way, and/or any area underneath a bridge, within the City of Atlanta for living accommodation purposes such as sleeping activities, or making preparations to sleep (including the laying down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping), or storing personal belongings, or making a fire, or carrying on cooking activities, or using a tent or other structure for habitation. These activities constitute camping if, in light of all the circumstances, it reasonably appears that in conducting one or more of these activities, the participant is in fact using the area as a living accommodation, regardless of the intent of the participant or the nature of any other activities in which s/he may also be engaging. For purposes of this section 106-12(a), the terms "camp" and "camping" do not include activity that occurs solely within city-owned parks. 
" City " means the City of Atlanta. 
" Controlled access highway overpass " means a crossing of two controlled access highways or of a controlled access highway and other public road, pedestrian path, railroad or public right-of-way at different levels where clearance to traffic on the lower level is obtained by elevating the higher level. 
" Interference (or " interfere ") with ingress and egress" means standing, sitting, lying down, using personal property, or performing any other activity on public property and/or in a park, where such activity: a) materially interferes with the ingress into and egress from buildings, driveways, streets, alleys, or any other real property that has a limited number of entrances/exits, regardless of whether the property is owned by the city, a private owner or another public entity; b) reasonably appears, in light of all of the circumstances, to have the purpose of blocking ingress and egress; and c) occurs without the express written permission of the owner of the property at issue. Where written permission has been granted, the individuals interfering with ingress and egress must have possession of the permission at the time of the activity in question. 
" Park " or " parks " means any city-owned park. 
" Public property " means any street, sidewalk, and/or other right-of-way, within the City of Atlanta. 
" Storing (or " store ") personal property" means leaving one's personal effects unattended on public property, in any area underneath a bridge, and/or in a park, such as but not limited to clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks. This term does not include parking a bicycle or other mode of transportation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to camp. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store personal property. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with ingress and egress. 
(e)  No person may be arrested for violating this code section until s/he has received an oral or written warning from the Atlanta Police Department to cease the prohibited conduct. If the violator fails to comply with the warning issued, s/he may be arrested for violation of this section. 
(f)  Where personal property is stored in violation of subsection (c) above, the Atlanta Police Department may deem the property to be abandoned and may confiscate it. No warning is required prior to the confiscation. The department shall retain the property in a manner consistent with the handling of other confiscated property. 
(g)  The prohibitions set forth in subsections (b) and (c) above shall not apply during a permitted outdoor event (as defined in City Code of Ordinances Chapter 142) on property where the outdoor event is located, as set forth in a city-issued outdoor event permit, unless the permit explicitly prohibits the activity. 
(h)  The prohibitions set forth in subsections (c) and (d) above shall not apply to activity permitted pursuant to Article III of City Code of Ordinances Chapter 138. 
(i)  The prohibitions set forth in this section 106-12 shall not apply to city, state, or county officials or employees acting in their official capacity, performing the activities as part of their official city duties. 
(j)  The prohibitions set forth in this section 106-12 shall not apply to city, state, or county contractors or subcontractors where said activities are associated and performed in conjunction with the scope of work set forth in the city contract. 
(Ord. No. 1996-82, §§ 1—6, 11-26-96; Ord. No. 1998-68, § 1, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2012-10(12-O-0360), § 1, 3-28-12; Ord. No. 2017-94(17-O-1837), § 1, 12-13-17 ) 
Sec. 106-13. - Reserved. 
Sec. 106-14. - Security fencing of construction cranes. 
(a)  In order to guard against access to construction cranes by unauthorized persons, all fixed or tower cranes shall be enclosed by security chain link fencing which shall be at least eight feet in height, topped with barbed wire and containing a locked gate at all points of access to the crane. The specifications for such security fencing shall be a required submittal in the building permit process and shall be subject to the approval of the director of the bureau of buildings. For existing construction projects, the contractors shall have 60 days to comply with the fencing requirement. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2007-72(07-O-2308), § 1, 11-27-07) 
Secs. 106-15—106-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY RIGHTS 

Sec. 106-51. - Theft by shoplifting. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of theft by shoplifting within the corporate limits of the city when the property which is the subject of the theft is $100.00 or less in value. 
(b)  Defined. A person commits the offense of theft by shoplifting when alone or in concert with another person, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to such person's own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or of the value thereof, in whole or in part, does any of the following: 
(1)  Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(2)  Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(3)  Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another; 
(4)  Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise; or 
(5)  Wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise. 
(c)  Violation. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  First offense. A fine of not more than $250.00 or imprisonment in the city jail or stockade for not more than 30 days, or both. 
(2)  Second offense. A fine of not less than $250.00 or imprisonment in the city jail or stockade for not less than 30 days, or both. 
(3)  Third or subsequent offense. Any person charged with a third or subsequent offense under this section shall be punished as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-8-14 in the court having jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged offense occurred. 
Any defendant charged under this section shall be entitled upon request to have the case against such person transferred to the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county in which the alleged offense occurred. 
(Code 1977, § 17-11009) 
State Law reference— Theft by shoplifting, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-14. 
Sec. 106-52. - Evading payment of fare for transportation service; conduct on city's streetcar transit system; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful, within the corporate limits of the city, for any person to evade or attempt to evade payment of the fare for transportation service upon a rapid rail system, public transit bus, or upon city's streetcar transit system. As used in this section, the "evasion of payment of the fare" shall include the following acts, activities or conduct: 
(1)  Entry into or upon a rapid rail car, public transit bus, or streetcar vehicle without payment of the fare charged for transportation service. 
(2)  Following fare payment, the refusal to exit the city streetcar vehicle after traveling two times around the full streetcar route. 
(3)  Following fare payment, the refusal to exit the city streetcar vehicle after: 
(A)  A single one-way trip; or 
(B)  The expiration of a multi-trip pass. 
(4)  Misuse of a transfer, TransCard, pass, ticket, token, Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) Breeze Card, MARTA University Pass Program Card or other evidence of payment of or prepayment of a fare issued by the city or MARTA with the intent to avoid or to assist another in avoiding payment of the fare charged for transportation service. 
(5)  Use or attempted use of a signed city or MARTA TransCard pass or ticket, MARTA Breeze Card or MARTA University Pass Program Card for the payment of the fare charged for transportation service by a person who is not the person whose signature appears on the TransCard who is not the owner of the city or MARTA pass or ticket or a MARTA Breeze Card. 
(b)  As applied to the city's streetcar transit system, fare payment shall be valid for use towards: 
(1)  A single one-way trip for two hours from the time of issuance/validation. A single one-way trip on the city streetcar is defined as the distance between a rider's point of entering the streetcar vehicle and the point of exiting the streetcar vehicle, but no more than two times around the full streetcar route. 
(2)  A multi-trip pass from the time of issuance / validation through the end of the pass's last consecutive service day. A multi-trip pass holder must exit the streetcar vehicle after traveling two consecutive times around the full streetcar route, but may re-enter the streetcar vehicle without payment of an additional fare prior to the expiration of the multi-trip pass. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit or to attempt to commit any of the following acts on a city streetcar vehicle or a city streetcar stop platform: 
(1)  Spit, defecate, or urinate. 
(2)  Discard litter, except into receptacles designated for that purpose. 
(3)  Smoke tobacco in any form, included by not limited to in the form of electronic cigarettes, personal vaporizers, or electronic nicotine delivery systems. 
(4)  Consume food or beverage or possess any open food or beverage container, provided that this paragraph shall not apply to resealable beverages in resealable plastic containers, to an operator of a city streetcar at an authorized layover point, or to a person providing food or beverage to any child under age five; provided, further, that nothing in this subsection shall apply to a city streetcar stop platform. 
(5)  Play any radio, cassette, cartridge, tape player, digital music player, or similar device, unless such device is connected to an earphone that limits the sound to the hearing of an individual user. 
(6)  Carry or possess any explosives, acids, other dangerous articles, or live animals, except for the following: 
(A)  A guide dog or service dog, provided that such guide dog or service dog is accompanied by a physically disabled person, blind person, person with visual disabilities, deaf person, or a person who is responsible for training a guide dog or service dog; or 
(B)  Small pets confined to rigid pet carriers with locks or latches. 
(7)  Obstruct, hinder, interfere with, or otherwise disrupt or disturb the operation, operator, or passengers of the city streetcar. 
(8)  Board any city streetcar vehicle through the rear exit door, unless so directed by an employee or agent of the city streetcar. 
(9)  Remain onboard a city streetcar vehicle after such vehicle has completed its scheduled route and passengers have been advised to exit the vehicle or remain aboard the city streetcar vehicle after having been warned and after such vehicle has entered a garage or other restricted area not open to the public. 
(10)  Enter, exit or pass through any emergency door of the city streetcar vehicle in the absence of a bona fide emergency. 
(11)  Enter the operator's cab or driver's seat of a city streetcar vehicle in absence of a bona fide emergency. 
(12)  Monetarily solicit or sell goods or services for a fee without the grant of a concession by the City of Atlanta. 
(13)  Deface, damage, displace, remove or destroy any advertisement, security sign, or notice on or in any city streetcar vehicle or city streetcar stop platform. 
(14)  Fail to exhibit proof of fare payment upon request of a Code Enforcement Agent or Atlanta Police Officer when entering or occupying a city streetcar vehicle. 
(15)  Possess or sell stolen or counterfeit proof of fare payment. 
(16)  Interfere with the operation of the city streetcar vehicle, city streetcar stop platform, or any city streetcar pay station. 
(17)  Remain at a city streetcar stop platform for more than two hours. 
(d)  The penalty imposed upon a conviction of subsection (a) of this section shall be a $100.00 fine. Upon a sentence of probation upon a conviction of subsection (a) of this section, the sentencing court may require as a special condition thereof, that the person be prohibited from riding the city streetcar during the probationary period. 
(e)  The penalty imposed upon a conviction of subsection (c) of this section shall be as provided in section 1-8. Upon a sentence of probation upon a conviction of subsection (c) of this section, the sentencing court may require as a special condition thereof, that the person be prohibited from riding the city streetcar during the probationary period. 
(f)  Employees of the city streetcar's system, or the Atlanta Police Department while performing the duties of their employment shall be exempted from the restrictions of paragraphs (8), (9), (10), and (11) of subsection (c) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 17-11004; Ord. No. 2014-16(14-O-1170), § 1, 5-14-14 ; Ord. No. 2015-61(15-O-1517), § 1, 11-25-15 ) 
State Law reference— Theft of services, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-5. 
Sec. 106-53. - Destruction of property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully damage, destroy, mar or deface any property of the city, or of another. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to tamper with, to open, or to paint any equipment of the departments and bureaus of the city, including fire hydrants and water mains. 
(Code 1977, § 17-1001) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21 et seq. 
Sec. 106-54. - Defacing buildings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint or draw upon, to carve any letter, word or design upon or to mutilate or deface in any way any wall, fence, public building, private dwelling, place or institution of learning, place of worship, statue or monument, now or hereafter erected in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17-1002) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21 et seq. 
Sec. 106-55. - Injuring or interfering with public service property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus belonging to a company, or to the city, engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone or other public services, or intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of the service supplied, or in any way to interfere with the proper action of the company or the city, intentionally to divert any services of the company or the city or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of the company or the city, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the company or the city. 
(b)  Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts referred to in subsection (a) of this section and/or the person who with knowledge of the violation receives the benefit of the service without proper charge as a result of the improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for the acts of tampering or diversion. 
(Code 1977, § 17-1005) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21 et seq. 
Sec. 106-56. - Unauthorized persons entering vacant buildings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or to remain in a vacant or unoccupied building or on any portion of vacant land upon which such vacant building is located unless with the permission of an authorized agent of such property, provided such building or vacant property is prominently marked by a posted notice, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived as exhibit A, which is easily seen from a distance of at least 50 feet that informs the public such property is vacant or unoccupied and unauthorized persons are prohibited from entering. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to be on such property lines that are prominently marked by a fence, chain or other means and by a posted notice that communicates to the public that unauthorized persons are not allowed on such premises. Contemporaneously with the posting of such notice, a sworn authorization, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived as exhibit B, must be filed with the city police department, stating that persons without written permission on their person are not allowed on the property at a specified address; and any such trespasser will be prosecuted by the police as the property's own agent. 
(Code 1977, § 17-1006) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 106-57. - Unauthorized interference or attempted interference with parked vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl on any property which is used to park vehicles, including parking lots for vehicles as set out in the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances, chapter 30, article XVII, division 3, section 30-1196, et seq., and public right-of-way, if said person has been observed: 
(1)  Attempting entry into vehicles, or 
(2)  Tampering with the vehicle of another, which shall mean any unauthorized interference with a vehicle or any part or accessory thereof or any contents therein, or 
(3)  Otherwise acting in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person opens or attempts to open the doors, trunk, windows or hood of the vehicle; takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer; manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object that may be utilized for entry into an automobile or is otherwise prohibited by law; removes or attempts to remove anything of value from the vehicle; or otherwise causes damage to the vehicle. 
(c)  A law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this code section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this code section: 
(1)  Unless the law enforcement officer complies with the foregoing procedure; and 
(2)  Unless the trier of fact determines beyond a reasonable doubt under all circumstances of the case that the explanation was not true or would not, if believed by the officer at the time, have dispelled the officer's alarm or immediate concern. 
(d)  Upon conviction of violation of this section, a person shall be sentenced to imprisonment or public work for six months, with a minimum of 60 days to serve in the city jail or working on the public streets or on the public works of the city, the remainder of the time to be probated. 
(Ord. No. 1996-16, § 1, 4-9-96) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 106-58. - Transportation passes and nontransferable tickets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, sell or otherwise acquire or deal in or solicit the purchase or sale of any pass or other evidence of transportation issued by any railroad, railway, steamship or steamboat line, or the person operating the same, which shows on its face that it was issued for free transportation. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to buy, sell or otherwise acquire or deal in the unused portions of nontransferable railroad, railway, steamship or steamboat passenger tickets whose use is restricted to the original purchasers thereof by the railroad, railway, steamship or steamboat company issuing them, or to act as vendor or broker of those partially used nontransferable passenger tickets, or to solicit personally, or by sign or advertisement, or in any manner to aid the sale or purchase of those partially used nontransferable passenger tickets within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17-11005) 
Sec. 106-59. - Resale of entertainment tickets restricted. 
(a)  As used in this section, the terms: 
Exhibition means, consistent with O.C.G.A. § 43-4B-1(5), a contest where the participants engage in the use of boxing skills and techniques and where the objective is to display such skills and techniques without striving to win. 
Person means, consistent with O.C.G.A. § 43-4B-1(12), any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or combination of individuals of whatever form or character. 
Ticket broker means, consistent with O.C.G.A. § 43-4B-1(19), (1) any person who is involved in the business of reselling tickets of admission to athletic contests, concerts, theater performances, amusements, exhibitions, or other entertainment events held in this state to which the general public is admitted and who charges a premium in excess of the price of the ticket; or (2) any person who has a permanent office or place of business in this state who is involved in the business of reselling tickets of admission to athletic contests, concerts, theater performances, amusements, exhibitions, or other entertainment events held inside or outside this state to which the general public is admitted and who charges a premium in excess of the price of the ticket. 
The term ticket broker shall not include the owner, operator, lessee, or tenant of the property in which an athletic contest or entertainment event is being held or the sponsor of such a contest or event or the authorized ticket agent of such persons. 
Original purchaser for personal use means a person who buys one or more tickets with the intention of using the ticket or tickets solely for the use of the purchaser or the purchaser's invitees, employees, and agents. An original purchaser who resells more than six tickets to the same athletic contest or entertainment event and who resells tickets to an athletic contest or entertainment event for more than 105 percent of their face value shall be presumed to be engaged in the business of a ticket broker. 
(b)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-4B-30, it shall be unlawful for any ticket broker or person who is the original purchaser for personal use of one or more tickets to resell or offer for resale one or more tickets to any athletic contest and entertainment event within 2,700 feet of a venue which seats or admits 15,000 or more persons. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the City Code. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3017; Ord. No. 2001-53, § 1, 7-24-01; Ord. No. 2004-81, § 1, 11-05-04; Ord. No. 2005-49, § 1, 8-22-05) 
State Law reference— Resale of athletic or entertainment tickets, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-310. 
Secs. 106-60—106-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER 

Sec. 106-81. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to engage in any conduct described in the following subsections; provided, however, that no person shall be convicted of any of the following sections upon a showing that the predominant intent of such conduct was to exercise a constitutional right to: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of the safety of such person's life, limb or health; 
(2)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)  Assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of, or with the intent to, engage in gaming; 
(5)  Be in or about any place, alone or with another or others, with the purpose of or intent to engage in any fraudulent scheme, trick or device to obtain any money or valuable thing; or to aid or abet any person or persons in doing so; 
(6)  Direct fighting words toward another, that is, words which by their very nature tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(7)  Interfere, by acts of physical obstruction, another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(8)  Congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and to fail to clear that public way after being ordered to do so by a city police officer or other lawful authority; 
(9)  Stand or remain in or about any street, sidewalk, overpass or public way so as to impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and to fail to clear such street, sidewalk, overpass or public way after being ordered to do so by a police officer or other lawful authority; 
(10)  Disrupt by actions which tend to incite a breach of the peace the undisturbed activities of any house of worship, hospital, surgi-center, or home for the elderly; or 
(11)  Throw bottles, paper, cans, glass, sticks, stones, missiles or any other debris on public property. 
(12)  Accost or force oneself upon the company of another; 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accosting means approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his/her person, or upon property in his/her immediate possession. 
Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request or solicit any item of value or an individual's company from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(13)  Carry any item with the intention either to threaten, intimidate or provoke the apprehension of violence, or with the disregard for the rights and safety of others. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to prohibit the carrying of a firearm or weapon as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-173. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3001; Ord. No. 2000-53, § 1, 10-10-00; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 12, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2005-48, § 1, 8-24-05; Ord. No. 2007-20(07-O-0489), § 1, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 2017-88(17-O-1795), § 1, 12-13-17 ) 
State Law reference— Riot, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-30; affray, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-32; obscene, vulgar or profane language, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39; obstructing public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43. 
Sec. 106-82. - Unauthorized persons entering school buildings. 
No person shall enter or remain in any public, private or parochial school building between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on days that school is in session, or until 10:00 p.m. at those schools which have extended sessions, who is not a regularly-enrolled student, teacher or employee at that school, unless the person shall have first and immediately proceeded to the administrative offices and been identified to the principal or the principal's agent and received written permission to remain on the premises. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3002) 
Sec. 106-83. - Unauthorized persons not to remain in school buildings when requested to leave. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter and remain in any public, private or parochial school or on surrounding school grounds after being directed to leave by the principal of the school or designated agent. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3003) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Sec. 106-84. - Creating a disturbance at schools. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create a disturbance in any private, public or parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds or on the fields or grounds lawfully used for school activities while such recreational areas are in use or other activities are in progress thereon. A disturbance shall be defined as any act which may be reasonably expected to substantially interfere with activities within the school or school activities on the school grounds or fields while such activities are in progress thereon. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3004) 
Sec. 106-85. - Monetary solicitation. 
(a)  "Monetary solicitation" defined: 
(1)  "Monetary solicitation" or to "monetarily solicit" is an act or action performed by an individual that meets the following three criteria: 
a.  Is an in-person request of another individual, either orally or by gesture; and 
b.  The request is for an immediate distribution of money or anything of monetary value; and 
c.  The request occurs on public property, including, without limitation, city streets, sidewalks, transit stations or platforms, and parks. 
(2)  "Monetary solicitation" and "monetarily solicit" shall not include: 
a.  Requests for signatures on a petition or other document; or 
b.  Distribution of written material that requests individuals to send contributions by mail or make donations in some other manner at a later time; or 
c.  Distribution of pre-addressed envelopes along with a verbal plea to contribute money, provided that no request for an immediate contribution is made; or 
d.  Sale of literature or other merchandise or food where payment occurs at a separate time and location, including through mail order; or 
e.  Public vending lawfully permitted in accordance with Atlanta City Code, Chapter 30, Article XXIII, Division 1, section 30-1400 et seq. 
(b)  Monetary solicitation in certain areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to monetarily solicit in any of the following places: 
(1)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility, which includes any temporary use site (port-a-toilet); 
(2)  Within 15 feet of an automated teller machine (ATM), provided that when an ATM is located within an ATM facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the ATM facility; 
(3)  Within 15 feet of any parking lot pay box, on-street parking pay station or kiosk; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)  In any public transportation vehicle; in or on any bus, rail, subway or Atlanta Streetcar platform or station or taxi stand, including without limitation entryways, exits, queuing areas and pay stations connected therewith; within 15 feet of any bus, rail, subway or Atlanta Streetcar platform or outdoor station or taxi stand; and within 15 feet of the entrance or exit of a station located in an enclosed building; 
(6)  Within 15 feet of the entrance or exit of a building, whether publicly or privately owned, including without limitation any residence, business, event venue or athletic facility. Nothing in this subsection (6) shall prohibit monetary solicitation within 15 feet of any other portion of a building other than its exit(s) and entrance(s); 
(7)  Within 15 feet of or within a line for entry to any building, whether the building is publicly or privately owned, including without limitation any residence, business, event venue or athletic facility; 
(8)  In a parking lot or garage owned or operated by the City of Atlanta, including entryways or exits and pay stations connected therewith; 
(9)  Within 15 feet of any public property "valid vendor location" where a "vendor" is operating, as defined in the Atlanta City Code, Chapter 30, Article XXIII, Division 1, Section 30-1401; or 
(10)  Within 15 feet of any private property "valid vendor location" where a "vending business" is in operation, as defined in the Atlanta City Code, Article XXIV, Division 1, Section 30-1461. 
(11)  Within the Restricted Monetary Solicitation Zone, defined as the area between the boundaries of the following named streets, including both sides of each named street and each corner of intersecting named streets: 
Martin Luther King Jr. Drive SW from Courtland Street SE to Peachtree Street SW; Peachtree Street SW from Martin Luther King Jr. Drive SW to Alabama Street SW; Alabama Street SW from Peachtree Street SW to Forsyth Street SW; Forsyth Street SW from Alabama Street SW to Marietta Street NW; Marietta Street NW from Forsyth Street NW to Ivan Allen Jr. Boulevard; Ivan Allen Jr. Boulevard from Marietta Street NW to Peachtree Street NE; Peachtree Street NE from Ivan Allen Jr. Boulevard to Peachtree Center Avenue NE; Peachtree Center Avenue NE from Peachtree Street NE to Baker Street NE; Baker Street NE from Peachtree Center Avenue NE to Piedmont Avenue NE; Piedmont Avenue NE from Baker Street NE to Edgewood Avenue NE; Edgewood Avenue NE from Piedmont Avenue NE to Courtland Street SE; Courtland Street SE from Edgewood Avenue NE to Martin Luther King Jr. Drive SW; and 
Piedmont Avenue NE from John Wesley Dobbs Avenue NE to Edgewood Avenue SE; Edgewood Avenue SE from Piedmont Avenue NE to Boulevard NE; Boulevard NE from Edgewood Avenue SE to Auburn Avenue NE; Auburn Avenue NE from Boulevard NE to Jackson Street NE; Jackson Street NE from Auburn Avenue NE to Irwin Street NE; Irwin Street NE from Jackson Street NE to Fort Street NE; John Wesley Dobbs Avenue NE from Fort Street NE to Piedmont Avenue NE. 
Auburn Avenue NE from Boulevard NE to Jackson Street NE; Jackson Street NE from Auburn Avenue NE to Irwin Street NE; Irwin Street NE from Jackson Street NE to Boulevard NE; Boulevard NE from Irwin Street NE to Auburn Avenue NE. 
(12)  Within the Midtown Theatre District Zone, defined as the area between the boundaries of the following named streets, including both sides of each named street and each corner of intersecting named streets: 
Spring Street NW from 3rd Street NW to Ponce de Leon Avenue NE; Ponce de Leon Avenue from Springs Street to W. Peachtree Street NW; W. Peachtree Street NW from Ponce de Leon Avenue NE to North Avenue NE; North Avenue NE from W. Peachtree Street NW to Piedmont Avenue NE; Piedmont Avenue NE from North Avenue NE to 4th Street NE; 4th Street NE from Piedmont Avenue NE to W. Peachtree Street NW; W. Peachtree Street NW from 4th Street NE to 3rd Street NW; 3rd Street NW from W. Peachtree Street NW to Spring Street NW. 
(c)  Aggressive monetary solicitation. It shall be unlawful for any person to monetarily solicit in any of the following manners: 
(1)  Blocking the path or passage of the person solicited; 
(2)  Not allowing the person solicited to leave the presence of the solicitor, by following immediately behind or walking alongside the person solicited; 
(3)  Using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or following refusal; 
(4)  Continuing to monetarily solicit a person after that person has refused the solicitation verbally or by gesture; 
(5)  Continuing to monetarily solicit a person located in or on a motor vehicle after that person has refused the solicitation verbally or by gesture; 
(6)  Making any statement, gesture or other communication which a reasonable person in the situation of the person solicited would perceive to be a threat that is intended to compel or force the person solicited to accede to the demands of the solicitor; and/or 
(7)  Touching the person solicited. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  Upon conviction under section 106-85(b) above, the violator may be sentenced to one or more of the following: the performance of up to 30 days community service; a monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00; and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days. 
(2)  Upon the first conviction under section 106-85(c) above, the violator may be sentenced to one or more of the following: the performance of up to 30 days community service; a monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00; and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days. 
(3)  Upon the second conviction under section 106-85(c) above, the violator may be sentenced to one or more of the following: the performance of up to 30 days community service; a monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00; and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days, provided that the sentence must include a minimum of 30 days imprisonment. 
(4)  Upon the third and future convictions under section 106-85(c) above, the violator may be sentenced to one or more of the following: the performance of up to 30 days community service; a monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00; and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days, provided that the sentence must include a minimum of 90 days imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2012-44(12-O-1324), § 1, 10-8-12; Ord. No. 2013-31(13-O-1103), 7-10-13; Ord. No. 2015-20(15-O-1189), §§ 1, 2, 5-27-15 ; Ord. No. 2015-31(15-O-1267), § 1, 6-24-15 ) 
Sec. 106-86. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-43, § 1, approved June 9, 2006 repealed § 106-86 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to license to make music on streets; making such for purpose of begging; as enacted by Code 1977, § 17-3007. 
Sec. 106-87. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 2, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed § 106-87, which pertained to treasure hunts and derived from Code 1977, § 17-3009. 
Sec. 106-88. - Moving household goods at night. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to move or transport household goods and furnishings from one place of residence to another between the hours of sunset and sunrise without first having obtained a permit to do so from the police chief. All applications for permits shall be filed more than 24 hours prior to the time of actual moving. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3014; Ord. No. 2001-27, § 1, 4-11-01) 
Sec. 106-89. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 3, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed § 106-89, which pertained to residential picketing and derived from Code 1977, § 17-3022. 
Sec. 106-90. - False representations to police or any city department. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly and willfully and with intent thereby to mislead, either in such person's own behalf or in behalf of others, as principal or as agent, to make or file orally or in writing any false representations of fact to any police officer of the city or to any department of the city government. 
(Code 1977, § 17-6002) 
Secs. 106-91—106-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 106-126. - House of ill fame. 
(a)  A person, having or exercising control over the use of any place or conveyance within the city which would offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution, commits the offense of keeping a place of prostitution when such person knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the purpose of prostitution. 
(b)  Those places or conveyances which have been adjudged to be places of prostitution as provided in this Code may be abated as also provided in this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 17-2001) 
State Law reference— Keeping a place of prostitution, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-10. 
Sec. 106-127. - Solicitation for an illicit sexual act. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while in any place open to the public and whether as a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle, to offer or consent to perform any illicit sexual act for money. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person, while in any place open to the public and whether as a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle, to attempt to induce, entice, solicit, pander, purchase or procure another to commit any illicit sexual act for money. An illicit sexual act is defined as one or more of the following: 
(1)  Prostitution; 
(2)  Sodomy for hire; or 
(3)  Masturbation for hire. 
Any person in violation of this Code section shall be guilty of the offense of idling and loitering for the purpose of committing an illicit sexual act. 
(b)  For the purpose of subsection (a) any person shall include solicitors of illicit sexual acts or panderers, who solicit, procure or purchase an other to perform any illicit sexual act in exchange for money, and who are commonly referred to as "johns" or "tricks". 
(c)  The following penalties shall be imposed upon the conviction of the offense of idling and loitering for the purpose of committing an illicit sexual act. 
(1)  First conviction. Punishment as provided in section 1-8. 
(2)  Second conviction. Sixty days incarceration in the city jail or stockade without a reduction in time. 
(3)  Third and subsequent convictions. Six months in the city jail or stockade without a reduction in time. 
(d)  The following penalties shall be imposed upon the conviction of subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this section. 
(1)  First conviction. A mandatory minimum term of imprisonment of 15 days in the city jail and a minimum mandatory fine of $250.00. 
(2)  Second conviction. 
a.  A mandatory term of 180 days imprisonment with a minimum of 60 days of said sentence of imprisonment to be served in confinement in the city jail. The remaining 120 days may be served on probation as prescribed in subsection 2(b); 
b.  The sentencing court may, in its discretion, require any person convicted of a second violation of subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this Code section, as a special condition of probation, to leave the corporate limits of the city and not return during the probationary period; 
c.  Any person convicted of a second violation of subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this Code section shall also pay a fine of $1,000.00. 
(3)  Third and subsequent convictions. A mandatory term of six months of imprisonment in the city jail. 
(4)  None of the mandatory sentences referred to in this Code section shall be suspended, probated, deferred or withheld, except as provided herein. 
(5)  Nothing in this Code section shall affect the sentencing court's authority to impose any other condition of probation as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 42-8-5. 
(6)  The city solicitor may move the sentencing court to impose a reduced or suspended sentence upon any person who is convicted of a violation of this Code section and provides substantial assistance in the identification, arrest, or conviction of any of his accomplices, accessories, co-conspirators, or principals. Upon good cause shown, the motion may be filed and heard in camera. The judge hearing the motion may impose a reduced or suspended sentence if he finds that the defendant has rendered such substantial assistance. 
(7)  Diversion program 
a.  Upon a verdict or plea of guilty or a plea of nolo contendre, but before an adjudication of guilt, the sentencing court may, in its discretion, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the defendant, defer further proceeding and enroll the defendant in an educational program administered by the City Solicitor's Office in accordance with Official Code of Georgia Annotated 15-18-80, and designed to address issues related to idling and loitering for the purpose of committing an illegal sexual act and/or prostitution. 
b.  Upon fulfillment of the terms of the educational program, including a showing that the defendant has not violated this Code Section for a period of one year, the defendant shall be discharged without court adjudication of guilt. 
c.  The City Solicitor's Office is authorized to assess and collect from each defendant who enters the program a fee as set forth in O.C.G.A. 15-18-80 for the administration of the program. Any such fee collected shall be deposited into the City of Atlanta General Fund. 
(8)  With the exception of those fees collected in accordance with 106-127(d)(7), all fines paid to and collected by the city's courts pursuant to conviction under this section shall be deposited to the Inmate Welfare Program Trust Fund, 3PO2494008121CL9999, to defray the cost of inmate programs and services in the department of corrections. 
(Code 1977, § 17-2004; Ord. No. 1996-76, 11-12-96; Ord. No. 1998-76, § 1, 10-22-98; Ord. No. 1998-89, § 1, 12-14-98; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 13, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2008-81(08-O-1485), §§ 1, 2, 11-6-08) 
State Law reference— Keeping a place of prostitution, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-10. 
Sec. 106-128. - Criminal impersonation. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Intent to defraud means the use of deception with the intention to injure another's interest which has economic value. 
(b)  Intent. A person is guilty of criminal impersonation if such person: 
(1)  Assumes a false identity and does not act in such person's assumed character with the intent to defraud another; or 
(2)  Pretends to be a representative of some person or organization and does an act in such person's pretended capacity with the intent to defraud another. 
(Code 1977, § 17-2002) 
Sec. 106-129. - Indecency. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1)  An act, or simulated act, of sexual intercourse; 
(2)  An exposure of one's genitals, or of one's breasts, if female; or 
(3)  The touching, caressing or fondling of the genitals, or the breast of a female. 
(Code 1977, § 17-2003) 
State Law reference— Public indecency, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
Sec. 106-130. - Defecating or urinating on public property or in areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to defecate or urinate on the streets or sidewalks, or in the halls or elevators of public or commercial buildings, or on any property open to public view in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3011) 
State Law reference— Public indecency, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
Sec. 106-131. - Spitting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon the sidewalks, or upon the floors of places of worship, buses, public halls, theaters or other public places. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3012) 
Sec. 106-132. - Hazing. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Haze means to subject a student to an activity which endangers the physical health of a student regardless of a student's willingness to participate in such activity. 
School means any school, college or university in the city. 
School organization means any club, society, fraternity, sorority or a group living together which has students as its principal members. 
Student means any person enrolled in a school in the city. 
(b)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to haze any student in connection with or as a condition or precondition of gaining acceptance, membership, office or other status in a school organization. 
(c)  Violation. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty and penalized as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3021) 
State Law reference— Hazing, O.C.G.A. § 16-5-61. 
Secs. 106-133—106-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 4, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed Div. 2, §§ 106-151—106-164, which pertained to gambling and related offenses and derived from Code 1977, §§ 17-5001—17-5014. 

Secs. 106-151—106-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRUGS AND OTHER CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Drugs and other controlled substances, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 106-181. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 5, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed § 106-181, which pertained to model glue and derived from Code 1977, §§ 17-8001, 17-8002. 
Sec. 106-182. - Marijuana. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess one ounce or less of marijuana within the corporate limits of the city. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $75.00, and shall not be punished by imprisonment for any term; provided that any defendant charged with possession of one ounce or less of marijuana shall be entitled on request to have the case against such defendant transferred to the court having general misdemeanor jurisdiction in the county wherein the alleged offense occurred. 
(Code 1977, § 17-8003; Ord. No. 2017-55(17-O-1152), § 1, 10-2-17 ) 
Possession of marijuana, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-30.1. 
Sec. 106-183. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 6, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed § 106-183, which pertained to aftershave lotion and derived from Code 1977, § 17-8004. 
Sec. 106-184. - Spray paint. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally smell or inhale spray paint containing halogenated hydrocarbons for the purpose of intoxication. 
(b)  Any person guilty of violating this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $250.00 or imprisonment for not more than 25 days for such violation. 
(Code 1977, § 17-8005) 
Secs. 106-185—106-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES BY AND AGAINST MINORS 

Sec. 106-226. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-57, § 2, adopted July 24, 2001, repealed § 106-226 in its entirety. Formerly said section pertained to frequenting of dancehalls as related to offenses by and against minors. The user of this Code is directed to ch. 14, art. IX, div. 1 and 2 for similar provisions. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 106-227. - Curfew—Authorized. 
It is unlawful for any minor 16 years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; however, on Fridays and Saturdays, the effective hours are between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by such minor's parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor. 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by such minor's parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor. 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity or dance. 
(4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the places referenced in this section during the proscribed period of time. 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion. 
(6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel, with interstate travel through the city, excepted in all cases from the curfew. 
(Code 1977, § 17-7002) 
Sec. 106-228. - Same—Responsibility of parents. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any child 16 years of age or younger to permit or by insufficient control to allow such child to be in or upon the public streets or any other places listed in section 106-227 within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. the following day, except in circumstances set out in subsections (1) through (6) of section 106-227. 
(b)  Violation. Upon conviction of violation of this section for the first time, a person shall be given a warning citation. Upon further convictions, a person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and costs, or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days, or work on the public streets or work on the public works of the city for not more than 60 days, or be subject to any one or more of the punishments, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 17-7003; Ord. No. 2009-60(09-O-1560), § 1, 10-13-09) 
Sec. 106-229. - Child in need of supervision. 
(a)  Any minor age six through 15 years old who loiters, wanders, strolls or plays in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots, unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. on any school day shall be considered a child in need of supervision. 
(b)  A minor shall not be considered a child in need of supervision under the circumstances set forth in items (1) through (6) of section 106-227 of this chapter, or in the following instances: 
(1)  When the minor is enrolled in a valid home study program as authorized by O.C.G.A. Section 20-2-690; 
(2)  When the minor has completed all course study requirements for high school graduation; 
(3)  When the minor is married in accordance with applicable law; 
(4)  When the minor has written proof from school authorities that he/she is excused from school attendance at that particular time; or 
(5)  When the minor is participating in an approved school or study activity which requires the minor to be off school property. 
(c)  A police officer shall transport any minor charged with being a child in need of Supervision, as defined in subsection (a), to a designated school district facility. A minor transported to the school district facility will be released to the custody of the school officials or to the custody of the minor's parent or legal guardian. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, legal guardian or other person having custody or control of any minor, age six through 15 years old, to knowingly commit an act or knowingly fail to act when such an act or omission would cause the minor to be found to be a child in need of supervision as defined in subsection (a). 
(1)  It shall be an affirmative defense to this section if the parent or legal guardian has invoked the jurisdiction of the juvenile court with regard to the minor prior to the time that the minor was charged with being a child in need of supervision. 
(2)  It shall not be a defense to the offense provided for in subsection (b) that the minor has not been formally found to be a child in need of supervision. 
(3)  Any person who violates this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in the general penalty provision currently designated as section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 2009-46(09-O-0824), § 1, 8-25-09; Ord. No. 2012-02(12-O-0077), § 1, 2-15-12) 
Secs. 106-230—106-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WEAPON CONTROL[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Weapons in parks, § 110-66. 
State Law reference— Weapons, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-101. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 106-251. - Law enforcement. 
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the acquisition, possession or disposition of weapons by police departments, sheriff's offices, marshal's offices, other local, state and federal law enforcement agencies, or the military and naval forces of this state or of the United States for use in the discharge of their official duties. 
( Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130), § 7, 3-29-17 ) 
Secs. 106-252—106-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 8, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed Div. 2 §§ 106-266—106-273, which pertained to registration, sale and disposition and derived from Code 1977, §§ 17-4021—17-4027; Ord. No. 2008-79(08-O-1677), § 23, 11-6-08. 

Secs. 106-266—106-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POSSESSION AND USE 

Sec. 106-301. - Discharging firearms. 
Shooting any firearms in the city, unless in a licensed shooting gallery or by permission of the council on military parades, is prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 17-4005) 
Sec. 106-302. - Firing of cannons, artillery. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to fire a cannon or other piece of artillery without special permission of the council. 
(Code 1977, § 17-4006) 
Sec. 106-303. - Air guns, slingshots, similar weapons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any air gun, air pistol, slingshot or like instrument or weapon within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17-4031) 
Sec. 106-304. - Arrows. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, within the corporate limits of the city, to discharge any arrow of any kind or character from a bow; provided, however, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the use of bows and arrows indoors on any established archery range under the personal and direct supervision of a person at least 18 years of age. 
(Code 1977, § 17-4032) 
Sec. 106-305. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 9, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed § 106-305, which pertained to sale or display in show windows visible from streets and derived from Code 1977, § 17-4033. 
Sec. 106-306. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 9, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed § 106-306, which pertained to knives, razors, similar weapons and derived from Code 1977, § 17-4034. 
Sec. 106-307. - City employees prohibited from carrying weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of the city to have on such employee's person, either concealed or unconcealed, or in such employee's immediate possession, or to bring onto any premises of the city any of the following implements: 
(1)  Any firearms, guns, pistols or other instruments of like kind or similar character; 
(2)  Any sword or dirk, spear or sword-in-a-cane; 
(3)  Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches; 
(4)  Any knife which has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches; 
(5)  Any knife of any kind, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than three inches; this is intended to include all knives such as butcher knives or other knives which do not close; 
(6)  Any straight razor; 
(7)  Any ice pick or similar device having a sharp point; 
(8)  Any knucks; 
(9)  Any explosives; 
(10)  Any article or combination of articles likely to be made into so as to produce an explosive, including but not limited to gas, fire or water; 
(11)  Slingshots, bows and arrows, cannon, artillery or fireworks; 
(12)  Gas bombs, fire bombs, water bombs or similar type bomb or like in kind likely to produce harm either to the person or property of the city; or 
(13)  Any or all other instruments, implements, objects or devices that would or could produce harm or injury to any person or property of the city or of another. 
(b)  The following employees or special employees of the city are authorized to carry pistols or other weapons or equipment when such is lawfully issued to them: 
(1)  Police. 
(2)  Park police. 
(3)  Airport police. 
(4)  Security guards employed by the city. 
(5)  Court bailiffs. 
(6)  Probation officers. 
(7)  Specially deputized citizens or employees of the city. 
(8)  Personnel employed by the office of corrections. 
(c)  Any violation of this section or any subsection thereof shall be considered an offense and any person convicted of violating the terms of this section or any subsection thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 17-4035; Ord. No. 2006-69, § 1, 10-11-06) 
State Law reference— Carrying deadly weapons to or at public gatherings, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-127; concealed revolver of pistol licenses, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-128 et seq. 
Secs. 106-308—106-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 10, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed Div. 4, §§ 106-326—106-330, which pertained to aliens and derived from Code 1977, §§ 17-4011—17-4015. 

Secs. 106-326—106-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 11, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed Div. 5, §§ 106-351—106-354, which pertained to pistols and derived from Code 1977, §§ 17-4001—17-4004. 

Secs. 106-351—106-375. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-11(17-O-1130) , § 12, adopted March 29, 2017, repealed Div. 6, §§ 106-376—106-378, which pertained to assault weapons and derived from Code 1977, § 17-4036(a)—(f). 

Secs. 106-376—106-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DRUG-FREE ZONES 
DIVISION 1. - COMMERCIAL ZONES 

Sec. 106-401. - Title. 
This article should be known as the "Drug-Free Commercial Zone" Code. 
(Ord. No. 1998-12, § 1, 3-9-98) 
Sec. 106-402. - Findings. 
(a)  The council finds that there is a high rate of drug related crime in certain commercial areas, as studied and determined by the Atlanta Police Department, as reported in Exhibit A, which is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth. 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. 16-13-32.6, the City of Atlanta creates and designates drug-free commercial zones to be located in those areas more fully described in the attached Exhibit B, which is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth, consisting of previously zoned commercial property pursuant to the city's planning and zoning powers and residential property contiguous to such commercially zoned area extending not more than one-half mile from the external boundary of any portion of the commercially zoned area, as certified in Exhibit C. 
(c)  For purposes of this article, designation of commercial property and contiguous residential property shall be that as set forth in chapter 16 of this Code, as it shall be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1998-12, § 1, 3-9-98) 
Sec. 106-403. - Designation of drug-free commercial zones. 
(a)  Drug-free commercial zones are those areas of the city designated as follows: 
Zone I, North Avenue: An area contained within a northern boundary of Bankhead Avenue; a southern boundary of Simpson Street: a western boundary of Ashby Street; an eastern boundary of Railroad Zone Boundary. 
Zone I, Fair Street: An area contained within a northern boundary of M. L. King, Jr. Drive; a southern boundary of Westview Drive, extended to Ashby Street; a western boundary of Ashby Street; an eastern boundary of Northside Drive. 
Zone I, M.L. King, Jr. Drive: An area contained within a northern boundary of Collier Road; a southern boundary of M.L. King, Jr. Drive; a western boundary of Old Gordon; an eastern boundary of Bolton Road. 
Zone I, Bankhead Highway: An area contained N.W. from the intersection of Bankhead and Hollywood Road to the intersection of Bankhead and Commercial Avenue, N.W. 
Zone I, Hollywood Road: An area contained N.W. from the intersection of Hollywood and Perry Blvd. to the intersection of Hollywood and Hightower Road, N.W. 
Zone I, James Jackson Parkway: An area contained N.W. from the intersection of James Jackson and Browntown Road to the intersection of James Jackson and Hightower Road, N.W. 
Zone III, Thomasville: An area contained within a northern boundary of Custer Avenue; a southern boundary of Isa Drive; a western boundary of Boulevard/Federal Prison Property Line; an eastern boundary of Moreland Avenue. 
Police Zone III, McDaniel: An area contained within a northern boundary of I-20; a southern boundary of University Avenue; a western boundary of Northside Drive; and an eastern boundary of I-75. 
Zone III, Jonesboro Road: An area contained within a northern boundary of McWilliams Avenue, S.E.; a southern boundary of Macedonia Road, S. E.; a western boundary of an imaginary line 300 yards westerly of the center line of Jonesboro Road; an eastern boundary of an imaginary line 200 yards easterly of the center line of Jonesboro Road. 
Zone IV, Cascade Heights: An area contained within a northern boundary of Worthem Avenue, S.W.; a southern boundary of Belvedere Avenue, S.W.; a western boundary of Beecher Road, S.W. at its intersection with Belvedere Avenue, S.W. to Benjamin E. Mays Drive; thence with Benjamin E. Mays Drive to Herring Road, S.W.; an eastern boundary of Delowe Drive, S.W. at its intersection with Belvedere Drive and with Delowe Drive to Cascade Road, S.W., thence in a straight line following the same direction as Delowe Drive to Jackson Place, S.W. thence Jackson Place to Philadelphia, S.W. (Also to include that portion of Jackson Place, S.W. east of the aforementioned line on both sides of Jackson Place for a distance of 150 yards.) 
Zone IV, Beecher: An area contained within a northern boundary of Donnelly Avenue; a southern boundary of Avon Avenue; a western boundary of Cascade Avenue, S.W and continuing as Cascade Road; and an eastern boundary of Lee Street, S.W. 
Zone IV, Allison Court: An area contained within a northern boundary of Campbellton Road, S.W.; a southern boundary of the city limits; a western boundary of Delowe Drive, S.W., to include all buildings on the extension of Allison Court which extends west of Delowe and dead ends; an eastern boundary of the Fort McPherson property line. 
Zone IV, M.L. King, Jr. Drive: An area contained within a northern boundary of the intersection of MLK, Jr. Drive, S.W. and Old Gordon Road, N.W. thence on MLK, Jr. Drive to Bolton Road, thence on Bolton Road to Fairlane Drive, N.W. thence on Fairlane Drive; a southern boundary starting at the intersection of MLK, Jr. Drive, S.W. and Interstate 285, and running a straight line, perpendicular to MLK, Jr. Drive, S.W., 500 yards, thence that line in a northerly direction with the midline of MLK, Jr. Drive; a western boundary starting at the intersection of Fairlane Drive, N.W. and Fedora Way, N.W. and running a line 500 yards perpendicular to the midline of MLK, Jr. Drive and with that line in a westerly direction to the eastern boundary of I-285. 
Zone IV, Allen Temple: An area contained within a northern boundary of Oakcliff Road, N.W., thence a line connecting with Tribble Lane, N.W., thence Tribble Lane; a southern boundary from the intersection of Harlan Road, S.W. and Tee Road, S.W., and thence from that intersection, running a line, perpendicular to MLK, Jr. Drive 500 yards, thence that line in a southerly direction with the midline of MLK, Jr. Drive to Lynhurst Drive, S.W., thence with Lynhurst Drive to North Utoy Creek, thence with North Utoy Creek; a western boundary of I-285 to its crossing with Brownlee Road, S.W. thence with Brownlee Road; and an eastern boundary of Harlan Road, S.W. thence MLK, Jr. Drive, S.W. thence Linkwood Road, N . W. 
Zone V, Fourth Ward: An area contained within a northern boundary of Ponce de Leon, N.E.; a southern boundary of Freedom Parkway, N.E., a western boundary of Argonne Avenue, N.E. continuing as Bedford Place, N.E. and continuing as Fort Street, N.E.; an eastern boundary of a straight line beginning at the intersection of Freedom Parkway where it intersects Corley Street, N.E. continuing along Corley Street to Highland Avenue, N.E thence a straight line to Florence Street, N.E. thence along Florence Street to East Avenue, N.E. thence a straight line to Wilmer Street, N.E. where it intersects Rankin Street, N.E. thence along Wilmer Street, N.E. and continuing in a straight line to Ponce de Leon Avenue, N.E. 
Zone V, Midtown: An area contained within a northern boundary of 11th Street, N.E., a southern boundary of 4th Street, N.E.; a western boundary of West Peachtree Street, N.W.; an eastern boundary of Argonne Avenue, N.E., thence extending north along a straight line. 
Zone V, Daniel Street: An area contained within a northern boundary of Auburn Avenue; a southern boundary of Decatur Street; a western boundary of Boulevard; an eastern boundary of Cornelia Street. 
Zone VI, DeKalb Avenue: An area contained within a northern boundary of DeKalb Avenue; a southern boundary of Memorial Drive; a western Boundary of Moreland Avenue; an eastern boundary of Rogers Street. 
Zone VI, Memorial Drive: An area contained within a northern boundary of Memorial Drive; a southern boundary of Portland Avenue and proceeding westerly along Portland Avenue to Glenwood Place, thence northerly along Glenwood Place to Glenwood Avenue, thence westerly on Glenwood Avenue; a western boundary of the Glenwood Memorial Connector; an eastern boundary of Flat Shoals Avenue. 
Vine Street N.W., from the intersection of Vine and Magnolia Street to the intersection of Vine and Thurmond Street NW. 
Police Beat 101: Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive and Peters Street Commercial Corridor: The area bordered on the north by Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive; on the east by Northside Drive thence Northeasterly on Peters Street to Spring Street; on the south by Atlanta Student Movement Blvd.; and on the west by Joseph E. Lowery Blvd. 
Police Beat 102: The area bounded on the north by Joseph E. Boone Blvd., on the east by Northside Drive, on the south by Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive and on the west by Joseph E. Lowery Blvd. 
Police Beat 104: The area bounded on the north by the MARTA rail line/Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, on the east by Joseph E. Lowery Blvd., on the south by I-20 and on the west by West Lake Avenue. 
Police Beat 105: The area bounded on the north by Joseph E. Boone Blvd., on the east by Joseph E. Lowery Blvd., on the south by Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive and on the west by West Lake Avenue. 
Police Beat 106: The area bounded on the north by Johnson Road/West Marietta Street, on the east by Joseph E. Lowery Blvd., on the south by Joseph E. Boone Blvd., and on the west by West Lake Avenue/Grove Park Place. 
Police Beat 301: The area bounded on the north by Ralph David Abernathy Boulevard; on the east by Metropolitan Parkway south to the Norfolk Southern rail line then east to the I-75/85 Downtown Connector then south along the I-75/85 Downtown Connector to an imaginary line coterminous with Casplan Street (north) then west back to Metropolitan Parkway; on the south by an imaginary line from east to west at the southern Boundary of Perkerson Park; and on the west by Lee Street. 
Police Beat 303: The area bounded on the north by I-20, on the east by I-75/85, on the south by University Avenue and on the west by Metropolitan Parkway. 
Police Beat 304: The area bounded on the north by Ralph David Abernathy Blvd., on the east by Metropolitan Parkway to 1-75/85, on the south by Langford Parkway and on the west by Lee Street. 
Police Beat 306: The area bounded on the north by Dill Avenue, on the east by the I-75/85 Downtown Connector, on the south by Langford Parkway and on the west by Lee Street. 
Police Bent 307: The area bounded on the north by Thirkeld Avenue, on the cast by Jonesboro Road, on the south by Lakewood Avenue and on the west the I-75/85 Downtown Connector. 
Police Beat 310: The area bounded on the north by Langford Parkway, on the east by Jonesboro Road on the south by Cleveland Avenue and on the west by I-75/85. 
Police Beat 311: The area hounded on the north by Cleveland Avenue, on the east by Hapeville Road, on the south by Mt. Zion Road and on the west by Sylvan Road. 
Police Beat 401: Ralph David Abernathy Boulevard Commercial Corridor: The area bordered on the north by Interstate 20; on the east by West Whitehall Street; on the south by Ralph David Abernathy Blvd.; and on the west by Langhorn Street. 
Police Beat 402: White Street Commercial Corridor: The area bordered on the north by Ralph David Abernathy Blvd.; on the east by Lawton Street to Hall Street to Donnelly Avenue to Lee Street; on the south by Arlington Avenue to Oakland Drive to Bridges Avenue; and on the west by Westmont Road to Cascade Avenue. 
Police Beat 404: The area bounded on the north by I-20, on the east by Langhorn Street and Cascade Avenue, on the south by Cascade Avenue and Mays Drive, and on the west by Peyton Road. 
Police Beat 509: The area bounded on the north by North Avenue, on the east by Piedmont Avenue, on the south by the 1-75/85 Downtown Connector and on the west by the 1-75/85 Downtown Connector. 
Police Beat 510: The area bounded on the north by Harris Street, on the east by the I-75/85 Downtown Connector, on the south by Marietta Street and on the west by Peachtree Street. 
Police Beat 511: Broad Street Commercial Corridor: The area bordered on the north by Decatur Street; on the east by Central Avenue; on the south by Mitchell Street; and on the west by Spring Street. 
Police Beat 604: The area bounded on the north by Ralph McGill Blvd./Freedom Parkway, on the east by Moreland Avenue, on the south by Decatur Street/DeKalb Avenue and on the west by the I-75/85 Downtown Connector. 
In APD Zones 5, beats 509 and 510. 
In APD Zone 6, beat 604. 
In APD Zone 3, beats 304, 306 and 307. 
(Ord. No. 1998-12, § 1, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2001-23, § 1, 3-27-01; Ord. No. 2004-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 2004-41, §§ 1—3, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 2008-22(08-O-0557), § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 2012-08(12-O-0282), § 1, 3-14-12; Ord. No. 2013-11(13-O-0317), § 1, 3-13-13; Ord. No. 2013-12(13-O-0515), § 1, 3-27-13; Ord. No. 2013-19(13-O-1032), § 1, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2013-25(13-O-1033), § 1, 5-29-13; Ord. No. 2013-26(13-O-1047), § 1, 6-12-13; Ord. No. 2013-31(13-O-1106), § 1, 7-1-13; Ord. No. 2013-59(13-O-1374), § 1, 11-27-13 ) 
Sec. 106-404. - Duration; revision; deletion. 
(a)  Designation of drug-free commercial zones shall expire five years from the date of the enactment of this ordinance, unless the Council after causing an appropriate study to be undertaken, decides to continue as or designate as a drug-free commercial zone by enacting an ordinance and the subsequent adoption thereof by the General Assembly in accordance with O.C.G.A. 16-13-32.6, et seq. 
(b)  The council may revise the maps and designations by ordinance in the event it deems that appropriate, however a revised map shall not become effective and the new area shall not be a drug-free commercial zone until the revised map has been filed with the Georgia Department of Community Affairs in accordance with O.C.G.A. 16-13-32.6, et seq. 
(c)  The council may remove the designation of drug-free commercial zone in the event it deems that appropriate. The removal of the designation also shall be by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1998-12, § 1, 3-3-98) 
Sec. 106-405. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the designated drug-free commercial zones of the City of Atlanta to engage in or be in or about any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcohol beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated, or for the purpose of or intent to engage in gaming or the purchase, use, possession or consumption of such illegal drugs, narcotics or alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Any person violating this code section shall be punished pursuant to section 1-8 of this Code as it shall be amended from time to time. 
(c)  A person is subject to exclusion for a period of six months from the public streets, sidewalks, and other public ways in all designated drug-free commercial zones designated in article VII of chapter 106 of the Code if that person has been found guilty and convicted of violating sub-paragraph (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1998-12, § 1, 3-3-98) 
Sec. 106-406. - Issuance of exclusion notices. 
(a)  The judge of a court of the city shall issue exclusion notices to any person found in violation of this Code section as provided for in section 106-405(a). 
(b)  If a person excluded from designated drug-free commercial zones is found in any such zone during the exclusion period, that person is subject to immediate arrest for violation of this code section as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1998-12, § 1, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 14, 1-10-05) 
Secs. 106-407—106-420. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SCHOOL ZONES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-84, § 1, adopted July 29, 2003, has been renumbered at the editor's discretion to conform to the style of this Code. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 

Sec. 106-421. - Designation of drug free zones. 
(a)  Designated drug free school zones: Shall be defined as that area 1,000 feet within the locations described below: 
(1)  Booker T. Washington High School located at 45 Whitehouse Drive, SW, Atlanta, Georgia; 
(2)  John F. Kennedy Middle School located at 225 Griffin Street, NW, Atlanta, Georgia; 
(3)  Alonzo F. Herndon Elementary School located at 187 Wesley Avenue, NE, Atlanta, Georgia; and 
(4)  Mary McLeod Bethune Elementary School located at 220 Northside Drive, NW, Atlanta, Georgia. 
(b)  Designated drug free recreational zones: Shall be defined as that area 1,000 feet within the locations described below: 
(1)  John F. Kennedy Park located at 225 Orr Street, Atlanta, Georgia; 
(2)  Charles L. Harper Memorial Park located at Joseph E. Lowery Blvd. at Mayson Turner Road, NW. 
(c)  Designated drug free residential zones: Shall be defined as that area 1,000 feet within the locations described below: 
(d)  The commissioner of public works, in consultation with the Atlanta Police Department, shall erect appropriate signage at each location described in subsections (a), (b) and (c) above. 
(e)  The posting of signage at each location described in subsections (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3), (a)(4), (b)(1), (b)(2) above shall be funded by the project safe neighborhood grant. 
(Ord. No. 2003-84, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 106-422. - Duration; revision; deletion. 
(a)  Designation of drug-free zones shall expire five years from the date of the enactment of this division, unless the council after causing an appropriate study to be undertaken, decides to continue as or designate as a drug-free zone by enacting an ordinance. 
(b)  The council may revise the designations by ordinance in the event it deems that appropriate. 
(c)  The council may remove the designation of drug-free zone in the event it deems that appropriate. The removal of the designation also shall be by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2003-84, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 106-423. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the drug-free zones designated is section 106-421 of the City Code of Atlanta to manufacture, distribute, dispense or possess with intent to distribute a controlled substance or marijuana. 
(b)  Any person violating this code section shall be punished pursuant to section 1-8 of this Code as it shall be amended from time to time. 
(c)  A person is subject to exclusion for a period of six months from the public streets, sidewalks, and other public ways in all designated drug-free zones designated in article VII of chapter 106 of the Code if that person has been found guilty and convicted of violating sub-paragraph (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-84, § 1, 7-29-03) 
Sec. 106-424. - Issuance of exclusion notices. 
(a)  The municipal court judge shall issue exclusion notices to any person found in violation of this Code section as provided for in section 106-423(a). 
(b)  If a person excluded from a designated drug-free zone is found in any such zone during the exclusion period, that person is subject to immediate arrest for violation of this code section as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2003-84, § 1, 7-29-03; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 15, 1-10-05) 
Secs. 106-425—106-800. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-83(08-O-2136, § 2, approved November 24, 2008, repealed Art. VIII, §§ 106-801—106-809, which pertained to graffiti abatement. The user's attention is directed to section 74-174 for similar provisions. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 106-801—106-809. - Reserved. 
Chapter 110 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Naming of public facilities and streets in honor of persons, § 2-2; vending machines on city property and in city facilities, § 2-3; budgets for and rental of neighborhood centers, § 2-921; civic and cultural affairs, ch. 46; library, ch. 102. 
Land development code reference— Impact fee for parks and recreational services, § 19-1001 et seq. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; specific constitutional grant of authority relative to parks, recreational areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5); statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; municipal recreation generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 110-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commissioner means the Commissioner of parks, recreation and cultural affairs. 
Department means the Department of Parks and Recreation. 
Linear park means a single land segment or series of adjoining land segments, where the total depth of the linear park is at least 20 feet and the total length is at least 1/8 mile, and where the distance between each segment is no greater than 100 feet. All of the adjoining land segments shall be dedicated as city park. Each segment must meet one of the following descriptions: 
(1)  An area that is utilized primarily for park and/or recreation purposes; 
(2)  An area of land, walkway or trail adjacent to a public right-of-way as defined in section 138-1 of this Code; or 
(3)  An area of land, walkway or trail adjacent to a street as defined in section 138-1 of this Code, but excluding any public right-of-way. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2001; Ord. No. 2012-37(12-O-0452), § 1, 8-29-12; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 110-2. - Parks council. 
(a)  There is established the parks council, membership in which shall be open to all residents of the city. The parks council shall be governed by a board of directors, of whom there will be 21. The members of the city council shall recommend to the mayor for appointment to the board of directors one person from each of the 12 districts, and the other nine members of the board of directors shall be nominated by the mayor. All members of the board of directors shall be subject to confirmation by the city council and shall serve one-year terms. The mayor shall designate seven members to serve on the executive committee. The Commissioner of parks and recreation and the directors of the bureau of parks and the bureau of recreation shall be ex officio members of the parks council. 
(b)  The parks council will be responsible for the following activities: 
(1)  Expressing the recreational needs and desires of the people of the city. 
(2)  Planning and developing innovative techniques and programs in the bureaus of parks and recreation. 
(3)  Soliciting philanthropic contributions to be used to improve the quality of the city's recreation system. 
(Code 1977, §§ 10-2023, 10-2024) 
Charter reference— Boards and commissions, § 3-401. 
Cross reference— Boards, councils, commissions and authorities, § 2-1851 et seq. 
_____
Sec. 110-3. - Fee schedule. 
The following fee schedule is adopted for the department of parks and recreation for tax-exempt organizations and other organizations, for residents and non-residents. The Commissioner of the Department of Parks and Recreation shall have the authority not to charge a fee at any given location over a period of time designated by the Commissioner, but not less than one month, provided that the decision is in writing and is applied uniformly to anyone utilizing said location during that time period. 
(a)  Reservation Fees: For purposes of this Section 110-3(a), "tax-exempt organization" shall mean any organization described in the Internal Revenue Service's list of organizations that qualify for 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(4) status, regardless of whether the organization has actually applied for and/or received such 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(4) designation. 
(1)  Showmobile rental (per 8 hour period) 
(a)  Tax exempt resident organizations ..... $350.00 
(b)  All other resident organizations ..... $450.00 
(c)  Tax exempt nonresident organizations ..... $600.00 
(d)  All other nonresident organizations ..... $800.00 
(2)  Playmobile rental (per hour) 
(a)  All (includes 2 Fun Experts) ..... $100.00 
(3)  Batting Cage Rental (per hour) 
(a)  All ..... $25.00 
(4)  P.A. System (per day) 
(a)  Tax exempt organizations ..... $70.00 
(b)  All other organizations ..... $135.00 
(5)  Athletic Fields (per hour) 
(a)  Unlighted ball fields 
1.  Tax exempt resident organizations ..... $50.00 
2.  All other resident organizations ..... $63.00 
3.  Tax exempt Nonresident organizations ..... $55.00 
4.  All other Nonresident organizations ..... $73.00 
(b)  Lighted ball fields 
1.  Tax exempt resident organizations ..... $63.00 
2.  All other resident organizations ..... $83.00 
3.  Tax exempt Nonresident organizations ..... $72.00 
4.  All other Nonresident organizations ..... $101.00 
(c)  Tournament ball fields (8 hour minimum) 
1.  Tax exempt resident organizations ..... $65.00 
2.  All other resident organizations ..... $80.00 
3.  Tax exempt Nonresident organizations ..... $105.00 
4.  All other Nonresident organizations ..... $120.00 
(6)  Recreation Center Rooms. The City of Atlanta owns three different types of recreation centers. A Class 4 recreation center has a full gymnasium and a natatorium. A Class 3 recreation center has a full gymnasium but no natatorium. A Class 2 recreation center does not have a full gymnasium or a natatorium. The rates for recreation center rooms are set forth below. 
(a)  Recreation Center room hourly rates, per room. These rates apply to multipurpose, classroom, dance, art, and computer lab room rentals. 
1.  Refundable security deposit ..... $100.00 
2.  Resident Individuals ..... $30.00 
3.  Non-resident Individuals ..... $43.00 
4.  Resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $30.00 
5.  Non-resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $43.00 
6.  All other Resident organizations ..... $75.00 
7.  All other Non-resident organizations ..... $112.00 
(b)  Auditorium hourly rates, per room. These rates apply to Auditorium rentals. In addition, rental of an Auditorium includes equipment such as floor tarps, microphones, podium, sound system, and kitchen equipment. 
1.  Refundable security deposit ..... $100.00 
2.  Resident Individuals ..... $85.00 
i.  Adamsville Auditorium #2 ..... $100.00 
3.  Non-resident Individuals ..... $150.00 
4.  Resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $52.00 
5.  Non-resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $75.00 
6.  All other Resident organizations ..... $122.00 
7.  All other Non-resident organizations ..... $175.00 
(c)  Conference room hourly rates, per room. These rates apply to conference rooms. Except tables and chairs, use of city equipment shall not be permitted with conference room rentals. 
1.  Refundable security deposit ..... $100.00 
2.  Resident Individuals ..... $42.00 
3.  Non-resident Individuals ..... $60.00 
4.  Resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $30.00 
5.  Non-resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $43.00 
6.  All other Resident organizations ..... $70.00 
7.  All other Non-resident organizations ..... $100.00 
(d)  Gymnasium hourly rates, per room - These rates apply to gymnasium rentals. Use of city equipment, chairs and/or tables shall not be permitted with gymnasium rentals. 
1.  Refundable security deposit ..... $100.00 
2.  Resident Individuals ..... $90.00 
3.  Non-resident Individuals ..... $210.00 
4.  Resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $88.00 
5.  Non-resident tax-exempt organizations ..... $125.00 
6.  All other Resident organizations ..... $157.00 
7.  All other Non-resident organizations ..... $225.00 
(e)  Neighborhood Planning Unit Neighborhood Associations. During regular operating hours, and pending availability, rooms will be made available, free of charge, to Booster Clubs that are registered with the Department of Parks and Recreation, NPU and Neighborhood Planning Unit Neighborhood Associations, and NPU Sub-Committees that are registered as such with the Department of City Planning, and that are conducting organizational and community business meetings and activities. Additionally, pending availability, there shall be no charge for the use of city equipment (excluding office supplies) used in connection with said meetings. The charge for such meetings that occur outside of operating hours, pending availability, shall be the applicable rate for Resident tax-exempt organizations. The use of city equipment (excluding office supplies) shall remain free of charge. 
(f)  Event Packages. 
1.  Weddings and wedding receptions. Any individual or organization wishing to hold a wedding or wedding reception at a Class 4 recreation center shall be charged $750.00 total for use of its' Auditoriums. This rental shall entitle the renter to seven hours of use, including a maximum of four hours for the event itself, two hours for set up, and one hour for break down. Any additional hours of use will be billed at $187.50 per hour. Weddings and wedding receptions may not be held in conference rooms or the gymnasiums. 
2.  Events with admission fees/vending. Any individual or organization holding an event at a Class 4 Recreation Center where attendants are charged an admission fee, and/or where vending occurs, must pay: 
i.  The applicable facility rates set forth above, and 
ii.  20% of the gross revenue collected at the event or $500.00, whichever is greater. 
3.  Birthday parties. Any individual or organization wishing to hold a birthday party at a Recreation Center shall be charged $110.00 total for use of its' Classroom and Gymnasium. This rental shall entitle the renter to two and a half hours of use, including one hour of classroom access, one hour of organized play in the gymnasium led by a Fun Expert, and 30 minutes for set-up prior to the event. Birthday parties cannot exceed 30 youth. 
(g)  Salary surcharge and security requirements . 
1.  Salary surcharge. In addition to all of the rates set forth above in this subsection (a)(6), the renter of any recreation center or portion thereof shall be required to pay a salary surcharge for those times when the rental occurs outside of operating hours of the recreation center. The salary surcharge shall be applied to any and all renters using a facility, including without limitation Booster Clubs, NPU's, and Neighborhood Planning Unit Neighborhood Association Sub-Committees. The salary surcharge shall be $25.00 per hour for each staff person required. One staff person shall be provided for every 100 persons whom the Department of Parks and Recreation reasonably expects to attend, such that 1—100 anticipated attendees shall require one staff person; 101—200 anticipated attendees shall require two staff people, etc. The number of expected attendees shall be based upon the number provided on the permit. The Department of Parks and Recreation may apply a different number where it has reasonably reliable information that more attendees will be present, where it provides that information and the decision to the applicant in writing, and where it gives the applicant an opportunity to refute the information. 
2.  Security requirement. The renter of all or a portion of a recreation center must provide off-duty POST-certified law enforcement officers during the rental, regardless of whether the rental occurs during regular or non-regular operating hours if the Department of Parks and Recreation reasonably expects that the number of attendees will be greater than 75, the event is a party or other gathering for social purposes (i.e. not a meeting), where the Department of Parks and Recreation reasonably expects that the event will be attended primarily by persons under the age of 21 years, the event involves the serving of alcohol, or the Department of Parks and Recreation and the Atlanta Police Department both reasonably determine that security is required because of the nature of the event to protect the safety of persons and/or property. The number of security personnel required shall be one officer for every 75 anticipated attendees or less (1—75 anticipated attendees shall require one officer; 76—150 anticipated attendees shall require two officers, etc.), unless the Atlanta Police Department decides that a greater ratio of security personnel is required to protect the safety of persons and/or property. The Department of Parks and Recreation shall establish in writing the procedure for ascertaining that the renter has met the security requirements established by the Department of Parks and Recreation and/or the Atlanta Police Department for the rental. To the extent that this subsection (g)(2) requires that a discretionary decision be made by the Department of Parks and Recreation and/or the Atlanta Police Department, the decision must be made based upon reasonably reliable information, that information and decision must be provided to the applicant in writing, and the applicant must be given an opportunity to refute the information. In no event shall the basis of the discretionary decision be the applicant or attendees' race, color, creed, religion, gender, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, gender identity, or disability status. 
(b)  The following fees shall be charged for participants in certain Cultural Affairs programs and admission to certain Cultural Affairs venues: 
     Hourly Fee 
(1)  Chastain Arts Center and Gallery. 
Adult Classes: 
Drawing ..... $7.00 
Painting ..... $7.00 
Clay (wheel) ..... $10.00 
Clay (hand building) ..... $10.00 
Printmaking ..... $8.00 
Metalwork ..... $8.00 
Framemaking ..... $8.00 
Jewelry ..... $8.00 
Performance/lectures/tours ..... $6.00 
Textiles ..... $7.00 
Movement arts ..... $15.00 
Open studio, per week ..... $20.00 
Children Fees: 
Summer camp (ages 2 & 3) ..... $16.00 
Summer camp (ages 4 & 5) ..... $12.00 
Summer camp (ages 6—12) ..... $10.00 
Summer camp (ages 12—17) ..... $11.00 
Regular classes (ages 2—4) ..... $16.00 
Regular classes (ages 5—17) ..... $16.00 
Room Rental: 
Fee-based workshops, and meetings—20% of revenue or minimum of $ per hour (whichever is greater) ..... $30.00 per hour 
Art organizations and individual artists ..... $9.00 
Social and special events—$ per hour (4-hour minimum); $ per hour per additional hour; Additional $ per hour for all off hour rentals 
Fees are $300 minimum for first four hours, $75 each additional hour. Off hours rental fee is $500 minimum for first four hours, plus $150/additional hour 
Refundable cleaning deposit ..... $100.00 
Gallery Fees: 
Commissions on sales of art—Not to exceed 35% of total cost. 
Miscellaneous Fees: 
Non-resident fee—$ per session (Age 65+ exempt, Summer Camp students exempt) 
Material Fee—Not to exceed $ per class ..... $35.00 
(2)  South Bend Center or Arts and Culture 

 
Salary Surcharge and Security Requirements for the South Bend Cultural Center shall follow the same guidelines as stated in section 110-3(a)(4), subsection (d) entitled "salary surcharge and security requirements. 
(c)  Atlanta Cyclorama Admissions: 
Patron Category: 
Adults (ages 13—64) ..... $10.00 
Seniors (ages 65 and above) ..... $8.00 
Children (ages 4—12) ..... $8.00 
Children (under 4 yrs. old) ..... free 
Group rates (10 or more persons): 
Adult group (ages 13 and above), per person ..... $9.00 
Children's group (ages 4—12), per person ..... $7.00 
Seniors (ages 65 and above) ..... $7.00 
Promotional Events: 
The Director of the Office of Cultural Affairs or her/his designee shall be permitted to hold up to six Cyclorama promotional event days per calendar year during which s/he may reduce all or some of the Cyclorama admission fees set forth above by no more than $2.00. The Director or her/his designee shall have the discretion of applying the promotional event reduced fee structure to City of Atlanta residents only, on any or all of the promotional event days. The promotional event days and the discounts associated therewith shall be advertised in advance on the Cyclorama website. 
Discounts: 
The Director of the Office of Cultural Affairs or her/his designee shall be permitted to offer a discount admission price for Cyclorama patrons who present an admission ticket for entrance to another tourist attraction, provided that: 1) the ticket for the other attraction is dated within 48 hours of the requested entrance to Cyclorama; and 2) the discount associated with the other attraction is explained in writing at the Cyclorama ticket booth, is set forth on the Cyclorama website, and is applied uniformly to all Cyclorama patrons. In addition, the Director of the Office of Cultural Affairs or her/his designee shall be permitted to have written coupons issued for discounted Cyclorama admission fees, provided that said coupons are available to the public and are not distributed anywhere within Grant Park other than on Zoo Atlanta property. The Director of the Office of Cultural Affairs or her/his designee shall have the discretion to determine the amount of any discount offered pursuant to this paragraph, but in no event shall the discount exceed $2.00. Only one discount may be utilized per admission. 
(d)  The following fees shall be charged for participants in certain programs of the office of recreation: 
(1)  Athletic fees: 
a.  Adult athletic team registration fees: 
i.  Basic registration (per season), per team ..... 375.00 
ii.  Single elimination tournament fee, per team ..... 150.00 
iii.  Double elimination tournament fee, per team ..... 200.00 
b.  Youth athletic team registration fees: 
City of Atlanta Team (per season, per sport, per person) 
For Atlanta residents ..... 75.00 
For non-residents ..... 150.00 
Non-City of Atlanta Team (per season), per team ..... 300.00 
Team Registration for City-hosted Tournaments, per team, per tournament ..... 150.00 
c.  Protest fee. Applied only to protests regarding eligibility of a team, coach and/or player. 

 
In the event that the protest is upheld, the protest fee will be returned, 
(2)  Camp Best Friends user fees, per child: 
a.  City residents, and children and grandchildren of city employees residing with the city employee—Per week, per child ..... $35.00 
b.  Non-city resident, per week, per child ..... $110.00 
c.  Late fee—Per child, per hour or fraction of hour for campers left on site after 6:00 p.m., for residents and non-residents ..... $20.00 
(3)  After-school tutorial fee: 
a.  City residents, and children and grandchildren of city employees residing with the city employee—Per week, per child ..... $35.00 
b.  Non-city resident, per week, per child ..... $110.00 
c.  Late fee—Per child, per hour or fraction of hour for child left on site after 6:00 p.m., for residents and non-residents ..... $20.00 
(4)  Teen Club Fee: per year, per person ..... $5.00 
(5)  Cultural Programming in Recreation Centers, per eight-class session ..... $30.00 
(6)  Athletic; One-Time Usage fee, per person, per visit ..... $5.00 
For use at City of Atlanta Natatorium or Recreation Center weight room during closed period only 
(7)  Non Athletic, City-sponsored Special Programs on City of Atlanta Recreation Center Property: 
a.  Adults and youth, per person, per program ..... $5.00 
b.  Seniors, per person, per program ..... $2.00 
(8)  Athletics Sports Camp Registration Fee, per person, per week ..... $65.00 
(9)  Youth Fee: per year, per child (Monthly Payment: plan is allowable) ..... $1,200.00 
Youth Fee provides a discounted rate for Afterschool, Camp Best Friends and all youth athletics registration 
(10)  Senior Program Fee: 
(a)  Resident, per person, per year ..... $25.00 
(b)  Non-Resident, per person, per year ..... $45.00 
(11)  Outdoor Court Fees: For purposes of this section regarding outdoor court fees. Primetime shall mean after 6:00 pm on Weekdays and all times on Weekends and Nationally-observed holidays. All other times shall be deemed Non-Primetime. 
a.  Outdoor Courts 
i.  Non-Primetime 
i.  City Residents ..... $3.00 per hour 
ii.  Non-City Residents ..... $3.50 per hour 
ii.  Primetime 
i.  City Residents ..... $5.00 per hour 
ii.  Non-City Residents ..... $5.50 per hour 
b.  Tennis Center Courts (additional package, instruction, and reservation rates for Tennis Centers only) 
i.  Soft (Clay) Courts 
i.  Non-Primetime 
a.  City Residents ..... $6.00 per hour 
b.  Non-City Residents ..... $6.50 per hour 
ii.  Primetime 
a.  City Residents ..... $6.50 per hour 
b.  Non-City Residents ..... $7.00 per hour 
ii.  Senior 75 years and Under ..... 50% off at time of play 
iii.  Seniors over 75 years ..... Free at time of play 
iv.  Youth Under 18 (Non-Primetime Only) ..... Free at time of play 
v.  Annual Passes (Non-Primetime Only) 
i.  Hard Courts 
a.  City Residents ..... $200.00 per year 
b.  Non-City Residents ..... $250.00 per year 
c.  Senior City Residents ..... $100.00 per year 
d.  Senior Non-City Residents ..... $125.00 per year 
ii.  Soft (Clay) Courts 
a.  City Residents ..... $350.00 per year 
b.  Non-City Residents ..... $450.00 per year 
c.  Senior City Residents ..... $225.00 per year 
d.  Senior Non-City Residents ..... $300.00 per year 
vi.  Lessons 
i.  Individual ..... $60.00 per hour 
ii.  Group (4 minimum) 
a.  Adult ..... $15.00 per hour 
b.  Youth ..... $12.00 per hour 
iii.  Team Coaching (2 minimum) ..... $80.00 per hour 
vii.  League Match Play (home matches only) 
i.  Hard Court ..... $80.00 per court 
ii.  Soft (Clay) Court ..... $110.00 per court 
viii.  Tournament Play (home matches only) 
i.  Hard Court ..... $6.00 per person, per match 
ii.  Soft (Clay) Court ..... $9.00 per person, per match 
ix.  Junior League Play (home matches only) ..... $40.00 per court 
x.  Ball Machines ..... $25.00 per hour 
(12)  Golf Course Fees: (Weekend rates are applicable for all National Holidays) 

 
c.  Additional Course Fees: 
i.  Putting Green Fee (Applies to patrons using putting green only) ..... $3.00 per ½ hour 
ii.  Golf Equipment Storage Fee ..... $3.00 per day (Short/Long Term) 
d.  Annual Memberships (18-Hole Course): Annual Membership covers green fees only. Members must pay reservation fees & cart fees. Membership may not be used before 2:00 pm on Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays. Membership may be used at any of the City's 18-Hole golf courses. 
i.  Resident Regular ..... $775.00 
ii.  Non-Resident Regular ..... $975.00 
iii.  Resident Senior (55+) ..... $410.00 
iv.  Non-Resident Senior (55+) ..... $775.00 
v.  Junior (18-) ..... $475.00 
e.  Annual Memberships (9-Hole Course): Annual Membership covers green fees only. Members must pay pull cart fees. Membership may not be used before 2:00 pm on Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays. Membership may be used at the City's 9-Hole golf course only. 
i.  Resident Regular ..... $400.00 
ii.  Senior (55+)/Junior (18-) ..... $325.00 
f.  Special Offers: From time-to-time and only with the prior written approval of the Commissioner, the operating entity at each golf course may offer special reduced promotional fees—for promotions of limited duration—that vary from fees set forth in the fee schedule. Promotional fees shall be limited as to duration and shall be specific in detail. A permanent log and file of approved promotional fees shall be kept as a public record in the Commissioner's Office. With regard to participants of visiting conventions, a special weekday tournament fee that is $1.00 higher than the regular fee and a special weekend tournament fee that is $2.00 higher than the regular fee may be charged. 
g.  Revenue Allocation: All revenues from course fees and retail will be deposited into the Department of Parks and Recreation's Golf Course Trust Fund. 
(13)  Candler Park Golf Course: 
Weekdays (Monday—Thursday): 
Residents ..... $7.00 
Students and senior residents ..... 6.50 
Nonresidents ..... 10.00 
Nonresident seniors and students ..... 7.50 
Weekends (Friday—Sunday): 
Residents ..... $9.00 
Students and senior residents ..... 7.00 
Nonresidents ..... 11.00 
Nonresident seniors and students ..... 8.00 
Annual Membership Fees (Not valid on weekends or holidays before 12:00 noon): 
Residents ..... $400.00 
Resident students and seniors ..... 325.00 
Nonresidents ..... 550.00 
Nonresident seniors and students ..... 475.00 
Tee time surcharge for a specific tee time ..... 3.00 
Putting green fee—Usage fee for patrons not playing golf but who are using the facility as a putting green; per half hour ..... 3.00 
Golf Equipment storage fee; short term and/or overnight storage, per day ..... 2.00 
(e)  Fees for use of city picnic pavilions are as follows: 
(1)  The following reservation fees: 
a.  Small Pavilions 
1.  City Residents ..... $100.00 per day 
2.  Non-City Residents ..... $150.00 per day 
b.  Medium Pavilions 
1.  City Residents ..... $150.00 per day 
2.  Non-City Residents ..... $200.00 per day 
c.  Large Pavilions 
1.  City Residents ..... $200.00 per day 
2.  Non-City Residents ..... $300.00 per day 
d.  X-Large Pavilions 
1.  City Residents ..... $300.00 per day 
2.  Non-City Residents ..... $400.00 per day 
(2)  A refundable sanitation bond of $100.00 will be charged to reserve the referenced pavilions, payable two weeks prior to the date of the reservation date. The bond shall be forfeited to the city if reserving party fails to clean the pavilions and deposit trash in the trash receptacles provided by the city prior to leaving the site. 
(3)  City park users who reserve pavilions shall have the option of using park attendants at the rate of $10.50 per hour at all designated parks. The commissioner of the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs shall have the authority to provide this option and charge this fee at other city parks at her discretion. 
(4)  Wedding fee: Where an outdoor wedding occurs inside a city park, in a location other than in a picnic pavilion, and where the wedding includes set-up or requires city services, the organizer shall be required to pay a fee of $50.00. 
(5)  City park users requesting a permit to utilize specific areas of park greenspace shall be required to pay a fee of $50.00. Large gathering permit holders shall be exempt from this permit fee. 
(6)  City park users who reserve the amphitheater at Historic Fourth Ward Park shall be required to pay an additional fee of $50.00 per hour if an electrical source is required. The fee is charged during set-up, the duration of the event and break down. 
(7)  City park users requesting permission to use amplified sound, portable toilets, banners, tents 10' x 10' or larger, or generators shall pay a Special Use Fee of $50.00. 
(f)  The fees to be paid to the city for aquatics programs, pool use and pool rentals shall be as follows: 
(1)  Red Cross Aquatics Training Fees: 
a.  Lifeguard Training ..... $350.00 
b.  Lifeguard Training Review ..... $200.00 
c.  Water Safety Instructor ..... $350.00 
d.  Certified Pool Spa Operator ..... $350.00 
e.  CPR for Professional Rescuer ..... $110.00 
f.  CPRO Review ..... $90.00 
g.  Lay Responder ..... $95.00 
h.  CPR Certification ..... $25.00 
i.  AED Certification ..... $25.00 
j.  FA Certification ..... $25.00 
k.  Online Lifeguard Training ..... $250.00 
l.  Online CPR for Professional Rescuer ..... $60.00 
(2)  Lessons: 
a.  Individual Swim Lessons (minimum 3 lessons Per hour) 
i.  Resident ..... $35.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $45.00 
b.  Mixed Group; All Ages (For 12 swim lessons, per person) 
i.  Resident ..... $65.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $80.00 
c.  Group lessons; All Ages (For 12 swim lessons, per person) 
i.  Resident ..... $35.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $65.00 
d.  Aqua Aerobics, per 12 lessons 
i.  Resident ..... $55.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $70.00 
e.  Hydrotherapy, per 12 lessons 
i.  Resident ..... $55.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $70.00 
f.  Walk-ins (must receive instructor consent to attend as a walk-in) 
i.  Resident ..... $7.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $10.00 
(3)  City of Atlanta Dolphins: 
a.  CAD — Novice 
i.  Resident ..... $135.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $165.00 
b.  CAD — Advanced 
i.  Resident ..... $225.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $425.00 
c.  CAD — Masters 
i.  Resident ..... $135.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $165.00 
(4)  Pool Entrance Fees: The following entrance fees shall be implemented for all City-owned pools during those hours when City-operated pools are open to the public. For those City pools that are operated by a private entity, the private entity may establish its own entrance fees to be applied only when City-operated pools are closed to the public. The entity's entrance fees shall be approved through the entity's MOU with the City. 
a.  All Individuals ..... $5.00 
b.  Splash Card 
i.  Adult 10 days ..... $37.50 
ii.  Child/Senior 10 days ..... $17.50 
iii.  Adult 20 days ..... $70.00 
iv.  Child/Senior 20 days ..... $35.00 
(5)  Yearly Membership Pass: The Yearly Pass may be utilized for entrance to both indoor and outdoor pools, as well as all fitness centers and weight rooms. Does not include enrollment in Programs or Activities. 
a.  Child/Senior 
i.  Resident ..... $65.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $85.00 
b.  Adult 
i.  Resident ..... $110.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $150.00 
c.  Family (for family of 4) 
i.  Resident ..... $245.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $345.00 
d.  each add'l family member 
i.  Resident ..... $55.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $90.00 
(6)  Summer Pass (8 weeks): The Summer Pass may be utilized for entrance to outdoor pools only. The Summer Pass is accepted at all City-owned outdoor pools during those hours when City-operated pools are open to the public. For those City pools that are operated by a private entity, the private entity may establish its own summer pass fees to be applied only when City-operated pools are closed to the public. The entity's summer pass fees shall be approved through the entity's MOU with the City. 
a.  Child/Senior 
i.  Resident ..... $40.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $60.00 
b.  Adult 
i.  Resident ..... $50.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $70.00 
c.  Family (for family of 4) 
i.  Resident ..... $120.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $140.00 
d. Each add'l family member 
i.  Resident ..... $15.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $35.00 
(7)  Hourly Pool, Room, and Amenity Rental Fees: 
a.  25 Yard Competition Pool 
i.  Resident ..... $110.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $220.00 
b.  50 Yard Competition Pool 
i.  Resident ..... $220.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $440.00 
c.  25 Yard Lane Rental 
i.  Resident ..... $25.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $50.00 
d.  50 Yard Lane Rental 
i.  Resident ..... $50.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $100.00 
e.  Therapy Pool 
i.  Resident ..... $60.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $120.00 
f.  Meeting Room Space 
i.  Resident ..... $55.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $110.00 
g.  Equipment PA Podium 
i.  Resident ..... $75.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $100.00 
h.  Timing System Rental 
i.  Resident ..... $200.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $400.00 
i.  Washington Natatorium Pavilion 
i.  Resident ..... $50.00 
ii.  Non-resident ..... $75.00 
(g)  Outdoor and Environmental Education Activities and Lake Allatoona. The following fees shall be paid to the city for the indicated activity or use of the indicated facility: 
(1)  Cost of camp. 

 
(2)  Cabin rentals. 
Lake Allatoona Cabin Rental refundable deposit (small cabin), per night ..... $150.00 
Lake Allatoona Cabin Rental refundable deposit (large cabin), per night ..... 250.00 
Lake Allatoona Cabin Rental fee (small cabin), per night ..... 150.00 
Lake Allatoona Cabin Rental fee (large cabin), per night ..... 250.00 
Lake Allatoona Grounds Rental Fee, per hour, three-hour minimum ..... 50.00 
Use of kitchen is free with cabin rental 
(3)  Dining hall rentals. 
Conference Room 1, per day ..... $150.00 
Conference Room 2, per day ..... 150.00 
Combined conference rooms, per day ..... 300.00 
Kitchen only, per day ..... 150.00 
Kitchen cost with conference room rental, per day ..... 50.00 
Entire building, per day ..... 450.00 
Day = 8 hours 
(4)  Lake Allatoona Activity Fees, for Residents and Non-Residents. 
Canoe 101 ..... $15.00 
Canoe trips ..... 20.00 
Kayak 101 ..... 15.00 
Kayaking trips ..... 20.00 
Camping 101 ..... 10.00 
Camping trips ..... 20.00 
Mountain biking ..... 30.00 
Rock climbing ..... 45.00 
Bouldering ..... 45.00 
Nature walks ..... 5.00 
Hiking ..... 5.00 
Introduction to tree climbing ..... 30.00 
Introduction to backpacking ..... 15.00 
Backpacking ..... 15.00 
Fishing ..... 5.00 
Plant and wildlife identification ..... 5.00 
Bird watching ..... 5.00 
Orienteering ..... 15.00 
Geo-caching ..... 10.00 
Outdoor photography ..... 10.00 
Primitive skills ..... 15.00 
(h)  Fees for therapeutics, for residents and non-residents: 
TR Youth Club 
Membership fee (bi-annual) ..... $15.00 
Activity fee ..... $3.00 
(i)  Vending and concessions: 

 

 
(j)  Parking Fees. The following parking fee applies to the Southside Park Sports Complex (approximately 200 parking spaces) during adult softball tournaments only: $3.00 per vehicle. 
The following parking fee applies to Grant Park (approximately 770 parking spaces): 
$2.00 per vehicle. 
(k)  Individuals or organizations ("businesses") utilizing a city park or parks ("park") for business purposes, conducting all or portions of the business' services or activities in a park, except where such services or activities do not include vending and are free of charge, shall be required to obtain a permit ("park business permit") from the Commissioner of the Department of Parks and Recreation prior to providing such services or activities. The Commissioner shall have the right to deny or revoke a permit, provided that such denial or revocation is based upon written criteria that are applied uniformly, and provided that such criteria do not include consideration of the speech content of the business, or the business owner's, employees' or patrons' race, color, creed, religion, gender, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, age, disability status, or gender identity. The Commissioner shall also have the right to modify the requests of a permit applicant, for example as to location that the business may operate and/or times that the business may operate, as long as said modification is based upon uniformly-applied written criteria, and is not based on the considerations listed above. 
(1)  Details of park business permit: 
a.  The permit fee shall be $1,500.00 per year per business, per each park in which the business is operating. Should a business own more than one company that utilizes a park, the business will need to obtain a permit for each such company. 
b.  Permit requirements shall include: i) the business shall not exchange any money on city property, including inside of a park; ii) the business shall obtain general liability insurance in an amount determined by the city's office of risk management, but in no event less than $1,000,000.00, with the city listed as an additional insured; iii) the business shall agree to indemnify and defend the city for any damages arising from the operation of the services and/or activities on city property. 
c.  The Commissioner may include any other non-financial requirements s/he deems appropriate, as long as those requirements are set forth in writing and applied consistently to all park business permit applicants. 
d.  The park business fee shall be paid in addition to any other fees owed pursuant to this section 110-3, including without limitation rental fees, and any other fees owed pursuant to the Atlanta Code of Ordinances or other applicable laws. 
(2)  Exemptions: 
a.  The park business permit requirement shall not apply to events for which an outdoor event permit has been issued pursuant to City Code of Ordinances Chapter 142. 
b.  The park business permit requirement shall not apply to 501(c)(3) organizations, but said organizations must pay all other fees owed pursuant to this section 110-3, including without limitation rental fees, and any other fees owed pursuant to the Atlanta Code of Ordinances or other applicable laws. 
c.  The park business permit requirement shall not apply to activities that are provided on recreation properties or amenities such as tennis centers, ball fields, or pools, even when those amenities are located inside of city parks. For businesses that conduct some activities on recreation property or amenities and some outside of recreation property but in a park, the business must obtain a park business permit for those activities that occur in the park. 
d.  The park business permit requirement shall not apply to organizations that are mandated to perform complete or partial maintenance and/or improvement of a park and/or recreation facility for one year or greater at no cost to the city, pursuant to a written agreement with the city that is fully executed. 
e.  The park business permit requirement shall not apply to businesses conducting photo or film shoots inside a city park. 
(3)  Penalties: Businesses in violation of this code provision shall be subject to the penalties set forth in City Code of Ordinances section 1-8. Each class or activity conducted without a permit may be deemed a separate violation. 
(l)  Individuals or organizations ("businesses") utilizing city recreation property, or a city recreation center, facility, or amenity, including without limitation ball fields, tennis courts, swimming pools ("recreation facility"), the Gilbert House, and South Bend Arts and Cultural Center for business purposes, conducting all or portions of the business services or activities in or on a recreation facility, except where such services or activities do not include vending and are free of charge, shall be required to pay a fee and enter a recreation business agreement with the city prior to providing such services or activities. The Commissioner of the Department of Parks and Recreation shall determine at what recreation facilities a business may be offered, and shall not permit businesses to be offered at other locations. This list shall be in writing and shall be applied uniformly. The Commissioner of the Department of Parks and Recreation or her/his designee may execute the recreation business agreement on behalf of the city without obtaining city council approval. S/he may allow a business to utilize a recreation facility only if the business is offering a recreation activity that is authorized by the Department of Parks and Recreation. Additionally, the Commissioner may determine which businesses to enter recreation business agreements with provided her/his criteria for such determination are established in writing and. applied uniformly, and provided that the criteria do not include any consideration of the business owner's, employees', or patrons' race, color, creed, religion, gender, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, political affiliation, age, disability status, or gender identity. 
(1)  Details of recreation business agreement: 
a.  The fee shall be 25 percent of the gross revenue obtained from all of the services, activities and/or programs performed by the business at the recreation facility. 
b.  Recreation business agreement requirements shall include: i) the business shall obtain general liability insurance in an amount determined by the city's office of risk management, but in no event less than $1,000,000.00, with the city listed as an additional insured; ii) the business shall agree to indemnify and defend the city for any damages arising from the operation of the services and/or activities at the city facility; iii) the term of the agreement shall be one year, and the city may terminate the agreement without cause with 60 days written notice. 
c.  Businesses who enter a recreation business agreement shall not be required to pay the other fees owed pursuant to this section 110-3 for the business operation, including without limitation rental fees, but shall be required to pay other applicable fees imposed by the city or other jurisdictions. 
d.  The Commissioner may include any other non-financial requirements s/he deems appropriate. 
(2)  Exemptions: 
a.  Where a program or activity is being conducted in a portion of a recreation facility that is outdoors, and where the individual or organization has received an outdoor event permit pursuant to City Code of Ordinances Chapter 142 for the program or activity at issue, the requirements of this City Code section 110-3(1) shall not apply. 
b.  The recreation business fee requirement shall not apply to 501(c)(3) organizations, but said organizations must pay all other fees owed pursuant to this section 110-3, including without limitation rental fees, and any other fees owed pursuant to the Atlanta Code of Ordinances or other applicable laws. 
c.  The recreation business fee requirement shall not apply to organizations that are mandated to perform complete or partial maintenance and/or improvement of a park and/or recreation facility for one year or greater at no cost to the city, pursuant to a written agreement with the city that is fully executed. 
d.  The amount of the recreation business fee for for-profit leagues shall be $1,500.00 plus any other fees owed pursuant to this section 110-3, including without limitation rental fees, and any other fees owed pursuant to the Atlanta Code of Ordinances or other applicable laws. Accordingly, the requirements of subsection (1)a and (1)c of this section 110-3(1) shall not apply to for-profit leagues, but all other requirements of this section 110-3(1), including without limitation subsections (1)b and (1)d shall apply. 
e.  The requirements of this City Code section 110-3(1) shall not apply to individuals or organizations conducting photo or film shoots in a recreation facility. 
f.  The requirements of this City Code section 110-3(1) shall not apply to events with admission fees and/or vending that are held in class 4 recreation centers, as described earlier in this section 110-3. 
(3)  Penalties: Businesses in violation of this code provision shall be subject to the penalties set forth in City Code of Ordinances section 1-8. Each class or activity conducted without a permit may be deemed a separate violation. 
(m)  Park filming fees. 
(1)  For purposes of this subsection (m), a "filming event" means shooting a film or taking photographs, where such filming or photography occurs inside a city park, and results in an end product that will likely be submitted for copyright protection. Examples of filming events include without limitation movie shoots, video shoots, TV shoots, advertisement shoots. music video shoots, and still photography shoots. 
(2)  Where the mayor or her/his designee determines that one or more park rental coordinators and/or other city staff person(s) is required to attend all or a portion of a filming event, the organizer of the filming event must pay to the city an amount equivalent to the total of all hourly wages that the city will pay to each staff person present at the filming event. Said amount shall be provided to the organizer in writing, indicating a breakdown of each type of employee required to be in attendance, the number of hours that each employee will attend, and the city's standard hourly rate for each employee in attendance. 
(3)  In the event that the mayor or her/his designee requires police coverage and/or fire rescue coverage at a filming event, the mayor or her/his designee may require the organizer to hire off duty law enforcement officers, off duty fire inspectors, and/or off duty emergency medical services personnel, rather than paying the City for on-duty presence. 
(4)  A filming event may occur in a park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. And 6:00 a.m. provided that written authorization is received by the Commissioner of the Department of Parks and Recreation, the Chief of the Atlanta Police Department, and the Chief of the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department. Should said night filming be permitted, the organizer will be required to pay for one or more park rental coordinators, and to provide off-duty public safety coverage in the amounts determined by the Commissioner and chiefs listed in this subsection. The Commissioner's and chiefs' determinations shall be based solely upon public safety factors and factors potentially impacting the physical integrity of the park. 
(n)  Active Net Online Convenience Fee. Individuals or Organizations utilizing The Active Network, Inc. online portal to register for any classes, make reservations of facilities, and sign up for memberships, offered by the Department of Parks and Recreation ("DPRCA") shall be assessed a convenience fee of 2.99% of the total transaction amount + $0.25. Individuals or Organizations wishing to avoid this convenience fee may still register in person at any DPRCA facility. 
(o)  Promotional Fee. The Commissioner, or his/her designee, may offer an initial promotional fee on any DPRCA programming fees up to 25% of the total cost for a maximum of three months. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2025; Ord. No. 1986-2, §§ 1, 2, 2-7-86; Ord. No. 1988-52, § 1, 11-8-88; Ord. No. 1991-11, § 1, 4-1-91; Ord. No. 1993-45, § 1, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 1993-73, § 1, 9-13-93; Ord. No. 1994-14, §§ 1, 4, 5, 3-24-94; Ord. No. 1994-23, § 1, 5-23-94; Ord. No. 1994-31, § 1, 7-11-94; Ord. No. 1995-13, § 1, 4-24-95; Ord. No. 1995-36, §§ 1, 2, 7, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 1995-44, § 1, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 1995-45, §§ 1, 3, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 1995-46, § 1, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 1995-47, § 1, 8-28-95; Ord. No. 1995-73, §§ 1, 3, 11-27-95; Ord. No. 1996-24, § 1, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 1997-04, § 1, 1-27-97; Ord. No. 1998-15, § 1, 3-9-98; Ord. No. 1998-72, § 1, 10-27-98; Ord. No. 1999-7, §§ 1—9, 1-27-99; Ord. No. 1999-9, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 1999-52, § 1, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 2000-51, § 1, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 2002-65, §§ 1—16, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 2003-01, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-03; Ord. No. 2003-58, § 1, 4-28-03; Ord. No. 2003-107, § 1, 11-24-03; Ord. No. 2004-33, §§ 1, 2, 6-24-04; Ord. No. 2005-26, § 1, 5-9-05; Ord. No. 2005-27, § 1, 5-23-05; Ord. No. 2006-78, § 1, 11-14-06; Ord. No. 2007-53(07-O-1007), § 1, 9-24-07; Ord. No. 2008-52(08-O-0885), § 1, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2008-53(08-O-0873), § 1, 6-24-08; Ord. No. 2008-72(08-O-0877), § 1, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 2009-08(09-O-0097), § 1, 2-23-09; Ord. No. 2009-26(09-O-0673), §§ 1—10, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2009-33(09-O-0805), §§ 11, 12, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2010-14(10-O-0408), §§ 1, 2, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 2010-39(10-O-1063), § 1, 7-15-10; Ord. No. 2010-40(10-O-0936), §§ 1—11, 7-15-10; Ord. No. 2011-08(11-O-0260), §§ 1, 2, 3-30-11; Ord. No. 2011-20(11-O-0793), §§ 1, 2, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 2011-24(11-O-0826), § 1(Exhs. A, B), 6-29-11; Ord. No. 2012-25(12-O-0779), § 1, 6-13-12; Ord. No. 2012-36(12-O-0713), §§ 1—10, 7-25-12; Ord. No. 2012-38(12-O-0999), §§ 1—5, 8-29-12; Ord. No. 2012-42(12-O-1068), §§ 1, 2, 9-26-12; Ord. No. 2013-01(12-O-1653), § 1, 1-16-13; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13; Ord. No. 2015-17(15-O-1099), § 1, 5-13-15 ; Ord. No. 2016-46(16-O-1605) , §§ 1—8, 12-14-16; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157) , § 6, 4-26-17; Ord. No. 2017-70(17-O-1216), § 1, 11-29-17 ) 
_____
Sec. 110-4. - Athletic fees. 
(a)  The mayor or the mayor's designee shall be authorized to obligate the city, to the extent of available appropriations, for the payment of entry and competition fees for individuals and teams representing the city parks and recreation program so that such individuals and teams may participate in organized athletic competition as representatives of the recreation program of the city. 
(b)  The director of recreation shall not make any obligation for payment of entry and competition fees until the chief financial officer shall have certified, after preaudit, that there is to the credit of the bureau of recreation a sufficient unencumbered balance, in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such obligation. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2026) 
Sec. 110-5. - Acceptance of gifts of animals. 
The Commissioner may accept gifts of animals on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2017) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 
Sec. 110-6. - Use of city picnic pavilions. 
All persons using or desiring to use city picnic pavilions shall comply with administrative and scheduling guidelines of the Department of Parks and Recreation which are on file in the office of the commissioner of the Department of Parks and Recreation. 
(Ord. No. 1995-36, § 4, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) 
Secs. 110-7—110-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, approved June 26, 2013, renamed article II, department of parks, recreation and cultural affairs to department of parks and recreation. 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-301 et seq. 

Sec. 110-31. - Additional qualifications of Commissioner of parks, recreation and cultural affairs. 
(a)  In addition to the general qualifications set forth in subsection (b), the Commissioner of parks, recreation and cultural affairs shall possess experience in either public or private employment at a senior supervisory level in at least one of the following fields for a minimum of two years; park management or planning, large-scale community recreation program management, and cultural program administration. 
(b)  In addition to the duties related to the administration of the department, the Commissioner of parks, recreation and cultural affairs shall also be responsible to: 
(1)  Operate and manage the city's neighborhood centers; and 
(2)  Supervise the operation and management of the Boisfeuillet Jones Atlanta Civic Center as a commercially viable asset to the cultural life of the City of Atlanta. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1001; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 72, 9-16-02) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, app. IV, § 29. 
Sec. 110-32. - Bureaus. 
The Department of Parks and Recreation shall consist of the following bureaus: 
(1)  Bureau of parks; 
(2)  Bureau of recreation; and 
(3)  Bureau of cultural affairs. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1002(a); Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, app. IV, § 30. 
Sec. 110-33. - Qualifications of director, bureau of parks. 
In addition to the general qualifications set out in Charter, appendix IV, section 3(a), the director, bureau of parks shall have the following qualifications: 
(1)  Graduation from an accredited college or university with a baccalaureate degree and one year of graduate study in business or public administration, industrial management, landscape architecture, park administration, turf management or a related field and three years of supervisory experience in building construction and grounds maintenance, park design and construction or a related area; 
(2)  Eight years of experience at a supervisory level which include five years in the areas specified in subsection (1) of this section; or 
(3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1002(b)) 
Sec. 110-34. - Functions and duties of bureau of parks. 
The functions and duties of the bureau of parks shall include the following: 
(1)  Administering and maintaining all parks, park facilities, park property and the city cemetery; 
(2)  Administering and enforcing all ordinances for the protection of trees and shrubbery; and 
(3)  Maintaining all trees on city property and city rights-of-way. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1003) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, app. IV, § 32. 
Sec. 110-35. - Qualifications of director, bureau of recreation. 
In addition to the general qualifications set out in Charter, appendix IV, section 3(a), the director, bureau of recreation shall have the following qualifications: 
(1)  Graduation from an accredited college or university with a baccalaureate degree and one year of graduate study in recreation administration, business administration, public administration, physical education or a related field and three years of supervisory experience which include experience in recreation management involving the development of comprehensive athletics, general recreation or other related programs; 
(2)  Eight years of experience at a supervisory level which include five years in the areas specified in subsection (1) of this section; or 
(3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1002(c)) 
Sec. 110-36. - Functions and duties of bureau of recreation. 
The functions and duties of the bureau of recreation shall include the following: 
(1)  Planning, promoting, organizing and supervising a comprehensive municipal program of recreation; and 
(2)  Supervising the recreational use of playgrounds, playfields, recreation centers, swimming pools, athletic fields and other park and recreation facilities. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1003) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, app. IV, § 31. 
Sec. 110-37. - Qualifications of director, bureau of cultural affairs. 
In addition to the general qualifications set out in Charter, appendix IV, section 3(a), the director, bureau of cultural affairs shall have the following qualifications: 
(1)  Graduation from an accredited college or university with a baccalaureate degree and one year of graduate study in business or public administration, liberal arts, fine arts, art history or a related field and three years of supervisory experience in program development, advocacy and administration; public relations; multifaceted cultural programs management; theater, convention center, auditorium or related facility management; grants program administration or related area; 
(2)  Five years of experience at a supervisory level in the areas specified in subsection (1) of this section; or 
(3)  Any equivalent combination of the qualifications set out in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1002(d)) 
Sec. 110-38. - Functions and duties of bureau of cultural affairs. 
The functions and duties of the bureau of cultural affairs shall include: 
(1)  Operating and scheduling the use of the cyclorama and other special recreational and cultural facilities of the city; 
(2)  Developing, implementing and monitoring special cultural events programs; 
(3)  Administering a program of municipal support of the arts; 
(4)  Oversight responsibility of the contract for Zoo Atlanta; 
(5)  Establishing, organizing and maintaining a network and strategy to respond to the demand for the city's officials to support a variety of cultural community initiatives; and 
(6)  Developing policies and procedures to implement the public art master plan. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1005; Ord. No. 2001-55, § 2, 7-24-01; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 73, 9-16-02) 
Secs. 110-39—110-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARK RULES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-55. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article III of Chapter 110: 
(a)  The term "park" or "parks" shall mean any property owned or leased by the City of Atlanta that is designated in writing by the city or by the department of parks and recreation to be a "city park", "city campground" or a "city multi-use trail", including any bodies of water and other amenities located thereon. 
(1)  City property may be available temporarily for park and recreational use without becoming dedicated in perpetuity as a park, as follows: 
(i)  The city explicitly dedicates the property for future use that is not a park; or 
(ii)  The city explicitly reserves the right to use the property in the future for non-park purposes and provides that park and recreation use may be temporary only. 
(2)  City property that meets the criteria of subsection (a)(1) above shall be treated as a "park" for the purpose of being subject to the provisions of Code Chapter 110 and all other Code provisions pertaining to city parks, including without limitation provisions setting forth park rules and fees. Such property shall be treated as a park until such time as the city, including without limitation any city department or contractor, closes the property to public recreational use. Such closure must include on-site public notice that the property may no longer be used for recreational purposes. 
(3)  Privately-owned portions of Oakland Cemetery shall not be deemed a "park". 
(b)  the term "smoking" shall mean inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted tobacco product including cigarettes, cigars, and pipe tobacco. 
(Ord. No. 2003-112, § 1, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2012-35(12-O-0966), § 1, 7-25-12; Ord. No. 2013-48(13-O-1275), 10-16-13 ) 
Sec. 110-56. - Violations. 
(a)  The violation of any rule and regulation governing the use of any park shall be deemed a violation of this Code of Ordinances and shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 thereof. In addition to the section 1-8 sanctions, in the event that a person's violation of any park rule or regulation results in damage to a park, including but not limited to its infrastructure or plants, the person also shall be responsible for reimbursing the city for the cost of repairing the damage, or replacing the damaged item(s) if the city finds that replacement is necessary." 
(b)  Where a rule or regulation governing the use of any park permits an activity only if the activity is approved by the Mayor, or the Commissioner or her/his designee, it shall be the duty of the recipient to have the written permission in his/her possession at all times that she/he is engaged in the activity to which the written permission pertains. The procedure to be utilized to obtain written permission shall be set forth in the park reservations policies and procedures promulgated by the Department of Parks and Recreation, and provided to the public upon request. Any activity that is permitted only upon approval by the mayor, Commissioner or her/his designee, shall be deemed unauthorized and shall be deemed a violation of this Code of Ordinances if the person(s) performing the activity does not have possession of the written permission at the time of performing the activity. 
(c)  In any court hearing or other proceeding involving a rule or regulation governing the use of any park, where the rule or regulation permits an activity only if the activity is approved by the Mayor, or the Commissioner or her/his designee, it shall be the duty, responsibility and burden of the defendant to produce credible evidence of the written permission at the hearing or other proceeding. If the defendant fails to produce credible evidence of the written permission, the court shall find that the permission was not granted. 
(Code 1977, §§ 10-2022, 17-10001; Ord. No. 2003-112, § 3, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2013-27(13-O-1088), § 4, 6-26-13) 
Sec. 110-57. - Authority to adopt. 
The mayor or the mayor's designee may designate the use of any park or park facility and may adopt appropriate rules and regulations governing the use of park grounds and facilities, the issuance of permits when required and the general operation of all parks and park facilities. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2002) 
Sec. 110-58. - Provisions extended to parks. 
All laws, provisions of this Code and other ordinances in force in the city for the promotion of the peace, good order and morals thereof are, whenever applicable, hereby extended to and shall embrace the territory included in the public parks; and any person violating any such ordinance shall be subject to the penalties therefor provided in this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 17-10002) 
Sec. 110-59. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No person shall do any of the following in any park: 
(1)  Climb or lie upon any tree, shrub, fence, statue, monument or fountain. 
(2)  Enter or leave any park except through established entrances or exits and within established time periods. 
(3)  Gain or attempt to gain admittance to any park or facility in any park where a charge is made, without paying that charge. 
(4)  Use any area for changing clothing, other than an area designated for that purpose. 
(5)  Disregard the notices, prohibitions or directions on any park sign. 
(6)  Disobey the lawful order of a police officer. 
(7)  Place or display any sign or advertisement, except that this rule shall not apply to any signs or advertisements regarding any City sponsored or City authorized program, festival, or other event that occurs in the park. Signs or advertisements regarding City sponsored or City authorized programs, festivals or other events may be placed or displayed only with written permission by the Commissioner and her/his designee, and only at the locations and during the times authorized in writing by the Commissioner and her/his designee. 
(8)  Play, practice or otherwise participate in any game, sport or other recreational activity that is destructive to the lawn, plants, walls, road, or other infrastructure of a park, except at or upon places designated for that game, sport or recreational activity. By way of example, these activities shall include but not be limited to wearing sneakers with cleats, playing rugby or volleyball, or skateboarding off of park walls. 
(9)  Knowingly, or through reckless behavior, destroy or damage the lawn, plants, walls, road, or other infrastructure of a park, except by written permission from the Commissioner or her/his designee. 
(10)  Drive stakes, posts, poles or any other device or dig holes for the purpose of securing stakes, posts, poles or any other device for any reason, including to erect a tent, stage or other structure, except by written permission from the Commissioner or her/his designee. 
(11)  Bring in, erect, or permit a minor child in one's custody to bring in and/or erect any inflatable amusements, amusements requiring water, or any amusements requiring an independent power source, except during permitted special events and festivals. This rule shall not apply to city pools and lakes. For purposes of this subsection, inflatable amusements shall not include balls or balloons, and amusements requiring water shall not include water pistols. 
(12)  Erect a tent or canopy with a finished dimension greater than ten feet by ten feet, or be in possession of an erected tent or canopy with the same dimensions, without receiving the written permission of the Commissioner, as well as all other applicable permits required by this Code. This rule shall not apply to Camp Allatoona. 
(13)  Bring in, carry, possess, or permit a minor child one's custody to bring in, carry or possess, glass containers except for authorized vendors who shall retain and remove from the park all glass containers utilized in their activities. This rule shall not apply to the Chastain Park amphitheater when performances are being given therein. 
(14)  Bring in and abandon any animal in a park, including but not limited to cats, ducks, raccoons, opossums, and dogs, without the written permission of the Commissioner or her/his designee. 
(15)  Use a playscape or park bench for other than its intended use and/or purpose. 
(16)  Dispose of charcoals anywhere inside of a park other than in city-provided receptacles that are clearly marked for charcoal disposal. 
(17)  Hang any sign, banner, or any other item from a tree located in the park. 
(18)  Lay any of the following items on any permeable surface in a park: plywood, a non-permeable tarp, or any other item used as a ground covering that is made of a material that does not allow water to penetrate to the ground below. Chairs made of non-permeable material, coolers, and other items not utilized as ground covers do not violate this subsection. This subsection shall not apply where the activity is performed at the direction of the parks Commissioner or her/his designee by a city contractor, a city subcontractor, or a city official or employee acting in her/his official capacity, performing the activities as part of her/his official city duties. In addition, the subsection shall not apply to the host of a permitted outdoor festival, as defined in Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances, during those times when the permit is in effect, provided that use of the items is associated with elements of the event that are authorized by the festival permit. 
(19)  Urinate or defecate in any park regardless of whether the location is in public view, including without limitation in or upon any park building, monument or structure, except in permanent restrooms or portable lavatories open to the public. This rule shall not apply to individuals wearing diapers or who accidentally soil themselves. Soiled diapers must be wrapped tightly so that no waste can escape, and must either be removed from the park or disposed of in a trash can. 
(20)  Spit or expectorate in or upon any park building, monument or structure. 
(21)  Use any water fountain, drinking fountain, pool, sprinklers, reservoir, lake or any other water contained in a park for the purpose of bathing, or cleaning clothing or other personal belongings, except in park bathrooms and showers. 
(22)  Use any athletic field or court for other than its intended purpose, including without limitation: baseball, football and soccer fields; volleyball courts; and tennis courts. Where a sports field is designated for a particular sport, this provision does not prohibit the field's use for a different sport provided that the alternative use is compatible with the type of field and unlikely to cause damage, and provided that no one is using or waiting to use the field to play the sport for which it is intended. This subsection shall not apply to use of athletic fields or courts during a permitted outdoor festival, as defined in Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances, where the terms of use are established in the festival permit, and the use is consistent with those terms. 
(23)  Enter or attempt to enter to any portion of a park that is closed to the public, unless providing city services as a city employee, contractor or subcontractor acting at the direction of the parks Commissioner or his designee. 
(24)  Enter or attempt to enter any portion of a park that is reserved for private use without express permission from the reservation holder. Express permission may be provided in the form of a ticket. 
(25)  Enter or attempt to enter any portion of a park or a park facility when a charge is required for admission, without paying the charge or without receiving express permission from the entity requiring the payment. 
(26)  "Store personal property" as provided in City Code of Ordinances section 106-12. 
(27)  Bring in any collection of livestock, farm animals or docile wild animals to be fed and pet. 
(28)  Handle or launch any simple or complex device containing combustibles that liberate gases that on being ignited and/or whose action propels the device through the air, except as authorized by permit. Examples of such prohibited devices include, but are not limited to: bottle rockets, firecrackers, smoke balls, sparklers, roman candles, strobes, and snaps. 
(29)  Use metal detectors other than for surface metal detection. The user or party using detectors is prohibited from digging or otherwise damaging park grounds. 
(30)  Use of off road vehicles in the public parks, trails and greenspaces to include all terrain vehicles and motorcycles, except motorcycles that remain upon roadways laid out and maintained for vehicular travel as described in section 110-87 and 110-88. 
(b)  The Commissioner shall at all times have available in the office of the Commissioner, as a part of the rules and regulations of the department, a description of the designated uses of the various areas of each public park. A copy of these rules and regulations shall also be filed with the municipal clerk. 
(c)  No persons shall congregate or gather within 150 yards of any entrance to the Chastain Park amphitheater during the hours of 7:30 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. on nights when performances are being given in the Chastain Park amphitheater, unless each such person shall: 
(1)  Hold a valid ticket for the performances being given on such night; 
(2)  Be delivering goods or services to the Chastain Park amphitheater or to persons holding valid tickets for such performance; 
(3)  Be dropping off or picking up passengers who hold valid tickets for such performance; or 
(4)  Be situated on private property of which such person is the lawful occupant, family member of such lawful occupant or the expressly invited guest of such lawful occupant. 
(d)  The Andrew Young Monument and Tribute, located in Walton Spring Park, is City-owned public art. The following rules shall apply to Walton Spring Park, and to the large bronze disk portion of the tribute, consisting of the entire disk plus the surrounding granite bench and wall (collectively the "Art Installation"): 
(1)  No animals on the Art Installation, except for any guide dog especially trained for the purpose of accompanying a totally or partially blind person or a deaf person, or a service dog especially trained for the purpose of accompanying a physically disabled person, or a dog trained and licensed by and in the possession of the Atlanta Police Department or any other law enforcement agency, or a horse utilized by the city's mounted police patrol. 
(2)  No lying down on the Art Installation. 
(3)  No sitting anywhere on the Art Installation, except for on the benches. 
(4)  No skateboarding or biking on the Art Installation. 
(5)  No "Outdoor Events" (as defined in Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances) of greater than 20 people in Walton Spring Park. 
(6)  All other rules set forth in this section 110-59, and all other City of Atlanta ordinances and applicable laws shall apply to Walton Spring Park. 
(e)  The Isamu Noguchi Playscape (the "art installation") located in Piedmont Park is city-owned public art. The art installation consists of the following: 1) The entire area located inside of and including the granite curve; 2) All installations located inside the granite curve, including the play dome, swing set, climbing cubes, jungle gym, spiral slide, triple slide, site play wall, see saw, and sand pit; and 3) the log seating and pavilion located outside of the granite curve and the property immediately surrounding them. The following rules shall apply to the art installation: 
(1)  No animals on the art installation, except for any guide dog especially trained for the purpose of accompanying a totally or partially blind person or a deaf person, or a service dog especially training for the purpose of accompanying a physically disabled person, or a dog trained and licensed by and in the possession of the Atlanta Police Department or any other law enforcement agency, or a horse utilized by the city's mounted police patrol. 
(2)  No lying down on the art installation 
(3)  No skateboarding or biking on the art installation 
(4)  No "outdoor events" (as defined in Chapter 142 of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances) of greater than 20 people within the art installation. 
(5)  All other rules set forth in this section 110-59, and all other City of Atlanta ordinances and applicable laws shall apply to the art installation. 
(f)  Skate parks. For the purposes of this section, shall be defined as the hard surfaced area designed for the active pursuit of the intended activity - access pathways, or adjacent observation areas are not included. 
(1)  No bicycles in the skate park. 
(2)  No lying down in the skate park. 
(3)  No eating in the skate park. 
(4)  No glass containers permitted in the skate park. 
(g)  Tents. In addition to meeting the requirements of subsections 110-59(a)(10) and (a)(12) above and any other requirements established by the City Code of Ordinances and other applicable law, any tent or canopy erected in a park must meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The structure may have no more than two opaque sides. The non-opaque sides must remain visually unobstructed. Said sides may be made of netting or mesh, provided that said netting or mesh does not materially impede visibility into the structure from the outside. Tents with more than two opaque sides are acceptable provided that: a) the opaque sides (other than two) can be opened such that at least two-thirds of each side becomes non-opaque; and b) the opaque sides (other than two) are opened to the greatest extent possible and fastened in a manner that does not materially impede visibility into the structure from the outside. Tents located at the Outdoor Activity Center or Camp Allatoona shall be exempt from this regulation, and may be permitted to have all opaque sides. 
(2)  The structure may not have a floor, unless erected at the Outdoor Activity Center or Camp Allatoona. 
(3)  Tents must have a distance between them of no less than 12 feet. 
(4)  The following items may not be located inside of any tent or canopy absent all required permits and licenses, including without limitation a permit from the Atlanta Fire Rescue Department: 
(A)  Generators, heaters and/or stoves powered by gasoline, kerosene, propane, or other flammable substance; 
(B)  Flammable gases, liquids or accelerants of any kind, including but not limited to, gasoline, propane, and kerosene; 
(C)  A flame/flames from any source, whether open or enclosed, including but not limited to, candles, lanterns, and torches. 
(h)  Application to use by the city. The provisions of this section 110-59 shall not apply when the city uses livestock, farm animals or docile wild animals on property owned or leased by the city. 
(i)  Smoking prohibited in parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in outdoor parks and recreational facilities located within the City of Atlanta, including, but not limited to, the parks, athletic fields, aquatic areas, golf courses, tennis courses, hiking/walking/biking trails, playgrounds, off-leash areas, and spectator and concession areas. 
(j)  The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following city-owned properties, so long as the properties remain the subject of a lease with a private party: The Chastain Amphitheater; The Lakewood Amphitheater; the Park Tavern Restaurant located in Piedmont Park and designated smoking areas at golf club amenities. 
(k)  The requirements of this section shall not restrict the right of any private lessee to enact a smoking prohibition policy on any portion of the leased properties. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2003; Ord. No. 2003-112, § 4, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 3, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2008-75(08-O-1574), § 2, 9-23-08; Ord. No. 2009-65(09-O-1731), § 1, 11-6-09; Ord. No. 2010-46(10-O-1272), § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 2012-12(12-O-0359), §§ 1, 2, 3-28-12; Ord. No. 2012-27(12-O-0635), § 1, 6-27-12; Ord. No. 2012-35(12-O-0966), § 2, 7-25-12; Ord. No. 2013-45(13-O-1247), § 1, 9-25-13 ; Ord. No. 2016-41(16-O-1572) , § 1, 11-16-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 14, provided for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2007. 
Sec. 110-60. - Use of public parks at night. 
(a)  No person shall be in any park or upon any park lane or park drive between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily, except that the hours for use of the Chastain Park amphitheater are extended until 1:00 a.m. on nights when performances are being given in the Chastain Park amphitheater as provided in section 110-59(c), or except if the person has a festival or assembly permit for consecutive days and is performing duties not possible during the normal festival or assembly hours. 
(b)  This section shall not prevent the use at any time of thoroughfares that are part of the system of streets and highways of the city which traverse any part or portion of any public park. 
(c)  No person shall park any vehicle on any of the roads, drives, avenues or parking lots in any park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily. The chief of staff may provide a parking permit exempting a vehicle from this rule, to any person(s) involved with a legitimately permitted event occurring in any park, where the chief of staff finds that said person has a legitimate need to park her/his vehicle in said park between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Nothing in this section shall limit the Commissioner's authority to close portions of a park to traffic at other times, as is provided in Code section 110-61. 
(d)  The park hours established in subsection 110-60(a) above shall not apply to any person who is part of a permitted outdoor event, pursuant to Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances, that occurs at the Outdoor Activity Center located at 1442 Richland Road, S.W. Atlanta, Georgia. Outdoor events at the Outdoor Activity Center may occur past 11:00 p.m. and may be overnight events, provided that the applicable city-issued outdoor event permit is received by the host. 
(e)  The park hours established in subsection 110-60(a) above shall not apply to any person who has obtained a permit, pursuant to section 110-3(g) of this Code of Ordinances, to utilize the Lake Allatoona Property. Use of the Lake Allatoona property may occur past 11:00 p.m. and may extend overnight if the applicable city-issued permit is received. 
(f)  The park hours established in subsection 110-60(a) above shall not apply to overnight events as defined in and meeting the criteria of section 110-75(c) of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2008; Ord. No. 1997-41, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 1997-49, § 1, 10-14-97; Ord. No. 2003-112, § 5, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2012-14(12-O-0361), § 1, 3-28-12; Ord. No. 2013-62(13-O-1243), § 4, 11-27-13 ) 
Sec. 110-61. - Closing of drive or avenue in park. 
(a)  The Commissioner may close, temporarily or permanently, to vehicular traffic any road, drive or avenue within a public park that is not a part of the municipal street system of the city. 
(b)  The Commissioner shall seek the recommendations of the director, bureau of traffic and transportation whenever any action is to be taken under this section. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2009) 
Sec. 110-62. - Sale of goods, articles or services. 
No person shall sell goods, articles or services of any nature in the city parks without first obtaining written permission from the mayor or the Commissioner; provided, however, that no person shall sell spirituous, vinous or malt liquors in the city parks, except as otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2014) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30. 
Sec. 110-63. - Reserved. 
Sec. 110-64. - Sale of articles at community prices. 
All goods, articles or services sold in the public parks shall be sold at or below the community prices for such goods, articles or services. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2016) 
Cross reference— Consumer protection, ch. 58. 
Sec. 110-65. - Boating and swimming. 
No person shall engage in boating, swimming or any like activity on any lake, pond or waterway within any park owned or operated by the city. However, this section shall not apply to persons renting boats from the city or its authorized concessionaire and operating them in an area designated for boating or to any city employee while in the performance of assigned duties or to any person comprising part of a rescue squad assisting or carrying out rescue work. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2010) 
Sec. 110-66. - Weapons. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-11-127, it is unlawful to carry a firearm to or while at a public gathering, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-127. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2012; Ord. No. 2008-57(08-O-1256), § 2, 7-16-08) 
Cross reference— Weapon control, § 106-251 et seq. 
Sec. 110-67. - Hunting and fishing. 
(a)  No person shall hunt or shoot in any public park, except as expressly authorized by law or rule and regulation. 
(b)  Fishing is permitted in designated ponds and lakes in public parks and as authorized by state law, except where prohibited by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2011; Ord. No. 2014-11(14-O-1124), § 1, 3-26-14 ) 
Sec. 110-68. - Approved lifeguard required at all swimming pools. 
All swimming pools operated within the city parks shall have present at all hours and times during which the swimming pool is open to the public a lifeguard who is approved as a lifeguard by the American Red Cross. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2013) 
Sec. 110-69. - Protection of plants and animals. 
(a)  No person shall throw rocks or other objects, punch with sticks or other instruments or otherwise provoke or annoy any animal in any public park. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, injure or destroy foliage, plants, shrubs, flowers, trees, birds or bird nests, squirrels, or rabbits in or upon any public park, public property or the property of another, without the permission of the owner, as to private property, or the mayor or designee, as to the property of the city. 
(c)  Any person in violation of subsection (b) above, where said violation occurs on any public park, shall be subject to the provisions of Code section 110-56. Any person in violation of subsection (b) above, where said violation occurs on any other public property, other than a public park, shall be responsible for fully reimbursing the city for the cost of repairing or replacing the damaged plants, and shall be subject to the penalties of City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, §§ 10-2018, 17-1005; Ord. No. 2003-112, § 6, 12-9-03) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18; vegetation, ch. 158. 
Sec. 110-70. - Pets. 
(a)  No person shall walk any pet in any park except on a leash, unless the area of the park is explicitly designated as an off-leash dog area. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of any person bringing a pet into a public park to clean up any matter excreted by the pet. 
(c)  Leashed pets are not prohibited in public parks except in the following areas of any parks: 
(1)  Amphitheater. 
(2)  Swimming pools and pool areas. 
(3)  Tennis courts. 
(4)  Golf course. 
(5)  Within 15 feet of all fences and structures. 
(6)  Lakes. 
(7)  Zoo. 
(8)  Ball fields. 
(d)  Pets are prohibited in parks during permitted Class A, Class B, and Class C outdoor festivals, as defined in section 142-59(a) of this Code of Ordinances. Pets are permitted in parks during Class D and Class E outdoor festivals, as defined in section 142-59(a) of this Code of Ordinances. Any prohibition of pets pursuant to this section, or any similar prohibition of pets during any outdoor festival or outdoor event, shall not apply to those animals where the animal's owner can demonstrate that the animal is part of a performance, exhibit, or other activity conducted as part of the outdoor festival or other outdoor event. Nor shall said prohibition apply to those animals that are confined to a specific area of the park, where such park area is designated by the city as serving the purpose for which the animal is using it. 
(e)  Subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall not apply to any guide dog especially trained for the purpose of accompanying a totally or partially blind person or a deaf person, or a service dog especially trained for the purpose of accompanying a physically disabled person, or a dog trained and licensed by and in the possession of the Atlanta Police Department or any other law enforcement agency, or a horse utilized by the city's mounted police patrol. 
(f)  Certain defined areas of select parks shall be designated as off-leash dog areas. These areas must be completely fenced with a double-gated entrance and exit system. For any area of a park designated as an off-leash dog area, the rules set forth below shall apply. All of the rules below shall be posted on a sign at each entrance to the off-leash area. In the event that the rules are not posted, users of the area shall still be held responsible for knowing and following the rules, and may be fined or otherwise penalized for failure to abide by such rules. These rules may be augmented by the Commissioner or her/his designee should s/he determine that additional rules are needed. 
(1)  All users of the off-leash area shall assume all risk and liability associated with such an area. 
(2)  Owners are responsible for the action of their dogs. Each dog must be kept within sight of her/his owner and under voice control. 
(3)  Dog owners have responsibility for watching their dog's behavior. If a dog displays aggressive behavior or fights, the owner shall be responsible for immediately controlling or removing the dog from the off-leash area. 
(4)  No more than three dogs per owner shall be allowed in the area at one time. 
(5)  All dogs must wear a collar and ID tag. 
(6)  All dogs must be properly licensed, healthy, and have current vaccinations. 
(7)  No puppies under 16 weeks are allowed. 
(8)  No dogs in heat are allowed. 
(9)  No dogs are permitted to enter with pronged collars. 
(10)  Any dog that barks continually must be removed or muzzled by her/his owner. 
(11)  Owners must clean up after their dogs. 
(12)  The off-leash areas have double gated entrances. Owners must close and latch both gates after entering or exiting the area. 
(13)  No children under the age of 12 are allowed in the area without close adult supervision. 
(14)  The only food of any kind allowed is bite-size dog treats. 
(15)  Do not feed dogs without the owner's permission. 
(16)  Bicycling, skateboarding, rollerblading, jogging or strollers are not allowed. 
(17)  Dogs are not permitted on benches. 
(18)  The off-leash area may be closed in times of bad weather or for maintenance. 
(19)  Serious problems resulting in injury must be reported immediately to the bureau of parks. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2015; Ord. No. 2003-112, § 7, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2005-04, §§ 1, 2, 1-24-05; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 4, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2012-16(12-O-0411), § 1, 5-16-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 14, provided for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2007. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Right to have guide dog in public place, O.C.G.A. § 30-4-1. 
Sec. 110-70.1. - Dogs permitted in certain areas of Grant Park. 
(a)  For the safety of dogs and zoo animals, dogs shall only be permitted in certain areas of Grant Park, provided the pet is on a leash and controlled by a competent person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit such person's dog within the following areas of Grant Park: 
(1)  Twenty-one acres of the zoo area and buildings. 
(2)  Cyclorama building and area. 
(3)  Swimming pool and pool area. 
(4)  Tennis court area. 
(5)  Athletic field areas. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of any person bringing a dog into Grant Park to clean up any matter excreted by such pet. 
(Code 1977, § 17-10004) 
Sec. 110-70.2. - Dogs permitted in certain areas of Piedmont Park. 
An off-leash pet area for dogs shall be established on a two and one-half acre parcel of specified parkland within Piedmont Park. Said area shall be operated, maintained and supervised with appropriate equipment, supplies, signage, and fencing by the Piedmont Park Conservancy, Inc., at no cost to the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2002-25, § 1, 4-5-02; Ord. No. 2003-78, § 1, 6-24-03; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 3, 1-24-05) 
Sec. 110-70.3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-15(12-O-0410), § 1, approved May 16, 2012, repealed § 110-70.3, which pertained to dogs permitted in certain areas of East Lake Park. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 110-70.4 - Dogs permitted in certain areas of Southbend Park. 
An off-leash pet area for dogs shall be established on two (2) acres of undeveloped parkland within the Southbend Park. Said area shall be operated, maintained and supervised with the appropriate equipment, supplies, signage, and fencing by the Friends of Southbend Park at no cost to the City of Atlanta. 
(Ord. No. 2009-52(09-O-1319), § 1, 9-11-09) 
Sec. 110-71. - Horseback riding and similar activities. 
No person shall engage in horseback riding or shall bring any horse or fasten any horse to any tree or other object in any public park, except at or upon places designated therefor. However, this section shall not apply to law enforcement officers when engaged in their official duties. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2020) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 
Sec. 110-72. - Model airplane flying. 
No person shall engage in model airplane flying in any public park, except at or upon places designated therefor; provided, however, that no person shall operate more than a 35 cc piston displacement motor. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2021) 
Sec. 110-73. - Copying cyclorama. 
No person, except on written permission of the Commissioner, shall make or produce or aid or assist in the making or producing of any photograph, etching, painting or modeling of the cyclorama of the Battle of Atlanta, housed in the cyclorama building at Grant Park. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2019) 
Sec. 110-74. - Helicopters. 
No person shall land a helicopter in any public park unless such helicopter is being used in an emergency situation by emergency personnel, including but not limited to police, fire, civil defense and medical personnel, or unless such authorization is granted by resolution by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2028) 
Cross reference— Aviation, ch. 22. 
Sec. 110-75. - Overnight and other outdoor events occurring in parks. 
(a)  Facility reservations. All rules regarding reservation of facilities located in city parks are located in chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Outdoor events generally. Definitions and permitting requirements of outdoor events that occur in city parks are set forth in chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances. Additional rules for outdoor events that occur in parks during night hours are set forth in subsection (c) below. 
(c)  Overnight events. Section 110-60 of this Code of Ordinances shall be waived for the limited purpose of allowing certain outdoor events, as defined in chapter 142, to occur in select city parks between 11:00 p.m. through 6:00 a.m. (for purposes of this section 110-75 only, "night hours" or "night") or some portion thereof, but only under the following circumstances: 
(1)  For purposes of this section 110-75, an "overnight event" is a permitted large gathering or outdoor festival (as defined in chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances), or any portion of a permitted large gathering or outdoor festival that occurs in a city park after 11:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m. Where the outdoor festival or large gathering begins prior to 11:00 p.m. and/or continues after 6:00 a.m., the "overnight event" shall be only that portion of the festival or gathering that occurs during night hours. The term "overnight event" does not include outdoor festivals or large gatherings that occur during night hours at the Outdoor Activity Center or Lake Allatoona. 
(2)  An overnight event must meet the "large gathering" or "outdoor festival" permitting requirements, as applicable, set forth in chapter 142 of the Atlanta Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Overnight events may occur only in the following parks: Woodruff Park and Gordon White Park. 
(4)  An overnight event must have one person who is responsible for the event during the night hours, and that person must be the applicant (or a co-applicant) for the outdoor festival or large gathering permit. The responsible party must be present throughout the night hours or must appoint a designee to be present and responsible. Where a designee is appointed, the responsible party shall notify the city of said designation in writing at least 24 hours prior to the start of the overnight event. 
(5)  The host of an overnight event in a park (either an individual or an organization as applicable) must wait at least ninety days after the end of the overnight event before beginning another overnight event of which she/he/it is the host in the same park. 
(6)  An overnight event may not be for the purpose of sleeping unless the sleeping is a material component of the host's message. 
(7)  Duration of an overnight event: 
a.  An overnight event may utilize the entire park for a maximum of two consecutive nights. The host's park use shall be non-exclusive when the park is open to the public (6:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m.). 
b.  If an overnight event occurs on more than two consecutive nights, the city will require the overnight event to utilize a smaller, contained area that is pre-designated for such use by the commissioner of the department of parks and recreation. The commissioner will include the description of the designated locations in the department's written policies, and will use these locations for every overnight event lasting longer than two consecutive nights. 
c.  An overnight event shall last for no longer than six consecutive nights. 
(8)  The following rules shall apply inside the park during overnight events: 
a.  Generators are permitted, but only if they are non-combustion generators and have received the requisite permits and permissions from the city and other applicable governmental entities. 
b.  Fire of any kind is prohibited except for hand-held candles. 
c.  Amplified sound is prohibited. 
d.  Sound arising from the overnight event must not be audible more than 100 feet from the park boundaries, including generator sounds, instruments and voices. 
e.  Where a park already has lighting, no additional lights may be used during the overnight event unless the lighting is integral to achieving the expressive purpose of the event. Where a park does not have lighting, lighting may be used at the overnight event provided that it does not require electricity, except that electricity may be used if the lighting is integral to achieving the expressive purpose of the event. If lighting is integral, the applicant shall work with the office of parks prior to the event to determine, and to memorialize in a lighting plan approved by the office, the location and direction of the necessary lighting that minimizes impact on the community surrounding the park. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit battery-operated flashlights which are expressly permitted during overnight events. 
f.  No alcohol is allowed at an overnight event. 
g.  The overnight event must have a sanitation and recycling plan approved by the city's office of sanitation. 
h.  All park rules apply to overnight events, including rules regarding tents. 
i.  Overnight events cannot be gated. 
j.  Anyone in a park during an overnight event must be participating in the event or a counter-demonstration thereto. An overnight event in a park does not open the park for general use. 
(9)  A security plan approved by the Atlanta Police Department is required for every overnight event. Where the overnight event is part of an outdoor festival or large gathering that begins prior to or continues after night hours, the security plan for the overnight event portion of the festival or gathering must be separate from the security plan for the remainder of the outdoor event, and the requirements of each security plan may be different. The overnight event security plan must include the hiring of off-duty law enforcement officers who are present throughout the overnight event in a quantity prescribed by the Atlanta Police Department pursuant to Atlanta Code of Ordinances section 142-55. The requirement of off-duty law enforcement officers at the overnight event shall not, in and of itself, create a requirement for off-duty law enforcement officers during daytime hours. 
(10)  Within two business days of the issuance of an overnight event permit, the commissioner of the department of parks and recreation shall send written notice of the event to the following individuals or their designees: the Clerk of the Atlanta City Council for distribution to the impacted councilmember; the Chair of the Atlanta Planning and Advisory Board; and the city coordinator of the NPU system for distribution to the neighborhood planning unit in which the overnight event will occur. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2029; Ord. No. 2003-112, § 8, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 5, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2013-62(13-O-1243), § 1, 11-27-13 ) 
Sec. 110-76. - Prohibited conduct in parks during outdoor events, assemblies. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person using a park during an outdoor festival or assembly, as defined in Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances, to do, or permit a minor child in his/ her custody to do, any of the following acts: 
(1)  Ride, drive or operate bicycles, motorcycles, mopeds or any other motor vehicles, or ride skateboards or skates onto or in the festival production area, as defined in Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances, or onto or in prohibited areas in the park. The prohibited areas, some of which may be inside of the festival production area, include the children's area, vending locations, craft demonstration area, performing arts venues, health and fitness expos, hot air balloon staging areas, roads, walks, courts, pools, and athletic fields. These items may be carried into or through the festival production area and prohibited areas if they are not ridden. This provision shall not apply to emergency medical personnel, nor to officials or employees of the City of Atlanta acting in their official capacity, nor to vendors restocking their merchandise, nor to vendors providing sanitation services for the outdoor festival. In addition, this provision shall not apply to any person working at the direction of the outdoor festival host, or her/his designee. Nothing in this provision shall waive the prohibitions set forth in section 110-87 of this chapter, though the Commissioner of the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs shall have the sole discretion to allow the outdoor festival host to install temporary roadways in the park to be utilized for outdoor festival set-up and take-down only, provided that the Commissioner's permission is in writing and states the exact location where the temporary roadway may be created. 
(2)  Bring in, carry, or in any way possess, play or operate any radio, musical instrument or similar device which is producing or reproducing sound in the park in such a manner as to be plainly audible to other persons in the park, other than the operator of the device. This subsection shall not apply to persons performing in the outdoor festival or assembly. All radios and musical devices with earphones are permitted. 
(3)  Bring, carry or in any way possess charcoal-fired portable grills. This provision shall not prohibit the use of charcoal in city grills placed in the park for public use. 
(4)  Engage in outdoor cooking except in a city grill, or in an area designated in writing and defined by on-site signage by the Commissioner of the department of parks, recreation, and cultural affairs or her/his designee. This provision shall not apply to authorized outdoor festival vendors. 
(5)  Alcohol consumption in a park is prohibited except during permitted outdoor festivals. Alcohol consumption is allowed in a park during a permitted outdoor festival, except that an outdoor festival host shall have the right to prohibit alcohol consumption at the outdoor festival. An outdoor festival host shall also have the right to require that alcohol consumed at the outdoor festival be purchased or obtained from an official outdoor festival vendor. Such limitations shall be noted on the outdoor festival permit application. 
(b)  City rules regarding whether pets shall be allowed in a park during an outdoor festival, as defined in Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances, are set forth in Code section 110-70(d) and (e). 
(Code 1977, § 10-2030; Ord. No. 2003-112, § 9, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 2006-66, § 6, 9-26-06) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-66, § 14, provided for an effective date of Jan. 1, 2007. 
Sec. 110-77. - Posting bills and notices. 
Any person who, in any park, shall post bills or notices shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished as provided in section 1-8; provided however, that the mayor or designee may allow bills and/or notice signs to be temporarily placed in any park when, in the discretion of the mayor or designee, such sign will be beneficial to any municipal or public endeavor, athletic or otherwise. 
(Code 1977, § 17-1003) 
Secs. 110-78—110-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 150. 

Sec. 110-86. - Use of drives and avenues. 
The roads, drives and avenues in public parks shall be open only to the use of pedestrians and bicycle riders and the occupants of vehicles in use for pleasure drives. No vehicles engaged in hauling for traffic or commerce shall use such roads, drives or avenues, except for the delivery of materials or other supplies necessary for the maintenance of the parks or for persons conducting business within the limits of the parks or with the written permission of the Commissioner. However, nothing in this section shall prohibit the policing of public parks by law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2004) 
Sec. 110-87. - Driving across parks. 
No person shall drive any vehicle upon or across any part of any public park, except upon roadways laid out and maintained for vehicular travel. This section shall not apply to city employees whose duties require them to drive on park property and who are authorized to do so by the Commissioner. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2005) 
Sec. 110-88. - Unauthorized parking of vehicles in parks. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon any of the roads, drives, avenues or parking lots or at any other place within any park when the person is not using the park or any of its related facilities. This section shall not apply to city employees in the conduct of city business. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2007; Ord. No. 2003-112, § 10, 12-9-03) 