Chapter 50 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Functions and duties of office of emergency management, § 2-235. Land development code reference— Construction of family fallout shelters, § 8-2077. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 50-1—50-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Charter reference— Office of emergency management, app. IV, § 60. State Law reference— Emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 50-26. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters or imminent threat thereof of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contaminations requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of such functions. (Code 1977, § 11-4002) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-27. - Policy and purpose.     Because of the possibility of the occurrence of emergencies or disasters resulting from manmade or natural causes or enemy attack and in order to ensure that preparations of the city will be adequate to deal with such emergencies or disasters and generally to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health and safety; to preserve the lives and property of the people of the city; and to carry out the functions, duties and responsibilities contained in the Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950 (PL 81-920) and the Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981 (O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.), it is found and declared to be necessary to: (1)  Create an office of emergency management. (2)  Authorize this office to take such steps as are necessary and appropriate to carry out this article so that all emergency management functions for the city are coordinated to the maximum practical extent with the comparable functions of the state and its political subdivisions, of the federal government including its various departments and agencies, of other states and localities and of private agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of the available manpower, resources and facilities in dealing with any emergency or disaster that may occur. (Code 1977, § 11-4001) 
Sec. 50-28. - Agency designated.     The Atlanta-Fulton County emergency management agency is designated as the office of emergency management to carry out all emergency management functions for the city in accordance with the Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950 and the Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981 (O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.), as amended. (Code 1977, § 11-4003) Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 50-29. - Appointment of director of emergency management. (a)  The office of emergency management shall be under the direction and control of a director of emergency management who shall be appointed by the governor upon nomination by the mayor and the chair of the Fulton County board of commissioners, in accordance with the laws of the state. (b)  The director of emergency management is also designated the disaster coordinator for the city with Fulton County. (Code 1977, § 11-4004) 
Sec. 50-30. - Policy development and implementation. (a)  The office of emergency management and the director of emergency management shall operate under policies established by the fire chief and police chief. The director of emergency management shall be directly responsible to the fire chief and police chief and shall serve as the director of emergency planning for the city, to include planning required for the management of resources and economic stabilization in an enemy attack; planning required for mitigation, response and recovery operations for natural disasters; and coordination of emergency planning with state and federal planning agencies. (b)  The director of emergency management shall serve as the senior liaison officer between the city, the state emergency management agency and state and federal military forces. (Code 1977, § 11-4005) 
Sec. 50-31. - Powers, duties of director.     The director of emergency management is authorized and directed to: (1)  Represent the city in all matters pertaining to emergency management; (2)  Utilize all bureau and department heads and all municipal officers of the city in the preparation and implementation of emergency management plans and coordinate them into an effective plan of operation; (3)  Assist city officials in planning the organization of city departments for emergency operations; (4)  Develop and maintain emergency management plans, in conjunction with city departments, for emergency functions in consonance with state and federal emergency plans and implement these plans in any such emergency; (5)  Establish an emergency management plan for the continuity of city government in an enemy attack or other emergency; (6)  Maintain and, where feasible, improve public fallout shelters and the attack warning system; maintain a community shelter plan and a crisis relocation plan in readiness for publication on short notice; train fallout shelter managers and radiological monitoring personnel; take such other readiness steps toward preparedness against enemy attack as are prudent and practical; and institute equivalent readiness measures and planning against manmade and natural disasters; (7)  Maintain an adequate emergency communications system encompassing all city departments and other agencies and an emergency operations center; and (8)  Establish and maintain an organization of sufficient staff and operating agencies to implement approved emergency plans, set forth in sections 50-32 and 50-33. (Code 1977, § 11-4006) 
Sec. 50-32. - Organization and services.     The emergency management organization shall consist of governmental and voluntary emergency services. The chief officer of a governmental service unit shall be the head of the department or bureau providing the service as an emergency management function. Directors of volunteer services shall be chosen by the director of emergency management. Services shall include but not be limited to the following: (1)  Governmental services: a. Police service City b. Fire and light rescue City department of fire and Fulton County fire department c. Engineering services and heavy rescue Department of public works of city and department of city planning of Fulton County d. Supply Bureau of purchasing and real estate of city and purchasing department of Fulton County e. Radiological defense f. Health and medical Fulton County g. Welfare  (2)  Volunteer and industry-provided services: a.  Communications b.  Emergency public information c.  Transportation (3)  Emergency management services: a.  Attack warning (city department of police implements) b.  Logistics (resources management) c.  Shelter planning d.  Training and education e.  Administration. (Code 1977, § 11-4008; Ord. No. 2017-14(17-O-1157), § 8, 4-26-17) 
Sec. 50-33. - Additional duties of director.     The director of emergency management shall, with respect to emergency management services: (1)  Coordinate the operations and actions of all services in time of emergency and control all these operations to the extent authorized by applicable law; (2)  Maintain a permanent staff sufficient to carry out the duties and responsibilities of the department and ensure that the staff is professionally trained and fully qualified; (3)  Ensure that an adequate emergency operations center (EOC) is available and properly equipped as needed for the conduct of emergency operations; (4)  Through coordination with the state emergency management agency and federal emergency management agency, ensure that city plans and activities are consistent with state and federal guidelines; (5)  Prepare and periodically update the basic emergency operations plan, to include an annex (plan) for each service which shall be prepared and authenticated by the service chief; and (6)  Plan and implement preparedness measures in readiness for implementation. (Code 1977, § 11-4009) 
Sec. 50-34. - Budget, financial records. (a)  The director of emergency management shall be the chief executive officer and responsible administrator of the office of emergency management. (b)  The director of emergency management shall prepare all budgets to meet operating and administrative expenses and shall operate the office of emergency management in accordance with the approved budget appropriations of the city and Fulton County to include anticipated federal matching funds, as projected by state emergency management division, department of public defense, with staff pay based upon an approved emergency management staffing pattern and pay scales of the state merit system. (c)  Financial records, personnel and administration records and such other records as are desired shall be subject to audit at any time by designated city and/or county officials. An annual audit of the financial records shall be conducted by the city and/or county. (Code 1977, § 11-4010) 
Chapter 54 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Charter reference— Department of housing and community development, app. IV, §§ 1(f), 23 et seq. Cross reference— Urban enterprise zones, § 146-51 et seq. Land development code references— Planning, § 6-3001 et seq.; historical preservation programs, § 6-4041 et seq. Related laws reference— Community development, ch. 3. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; urban redevelopment, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 54-1. - Affordable housing. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: (1)  Affordable housing means housing units accessible to individuals and families at or below 50 percent of area median income. Statistics regarding area median income are published annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the City of Atlanta shall utilize these statistics. (2)  Mixed income housing. For the purposes of public subsidies, mixed income housing is housing that contains at least 33 percent affordable housing units. (3)  Extremely low income family. An extremely low income family is a family making less than 30 percent of area median income. (b)  The city formally adopts the following policies regarding the availability of affordable housing as goals: (1)  All public subsidies for affordable housing should targeted so that two-thirds of the subsidies reach extremely low income families. (2)  The city should utilize the definition of affordability as contained in section 54-1(a) as the standard definition for all housing-related public programs in which the city participates. (3)  All tax increment financings and tax allocation districts that contain a residential component should include 33 percent of affordable housing units. (4)  Utilization of housing enterprise zone tax abatement subsidies should include an obligation for the development of at least 33 percent of affordable housing units. (c)  Mandatory affordable housing for publicly subsidized multi-family residential property. Any multi-family residential property that receives a grant, incentive, or subsidy through a sale lease-back or other written agreement involving a development authority doing business in the City of Atlanta shall include affordable housing, as approved by the development authority from one of the two tiers set forth in the definition of affordable housing below, during the term of the grant, incentive or subsidy. The affordable housing units shall be similar in construction and appearance (e.g., square footage, type and brand of appliances, materials used for countertops, flooring, etc.) to the market rate units and shall not be in isolated areas in the development, but shall be interspersed among market rate units. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for such property until the applicant provides an executed affordable housing land use restriction agreement in substantially the form promulgated by the office of housing for recordation.     As used herein, " Affordable housing" means: (1)  At least 15 percent of the total residential units shall be leased to households (excluding student households) having an income, as certified by the prospective tenant(s), at the time of execution of the applicable lease agreement that does not exceed 80 percent of the area median income ("AMI") for the family size having the same number of persons as the subject household for the Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta, Georgia Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD") Metro Fair Market Rent Area (as published by HUD as of the date of the tenant's application). The monthly rent amount (including utilities and mandatory fees) for each affordable housing unit shall be no more than 30 percent of the household's monthly gross income as published periodically by HUD; or (2)  At least ten percent of the total residential units shall be leased to households (excluding student households) having an income, as certified by the prospective tenant(s), at the time of execution of the applicable lease agreement that does not exceed 60 percent of the AMI for the family size having the same number of persons as the subject household for the Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta, Georgia HUD Metro Fair Market Rent Area (as published by HUD as of the date of the tenant's application). The monthly rent amount (including utilities and mandatory fees) for each affordable housing unit shall be no more than 30 percent of the household's monthly gross income as published periodically by HUD. (Ord. No. 2001-93, § 1, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2016-12(16-O-1163), § 1, 5-11-16 ) 
Sec. 54-2. - Affordable housing impact statements. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: (1)  Affordable housing impact statement means a statement, attached to proposed housing stock impact legislation, that estimates and describes the impact the legislation would have, if enacted, on the affordable housing stock of the City of Atlanta. (2)  Housing stock impact legislation means any and all legislation-including ordinances and resolutions constituting housing policy that come before any committee of the Atlanta City Council that, if enacted, are estimated to have an impact on the affordable housing stock of the City of Atlanta: Land Use Elements to the City's Comprehensive Development Plan; acceptance of public and private grants including local, federal and state funding for the construction and/or rehabilitation of affordable housing units; abandoned and blighted property legislation; changes to building permit fees; millage rate increases for blighted properties; and changes to demolition policies. (b)  Once any resolution or ordinance that meets the definition of housing stock impact legislation receives a first reading in the Atlanta City Council or one of its committees, the Office of Housing and Community Development shall, within ten business days, produce an affordable housing impact statement. (c)  All affordable housing impact statements, once they are completed by the office of housing and community development, shall be attached to the respective legislative items to which they pertain, prior to final action being taken on legislation, such that when any stakeholder requests the legislative item from the municipal clerk, or accesses the final action legislative item electronically via the internet, the affordable housing impact statement shall be attached. (d)  Affordable housing impact statements shall include a quantitative, or numeric section, that shall provide numeric estimates of impacts, quantifying numbers of units impacted at certain levels of affordability over the 30-year period following the enactment of the legislation; and a narrative section to provide an explanation of the analyses that led to the estimates. Where the estimates are derived from existing grant applications or the basis of those estimates are otherwise straightforward, the narrative section shall state as such. Where the proposals being considered require the office of housing and community development to draw upon their experience and expertise to come up with a projected impact, the narrative section shall specify what assumptions were used in creating the estimates. If there is insufficient information such as to preclude any meaningful estimate from being made, the narrative section shall state as such. (e)  The quantitative, or numeric section, shall take the following form, where the office of housing and community development shall fill in the blanks with appropriate estimates: This legislation, if enacted, is estimated to have a projected impact upon the affordable housing stock of the City of Atlanta over the 30 year period following the enactment of the legislation by: Adding _____, preserving _____, or decreasing _____ units affordable at 30 percent or below of the Area Median Income (AMI); and Adding _____, preserving _____, or decreasing _____ units affordable between 30.01 and 50 percent of AMI; and Adding _____, preserving _____, or decreasing _____ units affordable between 50.01 and 80 percent of AMI; and Adding _____, preserving _____, or decreasing _____ units affordable above 80 percent of AMI. (f)  The city's office of the municipal clerk shall maintain a stand-alone binder or set of binders containing all affordable housing impact statements and annual reports prepared pursuant to this section. (g)  The office of housing and community development shall prepare an annual report to the community development/human services committee. The report shall provide the total cumulative estimated quantitative impact on the city's affordable housing stock of all public policy decisions of the City of Atlanta for the previous year for which affordable housing impact statements have been created, that will include: the total numbers of units that were added, subtracted, or preserved at each income bracket as specified in the affordable housing impact statements, across all affordable housing impact statements. The office of housing and community development shall identify any duplicative impacts for which the same impact was covered by more than one item of legislation. This report shall also identify any housing policies enacted over the previous year that will have an enabling effect on the creation of affordable housing but for which an affordable housing impact statement was not created. This report shall also provide additional findings regarding any housing units funded in whole or in part by public grant dollars, for which affordable housing impact statements have been prepared, within the 30 year period preceding the annual report: specifically, the report shall specify whether the units still exist, whether they are occupied, and whether the cost for those units is consistent with the affordability price points identified in the original grant application. If the required affordability period for specific units is less than 30 years, the annual report shall state as such. (h)  The office of housing shall provide a yearly report to the community development/human resources committee on any housing units funded in whole or in part by public grant dollars, for which affordable housing impact statements have been prepared, within the 30 year period preceding the annual report. The report shall specify whether the units still exist, whether they are occupied, and whether the cost for those units is consistent with the affordability price points identified in the original grant application. If the required affordability period for specific units is less than 30 years, the annual report shall state as such. ( Ord. No. 2015-57(14-O-1614), § 1, 11-25-15, eff. 7-1-16 ; Ord. No. 2018-02(18-O-1026), §§ 1—7, 2-14-18 ) 
Sec. 54-3. - Housing commission. (a)  Purpose. The purpose of the housing commission shall be: (1)  To review the housing policies of the city with an emphasis on affordable housing; and (2)  To review the city's permitting procedures related to the construction and rehabilitation of housing; and (3)  To explore creative methods of financing affordable housing; and (4)  To review housing policies, practices and procedures of other jurisdictions. (b)  Composition. The housing commission shall be comprised of the following 11 members: • One member from the Urban Residential Finance Authority (URFA) to be appointed by the mayor. • One member from the Atlanta Housing Authority to be appointed by mayor. • One member from the office of housing and community development to be appointed by the mayor. • One member shall be a resident in a City of Atlanta Housing program to be appointed by council members from districts 1,2,3,4, and post 1. • One member who is actively engaged as an advocate for low-income persons in connection with affordable housing to be appointed by council members from districts 5,6,7,8 and post 2. • One member from the Atlanta Continuum of Care to be appointed by council members from districts 9,10,11,12, and post 3. • One member from the for-profit development community to be appointed by the council president. • One member from the non-profit development community to be appointed by the council president. • One member from the mortgage lending community to be appointed by the council president. • One member from the Atlanta Beltline, Inc. • One member from the non-profit Georgia ACT. (c)  Meeting, reports, and recommendations. The housing commission shall meet at least once per quarter and shall produce a report on its work and shall make recommendations to the mayor and city council at least once annually. (d)  Terms of office. The terms of office shall be for a two-year period with the exception of the Mayoral and presidential appointees who will serve three-year period. (e)  Compensation. Each member of the commission, except those who are City of Atlanta employees, shall be paid $50.00 as compensation for each meeting of the commission the member attends, but in no event shall the total amount to be paid to any member exceed the sum of $250.00 in any one calendar year. ( Ord. No. 2017-57(17-O-1569), § 1, 10-2-17 ) 
Sec. 54-4. - Beltline Affordable Housing Trust Fund Commission. (a)  Purpose. The purpose of the Beltline Affordable Housing Trust Fund Commission ("commission") shall be to make recommendations to the Atlanta City Council for the expenditure of funds collected in the Beltline Affordable Workforce In Lieu Fee Housing Trust Fund ("Beltline Trust Fund"). (b)  Composition. The Beltline Affordable Housing Trust Fund Commission shall be comprised of the following nine members: • One member from the Atlanta Housing Authority to be appointed by the mayor. • One member shall be the director of the office of housing and community development or her designee to be appointed by the mayor. • One member from the Atlanta Development Authority d/b/a Invest Atlanta to be appointed by the mayor. • One member from the Atlanta Beltline Inc. to be appointed by the mayor. • One member shall be a resident of the Beltline Overlay District to be appointed by council members from districts 1,2,3,4, and post 1. • One member shall be a resident of the Beltline Overlay District who participates in a City of Atlanta Housing program to be appointed by Council Members from Districts 5,6,7,8 and post 2. • One member who is actively engaged as an advocate for low-income persons in connection with affordable housing to be appointed by council members from districts 9,10,11,12, and post 3. • One member from the for-profit development community to be appointed by the council president. • One member from the non-profit development community to be appointed by the council president. Appointees shall be submitted to the community development/ human services committee and confirmed by the Atlanta City Council. (c)  Staffing. The commission shall receive primary staff support and assistance from the city's office of housing and community development. Other city departments and offices shall provide support and assistance as specifically requested by the commission. (d)  Meeting, reports, and recommendations. The chair of the community development/ human services committee shall convene the first meeting of the commission. The members shall elect their own chairperson and other officers they deem appropriate.     The commission shall meet at least twice per year. The office of housing and community development will provide the commission with an accounting of the funds in the Beltline Trust Fund, which Beltline Subarea the funds were collected from, and the number of units that may be produced and/or preserved from those funds once per year. The commission shall make recommendations for distribution of the funds towards: preservation, production, rehabilitation and/or restoration of affordable units, and which subarea the funds should be spent at least once annually. The office of housing and community development shall present to city council the recommendations of the commission and the city council shall either reject, modify, or approve the commission's recommendations. (e)  Terms of office. The terms of office shall be for a two-year period with the exception of the mayoral and presidential appointees who will serve three-year period. (f)  Compensation. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. ( Ord. No. 2017-75(16-O-1593), § 3, 11-29-17 ) 
Sec. 54-5. - Westside Affordable Housing Trust Fund Commission. (a)  Purpose. The purpose of the Westside Affordable Housing Trust Fund Commission ("commission") shall be to make recommendations to the Atlanta City Council for the expenditure of funds collected in the Westside Affordable Workforce In Lieu Fee Housing Trust Fund ("Westside Trust Fund"). (b)  Composition. The Westside Affordable Housing Trust Fund Commission shall be comprised of the following nine members: • One member from the Atlanta Housing Authority to be appointed by the mayor. • One member shall be the director of the office of housing and community development or his/her designee to be appointed by the mayor. • One member from the Atlanta Development Authority d/b/a Invest Atlanta to be appointed by the mayor. • One member shall be the Executive Director of the Westside Future Fund or his/her designee to be appointed by the Mayor. • One member shall be a resident of the Westside Overlay District to be appointed by council members from districts 1,2,3,4, and post 1. • One member shall be a resident of the Westside Overlay District who participates in a City of Atlanta Housing program to be appointed by council members from districts 5,6,7,8 and post 2. • One member who is actively engaged as an advocate for low-income persons in connection with affordable housing to be appointed by council members from districts 9,10,11,12, and post 3. • One member from the for-profit development community to be appointed by the council president. • One member from the non-profit development community to be appointed by the council president. Appointees shall be submitted to the community development/ human services committee and confirmed by the Atlanta City Council. (c)  Staffing. The commission shall receive primary staff support and assistance from the city's office of housing and community development. Other city departments and offices shall provide support and assistance as specifically requested by the commission. (d)  Meeting, reports, and recommendations. The chair of the community development/ human services committee shall convene the first meeting of the commission. The members shall elect their own chairperson and other officers they deem appropriate.     The commission shall meet at least twice per year. The office of housing and community development will provide the commission with an accounting of the funds in the Westside Trust Fund, which Westside neighborhood the funds were collected from, and the number of units that may be produced and/or preserved from those funds once per year. The commission shall make recommendations for distribution of the funds towards: preservation, production, rehabilitation and/or restoration of affordable units, and which neighborhood the funds should be spent in at least once annually. The office of housing and community development shall present to city council the recommendations of the commission and the city council shall either reject, modify, or approve the commission's recommendations. (e)  Terms of office. The terms of office shall be for a two-year period with the exception of the mayoral and presidential appointees who will serve three-year period. (f)  Compensation. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. ( Ord. No. 2017-74(17-O-1580), § 3, 11-29-17 ) 
Sec. 54-6. - Annual citywide housing inventory and affordability report. (a)  Once per year, the city's office of housing shall conduct an Annual Citywide Housing Inventory and Affordability Report. (b)  The report shall provide as close of an estimate as possible, based on real data, of the number of housing units in the City of Atlanta, including the total number of single-family homes, the total number of condominiums, and the number of apartment units. (c)  The report will also provide an estimate of how many of these units are affordable to Atlanta residents at 0 to 30 percent of the area median income; how many are affordable at 30 to 50 percent of the area median income; how many are affordable at 50 to 80 percent of the area median income; and how many are market rate. (d)  To arrive at the estimate of affordable housing units as required by subsection (c) in this section, the office of housing shall consider: (1)  How many housing choice vouchers or other vouchers, as issued by the Atlanta Housing Authority, are being used in the City of Atlanta; and (2)  How many affordable units are receiving a back-end rental subsidy through the City of Atlanta, the Atlanta Development Authority, or the Atlanta Housing Authority; and (3)  How many naturally occurring, or non-subsidized, affordable apartment homes, exist; and (4)  How many affordable single-family homes or condominiums exist, based on an approximation of monthly housing payments. The office of housing shall use their expertise to establish appropriate assumptions to reach this estimate, in conjunction with market data and other appropriate information. (e)  The office of housing shall present the Annual Citywide Housing Inventory and Affordability Report to the Community Development/Human Services Committee of the Atlanta City Council, and to the housing commission established per section 54-3 of Chapter 54 (Community Development), once per year. ( Ord. No. 2017-86(17-O-1778), § 1, 12-13-17 ) 
Secs. 54-7—54-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FHA 221 HOUSING[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Land development code references— Building regulations, § 8-2001 et seq.; housing code, § 8-2181 et seq. 
Sec. 54-26. - Technical committee. (a)  Constituted, purposes, meetings. There shall be constituted a technical committee which shall meet regularly at least twice each month on dates selected by members thereof and at such other times as may be necessary, at the call of the chair or vice-chair, when requested by at least two members of the committee, to consider applications for new construction in urban renewal project areas under this article, to advise applicants for building permits in urban renewal areas under this article where final plans and the effect these plans may have upon the applicant's contemplated construction or improvements, and other matters relating to new construction for displaced families where the urban renewal program under this article is concerned. Minutes of the meetings of this committee shall be kept. (b)  Membership. This committee shall consist of the director, bureau of buildings as chair, the planning engineer as vice-chair and the executive secretary of the housing authority, the city's agent for development of the urban renewal project areas. (c)  Attendance at meetings. The project planners for the urban renewal project areas affected shall be invited to attend these meetings and participate in discussions. (Code 1977, § 8-5012) Cross reference— Boards, councils, commissions and authorities, § 2-1851 et seq. 
Sec. 54-27. - Determination of phasing for construction of allocations devoted to project areas.     The department of housing and community development, in coordination with the housing authority, will determine the phasing considered desirable for construction of FHA 221 housing allocations and what portions thereof, if any, should be devoted to urban renewal project areas and shall make recommendations accordingly to local FHA officials. (Code 1977, § 8-5003) 
Sec. 54-28. - Determination of locations of urban renewal projects.     The department of housing and community development will study proposed locations for urban renewal projects and determine those considered most suitable from the city's standpoint for FHA 221 housing projects and shall coordinate thereon with local FHA officials. (Code 1977, § 8-5004) 
Sec. 54-29. - Rezoning recommendations.     The zoning review board will make timely recommendations to the development committee for rezoning such areas as it considers appropriate in order to facilitate the FHA 221 housing program. (Code 1977, § 8-5005) 
Sec. 54-30. - Processing applications embracing subdivisions, requests for building permits.     All FHA 221 project applications for five or more units on one tract or parcel of land will be considered a subdivision and will be processed through the department of housing and community development. Requests for building permits will be processed in the department of housing and community development by especially designated individuals who are thoroughly cognizant of requirements in this article. (Code 1977, § 8-5006) 
Sec. 54-31. - Commitments by builders.     At the time of the initial request for site approval for FHA 221 housing projects, builders and developers will be advised by the department of housing and community development of the requirements of this section and section 54-32. As a condition for approval of these projects, the department of housing will require written commitments from the builders and developers for: (1)  Preservation of adequate existing trees and provision for grass and other plant material on each lot to enhance the environmental living conditions of the area; (2)  Staggering of the setback within five feet variation and turning of plans to break monotony; (3)  Site plan to be developed by a qualified professional person in accordance with FHA MPR revision no. 56 lot improvement requirements; (4)  Designation in a preliminary plan, within the project boundaries for purchase by the city at cost, plus overhead, if so desired by the interested department, of appropriate open spaces for schools, parks, green areas or space for other environmental facilities deemed desirable for the neighborhood; and (5)  Minimum lot size considered appropriate, regardless of zoning requirements, where septic tanks are to be used. (Code 1977, § 8-5007) 
Sec. 54-32. - Minimum structural requirements. (a)  Duties of department. The department of housing and community development will ensure that the list of city minimum structural requirements for FHA 221 housing projects, as shown on the description of materials filed in the department of housing and community development, is made known to prospective builders at the time of the initial application for a building permit and will require, as a condition for issuance of a permit, inclusion of provisions for compliance with these minimum requirements in the builder's written plans and specifications and will exercise special care of enforcement of these requirements. (b)  Application of technical codes. Except as otherwise specified in this article, all houses built in the city under FHA mortgage insurance, section 221, National Housing Act, shall conform in all respects to the building, plumbing, electrical, heating and other codes and ordinances applicable to the construction of the houses. (Code 1977, § 8-5008) Land development code references— Building regulations, § 8-2001 et seq.; housing code minimum standards, § app. F, § 20. 
Sec. 54-33. - Varying specifications in description of materials.     The specifications set forth in the description of materials for FHA 221 housing, a copy of which is on file in the department of housing and community development, may be varied where, in the opinion of the director, bureau of buildings, the materials substituted for those required by the description of materials are of comparable strength, durability and could be used with equal usefulness when compared with those specified in this section. The director, bureau of buildings may approve any of the provisions stipulated in the minimum property standards of title 2, section 1, as published by the FHA, which, in the opinion of the director, bureau of buildings, are consistent with recognized engineering procedures and methods of construction. (Code 1977, § 8-5009) 
Sec. 54-34. - Designation of changes in description of materials.     In the description of materials for FHA 221 housing filed in the department of housing and community development, the following changes under the specific numbered items shall be made: (5)  Exterior walls. Number of coats: prime plus two. (8)  Finish flooring. First floor: grade: no. 2 common oak or better, two feet and longer lengths. (10)  Flooring framing. Where the grade is such that, in the opinion of the director, bureau of buildings, it is feasible to substitute a concrete slab on the ground for the floor joists, as specified in item (6) of the description of materials, a concrete slab on the ground may be used, provided it is not less than four inches thick and complies in all respects to the building code, is adequately waterproofed and is to receive a suitable asphalt tile or approved equal floor covering. (14)  Lath and plaster. Material: sheetrock thickness, three-eighths-inch recessed edge where studding or ceiling joists are 16 inches o.c., otherwise one-half inch. (15)  Decorating. Rubber base is acceptable, except in kitchen and bath. (16)  Interior doors and trim. Doors of suitable type required on closets (see trim 27); hollow core main entrance doors are acceptable, where adequately protected from weather. (18)  Entrances and exterior detail. Exterior millwork: C grade, if painted, is acceptable. (19)  Cabinets and interior detail. Base units: Add the phrase "or approved metal cabinets." (20)  Stairs. Eliminate requirement for disappearing stairs to attic, where adequate storage space is provided elsewhere. (21)  Special floors and wainscot. Wainscot: bath: change to read as follows: Wainscot four feet high and around tub and shower six feet high may be ceramic tile, aluminum tile, plastic tile or other approved equal material. Other portions of wall and ceiling shall be drywall or finished plaster. Floor shall be ceramic tile. (27)  Miscellaneous. a.  House size, bedroom size, storage area. An alternate to requirements for minimum house size, bedroom size and storage area as contained in the description of materials, at the option of the builder, is as follows: The total floor area shall be not less than 850 square feet; 810 square feet shall be livable area and 40 square feet, 100 square feet and 80 square feet respectively; carport required. b.  Walks and driveways. Driveway: four inches crushed stone and one inch asphalt mix is acceptable, if grade permits. (Code 1977, § 8-5010) 
Sec. 54-35. - Restriction on issuance of building permits. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Capital improvements consists of all other work, with the exception of incidental repairs.     Incidental repairs includes labor, supplies and other items, which do not add to the value or appreciably prolong the life of the property, the expenditures being deductible under the United States and state revenue laws. For the purposes of this section, reroofing shall be considered incidental repairs.     New construction consists of the erection of any structure; structure being defined in the city's building code. (b)  Generally. The director, bureau of buildings, shall not approve any application for a building permit or issue a permit for any proposed work in any urban renewal project area under this article, which has been duly designated by the city council, prior to the approval and adoption of final plans for that project area, when this work would consist of new construction or capital improvements, except as directed in this section. Upon receipt of an application, the director, bureau of buildings shall notify in writing the owner of the property, by certified mail, to appear before the technical committee established in this article at a given time and place. At the hearing the technical committee shall consider the building application to determine whether or not the new construction or capital improvements are consistent with redevelopment plans. If the construction or improvements are deemed to be consistent with the redevelopment plans, the committee shall record this finding and the director, bureau of buildings, shall issue a building permit if otherwise lawful. If this contemplated construction or improvement is deemed by the committee to be inconsistent with the redevelopment plans, the committee shall record this finding and advise the owner of the nature of these plans and the effect these redevelopment plans may have upon the owner's contemplated improvements. Upon written notice of the owner to the director, bureau of buildings, following the hearing that the owner still desires a permit for the new construction or capital improvements as set out in the application for a building permit theretofore filed, notwithstanding the findings and advice of the technical committee, the director, bureau of buildings, shall thereafter issue a building permit if otherwise lawful. (c)  Authority of housing authority. After approval and adoption of final plans by the city council of any urban renewal project area, the director, bureau of buildings shall not issue permits for new construction in this area until the requests have been referred to the housing authority for determination as to conformance with the redevelopment plans and compliance with any special conditions which may apply to the particular situation involved and until the director, bureau of buildings has received the approval of the housing authority. (Code 1977, § 8-5011) 
Secs. 54-36—54-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - URBAN HOMESTEADING PROGRAM[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Land development code references— Building regulations, § 8-2001 et seq.; housing code, § 8-2181 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 54-56. - Findings; initiation of program. (a)  It is found that there are many residential properties within the corporate limits of the city that have become vacant through various processes. Many of these structures or sites have been abandoned by the tenants or owners who, for various reasons, have no longer found them acceptable for either habitation, ownership or economic purposes. It is found and declared that some of these properties have been and continue to be elements contributing to the deterioration of neighborhoods and the depreciation of property values in the neighborhood in which they are located. This situation leads to what constitutes a serious and growing menace injurious to the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the city residents. It is further found and declared that the existence of these vacant dwellings contributes substantially and increasingly to the spread of disease and crime, constitutes economic and social liability, substantially impairs or arrests the sound growth of urban areas and exacerbates a growing urban slum condition. It is found that this form of blight is present in the inner city to a much greater degree than it is in the outer city, although the condition is found to exist throughout the city. Many of the residential properties that have become vacant are rehabitable. They are not totally without economic use and, if rehabilitated, could house citizens who need housing as a result of a variety of reasons, among which are displacement by eminent domain proceedings and a lack of housing starts due to general economic conditions. (b)  It is further found that many other urban centers throughout the United States have been confronted with problems similar to this and have developed systems of urban homesteading. These programs take various forms depending upon the applicable laws of the several states and local jurisdictions within which these programs are being carried out. Regardless of the laws governing the various programs of urban homesteading, the economic impact of rehabilitating homes alone is sufficient to justify a program of urban homesteading, notwithstanding the additional benefits procured through this program. Home ownership has been found to be beneficial to the maintenance of property. Expectation of home ownership has been found to be beneficial to the fruition of housing rehabilitation, and homes in private ownership that are rehabilitated increase the tax base of a local government. A decrease in the providing of certain public services, such as police and fire protection, is an additional and indirect benefit to be derived from the rehabilitation of housing. (c)  It is in consequence of these legislative findings stated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section that the city enters into this urban homesteading program, which is declared to be a governmental function undertaken in the public interest. (Code 1977, § 8-5021) 
Sec. 54-57. - Funding.     No direct expenditures from the city's general fund revenues shall be incurred by the city in connection with the urban homesteading program. (Code 1977, § 8-5029) 
Sec. 54-58. - Urban homesteading application review board. (a)  The urban homesteading application review board is established and created to act in an advisory capacity to the city on the urban homesteading program and to approve applicants as urban homesteaders. (b)  The board shall be composed of five members. All members shall be residents of the city. The mayor shall appoint the five members of the board, who shall be selected from the following membership classifications and who shall be confirmed by the city council: (1)  One appointee shall be a member of the residential construction industry; (2)  One appointee shall be a member of the legal profession who specializes in or who is well acquainted with those areas of the law dealing with residential real estate; (3)  One appointee shall be a representative of that sector of the financial community which specializes in residential lending activities; and (4)  Two appointees shall be citizens of the city not otherwise eligible for appointment. (c)  All appointments shall be for a term of two years. Members of the board may be appointed for consecutive terms. (d)  The mayor shall recommend removal and replacement of a member of the board for nonperformance of duty. Any vacancy in the membership of the board shall be filled in the same manner as the initial appointment. (e)  The board shall meet upon the call of the commissioner of housing and community development, at least quarterly, to review applications for urban homesteading. Following its deliberations the board shall certify to the commissioner of housing and community development those applicants who qualify under the criteria set forth in this division as urban homesteaders. For each applicant, the board shall adopt findings of fact upon which it shall base its determination as to whether the applicant qualifies as an urban homesteader. These findings of fact shall constitute a part of the record of the board's deliberations. (f)  Each member of the board shall be paid $25.00 for each meeting of the board the member attends, but the total amount so paid any member shall not exceed the sum of $600.00 in any one calendar year. (g)  The mayor shall appoint a presiding officer from among the membership of the board, and the board shall elect such additional officers as it deems necessary to carry out its functions. (Code 1977, § 8-5024(a)) Cross reference— Boards, councils, commissions and authorities, § 2-1851 et seq. 
Sec. 54-59. - Inventory list. (a)  The city, acting through the department of housing and community development and working in conjunction with various other departments and bureaus of the government, is authorized to maintain an urban homesteading inventory of residential properties which may be received by the city through any means; provided, however, the residential properties to be maintained on this inventory shall be subject to inspection by the bureau of buildings and found to be redeemable for residential purposes. (b)  Any residential property meeting the criteria set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be eligible to be placed upon the urban homesteading inventory and disposed of as provided in this division. (Code 1977, § 8-5022) 
Sec. 54-60. - Determination of eligibility of property. (a)  Prior to the determination of eligibility of a residential property to be placed upon the urban homesteading inventory, the department of housing and community development shall cause a title examination to be made upon each property by an attorney competent in the area of real estate abstract work, for the purpose of ascertaining what liens and charges constituting encumbrances are in fact on the property. A copy of the title report shall become a part of the file regarding this property. If there are monetary encumbrances or title defects appearing against any property which cannot be economically disposed of or passed through to a prospective urban homesteader, the commissioner of housing and community development shall have the right to reject the property from becoming part of the urban homesteading inventory. If, in the opinion of the commissioner of housing and community development, the monetary and other encumbrances are not sufficient to deter a prospective urban homesteader from entering into an agreement to pay all encumbrances on the property, the property shall become part of the city urban homesteading inventory and may be diverted from that purpose only by action of the mayor. (b)  An additional criterion as to whether or not a property can be placed upon the urban homesteading inventory shall be an opinion of counsel doing the title search that the city either can or cannot pass free and unencumbered fee simple title to the property at a point in time no greater than three years from the date of the title search. If, in the opinion of counsel, fee simple unencumbered title cannot be so passed to an urban homesteader, the commissioner of housing and community development shall reject the property from becoming a part of the urban homesteading inventory. (Code 1977, § 8-5023) 
Sec. 54-61. - Qualifications of applicants; placement of applicants. (a)  The commissioner of housing and community development may process applicants for the urban homesteading program. The commissioner of housing and community development shall present to the urban homesteading application review board for approval all those applicants who meet or appear to meet the criteria for urban homesteading as set forth in this section. (b)  Every successful applicant for urban homesteading must: (1)  Be 18 years of age or older and demonstrate a degree of personal stability necessary for taking on the responsibility of urban homesteading; (2)  Possess the technical resources or financial resources or provide documentation to show that the applicant is able to obtain the financial resources or any combination of these resources necessary for completing the rehabilitation required to bring the condition of the urban homesteading structure up to city housing code requirements within the three-year period prescribed by the program; (3)  Be a natural person; (4)  Not have previously participated in an urban homesteading program in the city; and (5)  Be willing to commit in writing to reside in the structure as the applicant's principal place of residence for a minimum of three years, that being the homesteading period for the urban homesteading program. (c)  When an applicant has been approved as a qualified urban homesteader, the commissioner of housing and community development shall endeavor to place that person into a residential dwelling from the urban homesteading inventory. Placement of this person shall be made in the order in which applicants were approved by the urban homesteading application review board, except that a preferred place in the order of placement shall be given to those approved applicants who are residents of the city and to those approved applicants who have been displaced by governmental action on the part of the city or by other governmental action which resulted in the acquisition of their principal residences for a public project. (Code 1977, § 8-5024(b), (c)) 
Sec. 54-62. - Leasing procedure. (a)  When the urban homesteader and the commissioner of housing and community development agree on a suitable dwelling for the homesteader, the homesteader shall enter into either a lease agreement with the city or an urban homesteading agreement in combination with a deed of conditional conveyance. The forms of both types of documents will be prepared by the city attorney's office. The lease form or combination of urban homesteading agreement and deed of conditional conveyance, among other pertinent and legal data, shall: (1)  Contain provisions for the payment of monetary encumbrances existing on the property; (2)  Provide for a scheduled upward phasing of housing code compliance; (3)  Include a statement on the part of the homesteader that, excepting circumstances beyond the homesteader's control, the homesteader will reside in the dwelling as a principal residence for a minimum of three years from the effective date of the agreement with the city; (4)  Include a provision that the homesteader, during the term of the lease or combination of urban homesteading agreement and deed of conditional conveyance, obtain and maintain casualty insurance and owner's and occupier's liability insurance with a reputable insurance company licensed to do business in the state, which casualty insurance will include fire and extended coverage, vandalism and malicious mischief coverages. The amount of the casualty insurance shall be equal in amount to the value of the property, as determined by the city, and the liability insurance shall have minimum coverage in the amount of $25,000.00 per occurrence and $100,000.00 in the aggregate and name the city as coinsured; (5)  Contain a provision that all utility bills shall be the responsibility of the homesteader; and (6)  Provide that if its terms and conditions have not been met, upon proper notice and hearing to the urban homesteader, the lease or combination of urban homesteading agreement and deed of conditional conveyance shall be declared in default by the commissioner of housing and community development and terminated, subject to any subordination agreement. (b)  Any urban homesteader forced to abandon the homestead by circumstances beyond the homesteader's control shall have the authority, subject to the approval of the commissioner of housing and community development, to assign the homesteader's rights under the lease or combination of urban homesteading agreement and deed of conditional conveyance to any other eligible homesteader for any consideration that the homesteader can negotiate. Any property so assigned shall be reported to the commissioner of housing and community development by the urban homesteader. Should any property be so assigned, the new urban homesteader shall be bound by the terms and conditions of the lease or combination of urban homesteading agreement and deed of conditional conveyance for the balance of the term of the instrument. Any urban homesteader who has assigned the homesteader's rights under these instruments to another individual shall be deemed ineligible for any other urban homesteading structure. (Code 1977, § 8-5025) 
Sec. 54-63. - Modification.     To the extent that the urban homesteading program, as expressed in the leases, modifies or amends housing code of the city, the program is authorized. However, the modification shall not exceed the following parameters: (1)  Actual or constructive possession of leased urban homesteading property must take place and property improvements must be started within a 60-day period from the date of entering into the lease. (2)  Six months from that date, the completion of plumbing, electrical, heating and roofing repairs are required so that the homesteader can move into the homesteading structure. (3)  At the end of a two-year period from the date of entering into the lease, all exterior repairs required on the homesteading structure are to be completed. (4)  At the end of the three years from the date of entering into the lease, all city housing code requirements on the homesteading structure are to be met before conveyance of deed and title can take place. (5)  For homesteading properties that are multifamily structures or that contain rental units, the urban homesteader is expected to occupy one unit at the end of the first six-month work period. When all of the interior work has been completed on the unit the homesteader intends to occupy, when all of the required exterior work on the entire structure has been completed and when all of the interior work on the unit which the homesteader intends to rent has been completed, an urban homesteader may enter into a lease agreement with an individual for a unit in the structure. (Code 1977, § 8-5026) 
Sec. 54-64. - Nontaxable status of property.     During the period that an urban homesteading property is under lease, it shall be nontaxable property owned by the city, and no homesteader, during the period of this lease, shall be required to pay any ad valorem taxes thereon, except those accrued taxes arising by operation of law assessed against the property prior to the time of entering into the lease. (Code 1977, § 8-5027) Cross reference— Ad valorem taxes, § 146-26 et seq. 
Sec. 54-65. - Conveyance of title.     At the end of the term of the lease of the urban homesteading property and provided there has been no default in the terms and conditions of the lease, the city shall convey the leased property, by warranty deed in fee simple, to the urban homesteader in possession of the property who is the named lessee under the lease or the assignees of the lease. Additionally, any homesteader shall be authorized to request the commissioner of housing and community development to convey an urban homestead to that urban homesteader at any time prior to the expiration of the term of the lease, provided the structure in which the homesteader is dwelling meets the criteria set forth in section 54-32 and provided that no conveyance of title shall be made prior to 12 months from the initial date of occupancy of the dwelling by the homesteader. All costs of the conveyance, including but not limited to attorneys' fees, recording costs, state revenue stamps, payment of any liens, including unpaid taxes, upon the property, and title insurance premiums, shall be borne by the urban homesteader. Should the urban homesteader fail and refuse to accept conveyance and fail to initiate steps to ensure conveyance, the lease the urban homesteader is holding shall be declared in default and the lease terminated. (Code 1977, § 8-5028) 
Secs. 54-66—54-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SECTION 810 PROGRAM 
Sec. 54-76. - Findings. (a)  It is found that there are many residential properties within the corporate limits of the city that have become vacant through various processes. Many of these structures or sites have become vacant by foreclosure or have been abandoned by owners who, for various reasons, have no longer found them acceptable for either habitation, ownership or economic purposes. Further, it is found and declared that some of these properties have been and continue to be elements contributing to the deterioration of neighborhoods and the depreciation of property values in the neighborhood in which they are located. This situation leads to what constitutes a serious and growing menace injurious to the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents of the city. It is further found and declared that the existence of such vacant dwellings contributes substantially and increasingly to the spread of disease and crime, constitutes economic and social liability, substantially impairs or arrests the sound growth of urban areas and exacerbates a growing urban slum condition. Further, it is found that this form of blight is present in the inner city to a much greater degree than it is in the outer city, although the condition is found to exist throughout the city. Many of the residential properties that have become vacant are rehabitable. They are not totally without economic use and, if rehabilitated, could house citizens who need housing as a result of a variety of reasons, among which are displacement by eminent domain proceedings and a lack of housing starts due to general economic conditions. (b)  It is further found that many other urban centers throughout the United States have been confronted with problems similar to this and have developed systems of urban homesteading. The economic impact of rehabilitating homes alone is sufficient to justify a program of urban homesteading, notwithstanding the additional benefits procured through such a program. Home ownership has been found to be beneficial to the maintenance of property. Expectation of home ownership has been found to be beneficial to the fruition of housing rehabilitation and homes in private ownership that are rehabilitated increase the tax base of a local government. A decrease in the providing of certain public services, such as police and fire protection, is an additional and indirect benefit to be derived from the rehabilitation of housing. (Code 1977, § 8-5030) 
Sec. 54-77. - City authorized as agent.     The city is authorized to act as agent for the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development to process applications for rehabilitation loans on properties conveyed to the city pursuant to section 810 urban homesteading, as provided for in section 312(a)(1)(D) of the Federal Housing Act of 1964. (Code 1977, § 8-5038) 
Sec. 54-78. - Funding.     No direct expenditures from the city's general fund revenues shall be incurred by the city in connection with the section 810 urban homesteading program. (Code 1977, § 8-5037) 
Sec. 54-79. - Urban homesteading application review board.     The urban homesteading application review board established in section 54-28 shall act in an advisory capacity to the city on the section 810 urban homesteading program in approving applicants as urban homesteaders. It shall be the duty of the board to meet upon the call of the commissioner of housing and community development, at least quarterly, to review applications for urban homesteading. Following its deliberations the board shall certify to the commissioner of housing and community development those applicants who qualify under the criteria set forth in this division as urban homesteaders. For each applicant, the board shall adopt findings of fact upon which it shall base its determination as to whether the applicant qualifies as an urban homesteader. These findings of fact shall constitute a part of the record of the board's deliberations. (Code 1977, § 8-5033(a)) 
Sec. 54-80. - Inventory list. (a)  The city, acting through the department of housing and community development and working in conjunction with various other departments and bureaus of the government, is authorized to maintain a section 810 urban homestead inventory of residential properties which may be received by the city through the Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to section 810 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974; provided, however, the residential properties to be maintained on this inventory shall be inspected by the bureau of housing production and found to be redeemable for residential purposes. (b)  Any residential property meeting the criteria set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be eligible to be placed upon the section 810 urban homesteading inventory and disposed of as provided in this division. (Code 1977, § 8-5031) 
Sec. 54-81. - Determination of eligibility of property. (a)  Prior to the determination of eligibility of residential properties to be placed upon the section 810 urban homesteading inventory, the department of housing and community development shall cause a title examination to be made upon each such property by an attorney competent in the area of real estate abstract work, for the purpose of ascertaining what liens and charges constituting encumbrances are in fact on the properties. A copy of the title report shall become a part of the file regarding such property. If there are monetary encumbrances or title defects appearing against any property which cannot be economically disposed of or passed through to a prospective urban homesteader, the commissioner of housing and community development shall have the right to reject the property from becoming part of the section 810 urban homesteading inventory. If, in the opinion of the commissioner of housing and community development, the monetary and other encumbrances are not sufficient to deter a prospective urban homesteader from entering into an agreement to pay all encumbrances on such property, the property shall become part of the city section 810 urban homesteading inventory. (b)  An additional criterion as to whether or not a property can be placed upon the section 810 urban homesteading inventory shall be an opinion of counsel doing the title search that the city either can or cannot pass free and unencumbered fee simple title to the property at a point in time no greater than three years from the date of the title search. If, in the opinion of such counsel, fee simple unencumbered title cannot be so passed to an urban homesteader, the commissioner of housing and community development may reject the property from becoming a part of the section 810 urban homesteading inventory. The term "fee simple unencumbered title" as used in this section, shall not be construed to be such title as would cause rejection of those residential properties which have previously had placed upon them easements and other encumbrances of record which would not affect subsequent marketability of any such properties. (Code 1977, § 8-5032) 
Sec. 54-82. - Qualifications of applicants; placement of applicants in housing. (a)  The commissioner of housing and community development is authorized to process applicants for the section 810 urban homesteading program. The commissioner of housing and community development shall present to the urban homesteading application review board for approval all those applicants who meet or appear to meet the criteria for urban homesteading as set forth in this division. (b)  All applicants for urban homesteading shall meet the following criteria: (1)  The applicant must be 18 years of age or older and must demonstrate a degree of personal stability necessary for taking on the responsibility of urban homesteading; (2)  The applicant must possess the technical resources or financial resources or must provide documentation to show that the applicant is able to obtain the financial resources or any combination of these resources necessary for completing the rehabilitation required to bring the condition of the urban homesteading structure up to city housing code requirements within 18 months after occupying the property; (3)  The applicant must be a natural person; (4)  The applicant must not have previously participated in an urban homesteading program in the city; (5)  The applicant must be willing to commit in writing to reside in the structure as the applicant's principal place of residence for a minimum of three years, that being the homesteading period for the section 810 urban homesteading program; (6)  No applicant shall be considered who is a city employee exercising any function or responsibility with regard to the section 810 urban homesteading program; and (7)  The applicant must be able to demonstrate a need for such housing. (c)  When an applicant has been approved as a qualified urban homesteader, the commissioner of housing and community development shall endeavor to place that person into a residential dwelling from the section 810 urban homesteading inventory. Placement of such persons shall be made in the order in which applicants were approved by the urban homesteading application review board, except that a preferred place in the order of placement shall be given to those approved applicants who are residents of the city and to those approved applicants who have been displaced by governmental action on the part of the city or by other governmental action which resulted in the acquisition of their principal residences for a public project. (Code 1977, § 8-5033(b)—(d)) 
Sec. 54-83. - Terms of agreement. (a)  When the section 810 urban homesteader and the commissioner of housing and community development agree on a suitable dwelling for the homesteader, the homesteader shall enter into an agreement with the city on a form prepared by the city attorney's office. The agreement shall contain provisions whereby the homesteader to whom such property is conveyed agrees that the homesteader: (1)  Use the property as a residence only; (2)  Not assign the homesteader's interest to a third party without the consent of the city; (3)  Not keep any explosives or highly inflammable substances on the premises, save only small quantities of combustibles such as cleaning fluid, gasoline, etc.; (4)  Pay all utility services; (5)  Be required to obtain and maintain comprehensive insurance on the premises in a face amount at least equal to the fair market value of the premises, as determined by the city, and also be required to obtain and maintain liability insurance in the sum of $25,000.00 per occurrence and $100,000.00 in the aggregate; (6)  If the urban homesteader should either file bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings or have bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings filed against the homesteader, the city may, at its election, retake possession of the premises and void the conveyance; (7)  Shall pay all applicable taxes due all appropriate taxing authorities imposed on the urban homesteading premises; and (8)  Shall secure the necessary building permits, as applicable. (b)  The urban homesteader shall assume such further obligations as shall be incorporated into a deed of conditional conveyance, prepared by the city attorney's office. The deed shall be subject to the terms and conditions that the homesteader shall: (1)  Occupy the property as a principal residence for a period of no less than three years; (2)  Make repairs required to meet minimum health and safety standards for occupancy prior to occupying the property; (3)  Make such repairs and improvements to the property as may be necessary to meet the applicable standards of the city's housing code for decent, safe and sanitary housing within 18 months after occupying the property; and (4)  Permit reasonable periodic inspections at reasonable times by employees of the city, the state or the United States government for the purpose of determining that the conditions set forth in this subsection have been met within the time periods prescribed in this subsection. (c)  Any urban homesteader forced to abandon the homestead by circumstances beyond the homesteader's control shall have the authority, subject to the approval of the commissioner of housing and community development, to assign the homesteader's rights under the agreement and deed of conditional conveyance to any other eligible homesteader for any consideration that the homesteader can negotiate. Any property so assigned shall be reported to the commissioner of housing and community development by the urban homesteader. Should any property be so assigned, the new urban homesteader shall be bound by the terms and conditions of the agreement and the deed of conditional conveyance for the balance of the terms of such instruments. Any urban homesteader who has assigned such homesteader's rights under such instruments to another individual shall be deemed ineligible for any other urban homesteading structure. (Code 1977, § 8-5034) 
Sec. 54-84. - Modifications.     To the extent this division is inconsistent with the city's housing code, the housing code is amended to comply with this division; provided, however, that the modification shall not exceed the following parameters: (1)  Actual or constructive possession of leased urban homesteading property must take place and property improvements must be started within a 60-day period from the date of entering into the lease. (2)  Six months from that date, the completion of plumbing, electrical, heating and roofing repairs are required so that the homesteader can move into the homesteading structure. (3)  At the end of a one-year period from the date of entering into the lease, all exterior repairs required on the homesteading structure are to be completed. (4)  At the end of the 18 months from the date of entering into the lease, all city housing code requirements on the homesteading structure are to be met before conveyance of deed and title can take place. (5)  For homesteading properties that are multifamily structures or that contain rental units, the urban homesteader is expected to occupy one unit at the end of the first six months' work period. When all of the interior work has been completed on the unit the homesteader intends to occupy, when all of the required exterior work on the entire structure has been completed and when all of the interior work on the unit the homesteader intends to rent has been completed, an urban homesteader may enter into a lease agreement with an individual for a unit in the structure. (Code 1977, § 8-5035) 
Sec. 54-85. - Conveyance of property.     Under this division, at the end of the term set forth in the deed of conditional conveyance and provided there has been no default in the terms and conditions of either the agreement between the city and the urban homesteader or the deed of conditional conveyance, the city shall convey to the urban homesteader the property referenced in the deed of conditional conveyance by a limited warranty deed in fee simple. All costs of the conveyance, including but not limited to attorneys' fees, recording costs, state revenue stamps, payment of any liens, including unpaid taxes, upon the property and title insurance premiums shall be borne by the urban homesteader. If the urban homesteader fails and refuses to accept conveyance and fails to initiate steps to ensure conveyance, the agreement and deed of conditional conveyance the urban homesteader is holding shall be declared in default and the estate created terminated. (Code 1977, § 8-5036) 
ARTICLE IV. - AFFORDABLE HOUSING HOMESTEADING PROGRAM 
Sec. 54-86. - Procedures. (a)  The director of real estate portfolio in consultation with the chief procurement officer or his or her designee will submit to the city's office of housing and community development in January of each year a list of potential surplus properties which are no longer useful or needed by the city. In determining whether city-owned real property is potentially surplus for the purposes of this article, the director of real estate portfolio will consider whether title to the real property is good, marketable and insurable. (b)  The office of housing and community development will have 60 days after receipt of the list from the director of real estate portfolio to review the list and determine whether any of the potential surplus properties on the list are feasible for development as owner-occupied affordable housing. The office of housing and community development will consider the following factors in making its determination: (1) whether the property is large enough and of an appropriate shape for the development of one or more housing units; (2) whether utilities such as water, gas, and electricity would be available to one or more new housing units at the site; (3) whether the current zoning or land use designation of the parcel allows for residential uses; and (4) such other factors as the office of housing and community development deems necessary or appropriate, including the availability of property near public transit. (c)  After the office of housing and community development identifies which potential surplus properties are feasible for development of owner-occupied affordable housing (the "affordable housing property list"), the office of housing and community development will submit an ordinance containing the requirements provided herein to the community development and human services committee. The ordinance will contain a finding that the properties on the affordable housing property list are surplus and will approve the properties to be advertised and disposed by request for proposals pursuant to chapter 2, article X, division 4, section 2-1189 and this article IV. (d)  Upon Atlanta City Council approval of the ordinance, the office of housing and community development will send a request to the chief procurement officer to issue a public notice for request for proposals from nonprofit and for-profit developers to produce or rehabilitate owner-occupied housing units on a maximum of five surplus properties per developer per year that will be sold below market value. The request for proposals will encourage proposals that use creative strategies to lower construction costs for single-family homes, including partnerships with job training agencies, innovative methods of construction, and smaller houses, with a preference to develop housing targeting households earning zero to 30 percent of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Atlanta-Sandy Springs Marietta Area Median Income (AMI). The request for proposals will provide a maximum 90 day period to respond. (e)  To become eligible to purchase a property, the nonprofit or for-profit developer must agree to develop owner-occupied affordable housing units on the property to be sold to households earning at or below 80 percent of the area median income (AMI) as calculated and published annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for the Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta metropolitan area, with a preference for projects targeting households earning zero to 30 percent of the AMI (the "Affordable Housing Covenant"). The affordable housing covenant will run for a term of 20 years. The affordable housing covenant will contain appropriate limits on homeowners gaining full equity from re-selling the owner-occupied units during the 20 year period. (f)  The city's law department shall prepare the affordable housing covenant and all appropriate documents to be filed in the land records of Fulton County or DeKalb County to accompany any sale or resale of properties pursuant to this section in a manner consistent with this ordinance. Upon execution of an appropriate covenant, the chief procurement officer or his or her designee shall sell any properties deemed feasible for affordable housing to a non-profit developer or for-profit developer. ( Ord. No. 2017-65(17-O-1463), § 1, 11-6-17 ) 
Chapter 58 - CONSUMER PROTECTION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 30; articles sold in parks to be sold at community prices, § 110-64. State Law reference— Constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II; statutory grant of home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; consumer protection generally, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 58-1—58-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIRS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30; traffic and vehicles, ch. 150. 
Sec. 58-36. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle required to be registered with the state revenue commissioner.     Person means an individual, partnership, association, corporation or other entity.     Repairing motor vehicles means the diagnosis of malfunctions, maintenance, repair, removal or installation of an integral component part of an engine, driveline, chassis or body of a motor vehicle. (Code 1977, § 14-5193) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-37. - Penalty for violation.     Any person who violates this article shall be subject to penalty under section 1-8. (Code 1977, § 14-5196) 
Sec. 58-38. - Duties of person engaged in business.     All persons engaged in the business of repairing motor vehicles shall: (1)  Upon request by the consumer, provide the consumer with a written estimated price for labor and parts necessary to perform a motor vehicle repair before such repair is performed; (2)  Upon request by the consumer before the repair is performed, return to the consumer any parts which have been replaced by the repair unless such parts are under warranty or exchanged. If a part is exchanged, evidence of exchange must be provided the consumer upon request; (3)  Prominently display a sign or provide written information which advises the consumer of the consumer's right to request a written estimate and return of parts; and (4)  Provide the consumer with a written notice which shall describe all repair work done and parts supplied, excepting a total charge of less than $10.00; the invoice shall be in such language as to be easily understood by the consumer. (Code 1977, § 14-5194) 
Sec. 58-39. - Overcharge.     No person engaged in the business of repairing motor vehicles shall exceed the written estimated price given to the consumer pursuant to section 58-38 by more than ten percent if the written estimated price is above $250.00 or by more than 25 percent if the written estimated price is below $250.00 unless the consumer has given written or oral consent to such excess charges. (Code 1977, § 14-5195) 
Secs. 58-40—58-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CLOSEOUT AND SIMILAR SALES[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 30. State Law reference— Restrictions on going out of business sales, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-393. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 58-61. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Fire and other altered goods sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means.     Going out of business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock or goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including but not limited to the following sales: adjuster's, adjustment, alteration, assignee's bankrupt, benefit of administrator's, benefit of creditor's, benefit of trustees, building coming down, closing, creditor's committee, creditor's end, executor's final days, forced out, forced out of business, insolvent's last days, lease expires, liquidation, loss of lease, mortgage sale, receiver's, trustee's, quitting business.     Goods means any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this article.     Removal of business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move and resume business at a new location in the city or will then continue business from other existing locations in the city. (Code 1977, § 14-5122) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-62. - Article supplemental.     The sections of this article are intended to augment and be in addition to business licenses of this Code. Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises, businesses or practices than is imposed by chapter 30, article III of this Code, pertaining to business licenses, or other sections of this Code, this article shall control. (Code 1977, § 14-5121) 
Sec. 58-63. - Inventory restrictions. (a)  Bona fide orders. All goods included in the inventory of an applicant for a license under this article shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. (b)  Goods purchased for sale. This inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale regulated under this article. Any unusual purchase or additions to the stock of goods of the business affected by this article within 30 days before the filing of an application under this article shall be deemed to be of that character. (Code 1977, § 14-5127) 
Sec. 58-64. - Duties of licensee.     A person licensed under this article shall: (1)  Adhere to inventory. Make no additions whatsoever, during the period of the licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for a license; (2)  Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising; (3)  Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto; (4)  Keep duplicate inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and present the duplicate to inspecting officials upon request; and (5)  Segregate noninventoried goods. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale and make this distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place of sale apprising the public of the status of those goods. (Code 1977, § 14-5130) 
Sec. 58-65. - Other prohibited activities. (a)  Sale of unaffected or undamaged goods. It shall be unlawful for any person conducting any sale, whether by auction or otherwise, of any goods, wares or merchandise, which are or have been or which are claimed to or have been sold or purchased on account of any fire, or which are or have been or are claimed to or have been the property of any bankrupt or person who has failed in business or has made a general assignment, or which are being sold or offered for sale in any other way than through the usual channels of trade, to sell or offer for sale therein any goods, wares or merchandise not so circumstanced or affected or damaged. (b)  Adding to goods. It shall also be unlawful for any person to add to, or to permit to be added to, or to bring into or permit to be brought into any store, warehouse or other building in the city, any goods for the purpose of adding to such goods, wares or merchandise so circumstanced or affected and on hand in any such store, warehouse or other building for the purpose of being sold at such sale. (Code 1977, § 17-2005) 
Secs. 58-66—58-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
Sec. 58-81. - Required.     A license issued by the chief financial officer shall be obtained by any person before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means to be one of the following: (1)  Going out of business sale; (2)  Removal of business sale; or (3)  Fire and other altered stock sale. (Code 1977, § 14-5123) 
Sec. 58-82. - Exemptions.     This division shall not apply to or affect the following: (1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction or any person forced to vacate the premises because of eminent domain procedures or the threat of eminent domain. (2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. (3)  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction. (4)  Any publisher or newspaper, magazine or other publication that publishes in good faith any advertisement without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character or without knowledge that this article has not been complied with. (Code 1977, § 14-5124) 
Sec. 58-83. - Application.     A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this article shall make a written application to the chief financial officer setting forth and containing the following information: (1)  The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale; (2)  The true name and address of the person from whom the applicant purchased the goods to be sold and the price therefor and if not purchased the manner of acquisition; (3)  A description of the place where the sale is to be held; (4)  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease and the effective date of the termination of the occupancy; (5)  The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted; (6)  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which it will be conducted; (7)  The means to be employed in advertising the sale, together with the proposed content of any advertisement; and (8)  A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at the sale as disclosed by the applicant's records. The inventory shall be attached to and become part of the required application. (Code 1977, § 14-5125) 
Sec. 58-84. - Issuance prerequisites. (a)  Established business. Any person who has not been the owner of a business advertised or described in the application for a license under this division for a period of at least 12 months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be granted a license under this division. (b)  Exception for survivors of deceased businessperson. Upon the death of a person doing business in this city, the person's heirs, devisees or legatees shall have the right to apply at any time for a license under this division. (Code 1977, § 14-5126) 
Sec. 58-85. - Fees.     Any applicant for a license under this division shall submit to the chief financial officer with the application a license fee of $100.00 to cover a 30-day sale. Any applicant for a renewal license under this division shall submit to the chief financial officer with the renewal application a renewal license fee of $100.00 to cover an additional 30 days. The renewal license may be granted at the discretion of the chief financial officer. (Code 1977, § 19-14.017) 
Sec. 58-86. - Interval between sales. (a)  Any person who has held a sale, as regulated under this article, at the location stated in the application within one year last past from the date of the application shall not be granted a license. (b)  Whenever any person who has commenced a sale under this article at the location stated in the application shall determine within the licensing period that due to circumstances beyond the person's reasonable control the person will be unable to discontinue the person's business as originally intended, the licensee shall immediately cease all advertising and notices of such sale and shall document the pertinent facts and transmit them in writing to the chief financial officer. (c)  If the chief financial officer determines that the going out of business sale was undertaken in good faith and not completed due to circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the licensee, the chief financial officer may reinstate the gross receipts business license which was surrendered by the licensee to obtain a going out of business sale license. However, in such event the licensee shall forfeit any fee paid for the going out of business sale license and shall include all revenues received during the authorized term of the sale. (Code 1977, § 14-5131) 
Sec. 58-87. - Location of sale restricted.     When a person applying for a license under this division operates more than one place of business, the license issued shall apply only to the one store or branch specified in the application, and no other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it or in any way participating in the licensed sale nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale. (Code 1977, § 14-5232) 
Sec. 58-88. - Effect of issuance.     A license shall be issued under this division on the following terms: (1)  Licensing period. The license shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days, Sundays and legal holidays excluded, following the issuance thereof. (2)  Renewal procedure. The chief financial officer shall renew a license for one period of time only in addition to the 30 days permitted in the original license and not to exceed 30 consecutive days, Sundays and holidays excluded, when the chief financial officer finds that: a.  Facts exist justifying the license renewal. b.  The licensee has filed an application for renewal. c.  The licensee has submitted with the application for renewal a revised inventory showing the items listed on the original inventory remaining unsold and not listing any goods not included in the original application and inventory. For the purpose of this subsection, any application for a license under this division covering any goods previously inventoried as required under this article shall be deemed to be an application for renewal, whether presented by the original applicant or by any other person. (3)  Nature of sale. The license shall authorize only the type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. (4)  Saleable goods. The license shall authorize the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. (5)  Surrender of general licenses. Upon being issued a license under this division for a going out of business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the chief financial officer all other business licenses the licensee may hold at the time applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a license under this division. (6)  Transferability. Any license provided for in this division shall not be assigned or transferable. (Code 1977, § 14-5129) 
Secs. 58-89—58-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PREDATORY LENDING PRACTICES 
Sec. 58-100. - Legislative findings.     The City Council of the City of Atlanta, Georgia finds: (1)  That citizens from many lower and moderate income neighborhoods in Georgia have been unable to access legitimate financing for home purchases and renovations, allowing predatory lenders to thrive; and (2)  That these predatory lenders are charging exorbitant fees and interest rates and are persuading citizens to incur mortgage debt in excess of their needs or ability to pay often through fraudulent means; and (3)  These predatory lending practices appear to be targeting elderly and vulnerable borrowers; and (4)  That to protect the citizens of Atlanta and its neighborhoods from lending practices which strip hard earned equity from city residents and contribute to the problem of vacant and abandoned houses by making loans that families cannot afford to repay. (Ord. No. 2001-71, § 1, 9-25-01) 
Sec. 58-101. - Intent and purpose.     It is the intent and purpose of this article: (1)  To collect and make available to the public information necessary for city residents to protect themselves against predatory lending practices; and (2)  To prevent the lenders engaged in predatory lending and those persons providing referrals and services to those lenders from enjoying the privilege of doing business with our city. (Ord. No. 2001-71, § 1, 9-25-01) 
Sec. 58-102. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply throughout this article:     Affiliate means any entity that controls, is controlled by, is under common control with, or makes loans to, including capital business loans, another entity, including any successors in interest or alter egos. For the purposes of this definition, "control" shall mean any entity that has control over another entity if: (1)  The entity directly or indirectly or acting through one or more other persons owns, controls, or has power to vote 25 percentum or more of any class of voting securities of another entity; or (2)  The entity controls in any manner the election of a majority of the directors or trustees of another entity.     Annual percentage rate means the annual percentage rate for the loan calculated according to the provisions of the federal Truth in Lending Act (15 U.S.C. § 1601 et seq.), and the regulations promulgated thereunder by the Federal Reserve Board (as said Act and regulations are amended from time to time).     Business entity means any individual, domestic corporation, foreign corporation, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership, joint venture, or unincorporated association, including any parent company, subsidiary, exclusive distributor or company affiliated therewith, engaged in a business or commercial enterprise.     City means the City of Atlanta.     City agency means the City of Atlanta, its departments, boards and commissions.     City-related agency means all authorities and quasi public corporations which either: (1)  Receive appropriations from the city; or (2)  Have entered into continuing contractual or cooperative relationships with the city; or (3)  Operate under legal authority granted to them by city ordinance.     High cost lender means a business entity that, through itself and/or an affiliate has made, issued or arranged, within any 12-month period, high cost loans that comprise either: (1)  Five percent of the total annual number of loans made, issued or arranged; or (2)  Ten individual loans; whichever is less.     The term "high cost lender" shall not include a business entity, or its affiliates, that has submitted to the city a plan to discontinue the practice of making high cost loans, if the plan ensures: (1)  The prompt disengagement from the practice of making, issuing, or arranging high cost loans by the business entity(s) and its affiliates; and (2)  The complete cessation of the making, issuing or arranging of high cost loans by the business entity and its affiliates within 90 days after the plan is submitted; provided that no more than one plan may be submitted on behalf of any business entity.     High cost loan means a high cost loan is a loan that is secured by residential real property located within the city on which there is situated a dwelling for not more than four families or a condominium unit, or is secured by a cooperative unit within the city, if: (1)  The annual percentage rate of the loan equals or exceeds five percentage points over the weekly average yield on United States Treasury securities with a comparable duration to the term of the loan, as of the week immediately preceding the week in which the interest rate for the loan is established, subject to the following conditions: a.  If the terms of the loan offer any initial or introductory period, and the annual percentage rate is less than that which will apply after the end of such initial or introductory period, then the annual percentage rate that shall be taken into account for purposes of this paragraph shall be the rate which applies after the initial or introductory period; and b.  In the case of an interest rate which varies in accordance with an index, the loan shall be deemed a high cost loan if: 1.  Potential or scheduled increases in the interest rate of the loan are not directly tied to future increases and decreases in a widely used federal or private market measurement that reflects the cost of borrowing money, such as the interest rate yield on United States Treasury securities, the federal funds rate, or the prime interest rate; or 2.  The margin over such index at any point during the life of the loan exceeds five percentage points. (2)  The total points and fees exceeds three percent of the total loan amount.     Points and fees means: (1)  All items required to be disclosed under sections 226.4(a) and 226.4(b) of Title 12 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended from time to time, except the interest rate or time-price differential; (2)  All charges for items listed under section 226.4(c)(7) of Title 12 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended from time to time, but only if the charges are not bona fide and reasonable in amount or the lender receives direct or indirect compensation in connection with the charge or the charge is paid to an affiliate of the lender; (3)  All compensation paid directly or indirectly (including but not limited to yield spread premiums) to a mortgage broker, including a broker that originates a loan in its own name in a table funded transaction, not otherwise included in subparagraph (1) or (2) of this paragraph; (4)  All premiums or other charges financed, directly or indirectly, in the loan for any credit life, credit disability, credit unemployment, accident, health, or loss-of-income insurance or any other line or subline of insurance which may become accepted as credit insurance by the insurance and lending industries or for any debt cancellation or suspension agreements or contracts (whether or not the debt cancellation or suspension agreement coverage is insurance under applicable law), or similar products; and (5)  The maximum prepayment fees or penalties that may be charged under the terms of the loan.     Predatory lender means a business entity that, through itself and or an affiliate has made, issued or arranged, within any 12-month period, predatory loans that comprise either: (1)  Five percent of the total annual number of loans made, issued or arranged; or (2)  Ten individual loans; whichever is less.     The term "predatory lender" shall not include a business entity, or its affiliates, that has submitted to the city a plan to discontinue the practice of making predatory loans, if the plan ensures: (1)  The prompt disengagement from the practice of making predatory loans by the financial institution and its affiliates, and (2)  The complete cessation of the making of predatory loans by the financial institution and its affiliates within 90 days after the plan is submitted; provided that no more than one plan may be submitted on behalf of any financial institution.     Predatory loan means a threshold or high cost loan that was made under circumstances that involve any of the following acts or practices or that contain any of the following loan terms: (1)  Fraudulent or deceptive acts or practices, including fraudulent or deceptive marketing and sales efforts to sell high cost loans. (2)  "Loan flipping". "Flipping" a loan means the making of a threshold or high cost loan to a borrower that refinances an existing loan secured by residential property in the city when the new loan does not have a reasonable, tangible net benefit to the borrower considering all of the circumstances, including the terms of both the new and refinanced loans, the cost of the new loan, and the borrower's circumstances. Reduction of monthly payments alone shall not be considered a tangible net benefit to the borrower. (3)  "Balloon payments". A loan that contains a scheduled payment that is more than twice as large as the average of earlier scheduled payments or which contains a provision that gives the lender, in its sole discretion, the right to accelerate the indebtedness in the absence of the default of the borrower. (4)  "Negative amortization". A loan that contains a payment schedule with regular periodic payments that causes the principal balance to increase. (5)  "Points and fees." The direct or indirect financing of the following: a.  Any prepayment fees or penalties payable by the borrower in a refinancing transaction if the lender or an affiliate of the lender is the noteholder of the note being refinanced; b.  Any points and fees; or c.  Any other charges payable to third parties. (6)  "Increased interest rate". A loan that contains a provision that increases the interest rate after the occurrence of a default. Interest rate increases do not constitute a predatory loan practice in a variable rate loan where the increase is otherwise consistent with the provisions of the loan documents, provided that the event of default or the acceleration of the indebtedness does not trigger the change in the interest rate. (7)  "Advance payments". A loan which includes terms under which more than two periodic payments required under the loan are consolidated and paid in advance from the loan proceeds provided to the borrower other than a loan issued by or guaranteed by city agencies, city-related agencies, or another state or federal government agency. (8)  "Modification or deferral fees". A loan which includes terms under which the lender may charge a borrower any fees or other charges to modify, renew, extend, or amend a loan product or to defer any payment due under the terms of a loan product. (9)  "Mandatory arbitration". A loan that contains a mandatory arbitration clause that limits in any way the right of the borrower to seek relief through a court of law or equity. (10)  "Prepayment penalties". The lender has charged or contracted to charge any prepayment fee or penalty for the voluntary or involuntary prepayment of the home loan, or the lender has charged or contracted to charge any fee for informing any person of the balance due to pay off the home loan. (11)  "Financing of credit insurance". The lender has financed, directly or indirectly, premiums or other charges for any credit life, credit disability, credit unemployment insurance, accident, health, or loss-of-income insurance or any other line or sub-line of insurance which may become accepted as a credit insurance by the insurance and lending industries or for any debt cancellation or suspension agreements or contracts (whether or not the debt cancellation or suspension agreement coverage is insurance under applicable law), or similar products. Insurance premiums calculated and paid on a monthly basis shall not be considered financed by the lender; provided, however, that in no event shall the amount of coverage for any home loan exceed the amount necessary to satisfy the borrower's obligation on any given date during the life of such home loan. (12)  "Lending without home loan counseling" means making, issuing, or arranging a threshold or high-cost loan without first receiving notice from a counselor approved by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development that the borrower has received counseling on the advisability of the loan transaction and the appropriateness of the loan for the borrower based upon the information provided by borrower and lender to the counselor at the time counseling is provided to the borrower. (13)  "Lending without due regard to repayment" means that the lender does not reasonably believe at the time the loan is consummated that the borrower or borrowers who reside in the home (when considered individually or collectively) will be able to make the scheduled payments to repay the obligation based upon consideration of their current and expected income, current obligations, employment status, and other financial resources (other than the borrower's equity in the dwelling which secures repayment of the loan). A lender who follows the debt-to-income ratio listed in 38 C.F.R. Section 36.4337(c)(1) and as defined in 38 C.F.R. Section 36.4337(d), and follows the residual income guidelines established in 38 C.F.R. Section 36.4337(e) and VA-Form 26-6393 shall benefit from a rebuttable presumption that the lender made the loan with due regard to repayment ability. (14)  "Encouraging default." The lender recommends or encourages default on an existing loan or other debt prior to and in connection with the closing or planned closing of a loan that refinances all or any portion of such existing loan or debt. (15)  "Late fees." The lender charges late fees for the late payment of an installment due on a home loan, unless: a.  The fee does not exceed five percent of the past due installment; b.  The fee is not charged more than once as a result of a single late payment; and c.  The borrower has agreed to the imposition of the late fees in the home loan contract. (16)  Charging of points, fees or other charges in connection with a high-cost home loan if the proceeds of the high cost home loan are used to refinance an existing high-cost home loan held by the same lender or an affiliate of the lender. (17)  Refinancing of a special mortgage originated, subsidized or guaranteed by or through a state, tribal or local government, or nonprofit organization, which bears either a below-market interest rate, or has nonstandard payment terms beneficial to the borrower, such as payments that vary with income, are limited to a percentage of income, or where no payments are required under specified conditions, and where, as a result of the refinancing, the borrower will lose one or more of the benefits of the special mortgage.     Threshold loan means a loan that is secured by residential real property located within the city on which there is situated a dwelling for not more than four families or a condominium unit, or is secured by a cooperative unit within the city, if the annual percentage rate of the loan equals or exceeds by at least four percentage points but less than five percentage points the weekly average yield on United States Treasury securities with a comparable duration to the term of the loan, as of the week immediately preceding the week in which the interest rate for the loan is established, subject to the following conditions: (1)  If the terms of the loan offer any initial or introductory period, and the annual percentage rate is less than that which will apply after the end of such initial or introductory period, then the annual percentage rate that shall be taken into account for purposes of this paragraph shall be the rate which applies after the initial or introductory period; and (2)  In the case of an interest rate which varies in accordance with an index, a loan shall be deemed a threshold loan if: a.  Potential or scheduled increases in the interest rate of the loan are not directly tied to future increases and decreases in a widely used federal or private market measurement that reflects the cost of borrowing money, such as the interest rate yield on United States Treasury securities, the federal funds rate, or the prime interest rate; or b.  The margin over such index at any point during the life of the loan exceeds five percentage points. (Ord. No. 2001-71, § 1, 9-25-01) 
Chapter 62 - COURTS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Bonding agents, § 30-551 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 98. Related laws references— Courts generally, ch. 4; city court, § 4-36 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 62-1. - Bond clerk division; duties and authorities of bond clerk. (a)  There shall be created a division known as the bond clerk division within the violations bureau of the municipal court. The appointment of the head of the division, known as bond clerk, shall be made by the judges. (b)  It shall be the duty of the bond clerk to collect and enforce all collections of appearance and certiorari bonds given by persons either to appear or to abide final judgment in all courts. (c)  The chief of corrections shall not accept cash bonds on any offenses under the jurisdiction of the Atlanta Municipal Court except as set forth in section 62-31 (b), (c), (d) and (f) of this chapter. For the bail requirements of offenses under the jurisdiction of the Atlanta Municipal Court, the corrections chief shall implement the provisions of section 62-31 (a), (b), (c), (d) and (f). The chief of corrections or designated representative shall accept all appearance bonds on standard forms provided by the department of corrections, and shall deliver to the proper court the coupon stubs of these bonds. The chief of corrections shall deposit with the revenue collection administrator all sums taken on bonds, which sums shall be kept in an account and fund to be designated by the chief financial officer. (d)  The bond clerk shall keep and record all bonds received from the chief of corrections in a ledger known as the bond ledger and shall file the bonds by court date. If a case is bound over to a state court, the bond clerk shall release any bond relating to that case to the solicitor of the municipal court or the solicitor's assistant upon presentation of the receipt thereof. (e)  The clerk of the municipal court shall advise the bond clerk in writing of the action taken by the court on each case. (f)  The bond clerk, upon written notice from the clerk of the court, shall adjust records accordingly. If a trial is reset, the bond clerk's bonds and records are to be corrected to show the new trial date, etc. For a forfeiture and the issuance of an execution, the bond clerk is to collect the face value of the bond within ten days from the date of the execution. The bond clerk shall in no way have the authority to extend the ten-day payment period nor shall the trial judge, except in extreme cases, have the authority once a bond has been forfeited and an execution issued thereon to change the date or the time of payment of the bond. Upon failure of the surety to pay the face value of a bond after executions have been issued and within the prescribed time, the bond clerk shall notify the chief judge, and the chief judge shall in turn notify the chief of corrections of the failure of a surety to remit the value of the bond. The chief of corrections is to take the action of suspending the permit of a bondsperson as prescribed in this Code. (g)  The bond clerk shall collect all forfeited bonds of the court for which executions have been issued and shall deposit any collections with the revenue collection administrator's office daily with a written, detailed report to the municipal revenue collector's office of these collections. (h)  Where applicable, the bond clerk shall refund all bonds upon appearance of the principal at the time set for trial and the completion of the trial of the principal or upon the dismissal of the offense for which the bond was set. Any bond so refunded shall be refunded by direct payment to the principal or by mailing it to the principal within ten days of the completion of trial or the dismissal of the charge; provided, however, that when a bond is consummated by check, the bond clerk shall have a maximum of 20 days within which to make the refund. The 20-day period shall begin with the date of the bond or the date of the check, whichever is later. The bond clerk at the election of the principal may remit part of the bond to the particular court involved in payment of the fine and remit the balance of the cash bond to the principal. Nothing in this section shall in any way limit or prohibit the bond clerk from refunding any forfeited bond when the prisoner is produced prior to the issuance of an execution. (i)  Within 24 hours after a surety has surrendered its principal, this surety must give notice of this surrender to the bond clerk. (j)  All bonds shall be securely kept by the bond clerk, upon a bond being satisfied. The bond clerk shall mark the bond satisfied and enter it in the bond book. (k)  The bond clerk, at the end of each calendar month, shall make a full and detailed report in triplicate on the status of all bonds, and a detailed explanation is to be given in the report as to the reason the bond has not been collected. A copy of the report is to be submitted to the court, to the chief of corrections and to the chief financial officer. (Code 1977, § 3-1043; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 4, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 2018-03(18-O-1045), § 1, 2-6-18 ) 
Secs. 62-2—62-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Charter reference— Municipal court, art. 4. State Law reference— Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 62-26. - Seal. (a)  The municipal court of Atlanta, referred to in this article as the municipal court, shall have a seal which shall contain the words "The Municipal Court of Atlanta, Georgia" and in the center the word "Seal." (b)  The seal shall be kept by the clerk of the court. (Code 1977, § 3-1001) 
Sec. 62-27. - Judges.     There shall be a chief judge of the municipal court. There shall be such number of associate judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The term "municipal judge" shall include any person authorized by the Charter and applicable related law to try cases in the municipal court. (Code 1977, § 3-1002) Charter reference— Municipal court judges generally, § 4-104 et seq. Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-781 et seq. 
Sec. 62-27.1. - [Number of municipal court judges; effective date.]     Effective September 21, 2009, the number of municipal court judges shall be ten. (Ord. No. 2011-12(08-O-1760), § 1, 9-30-09) 
Sec. 62-28. - Solicitor and assistant. (a)  There shall be a solicitor who shall be known as the solicitor of the municipal court. (b)  The duties of the solicitor of the municipal court shall be to: (1)  Prosecute all cases on behalf of the city that are tried in the court; (2)  Prosecute all commitment hearings that are held in the court; (3)  Perform all appellate work, including work taken either by way of appeal or certiorari, resulting from either cases tried or commitment hearings in the court; (4)  Advise police officers on individual cases, general procedure and legal developments relating to case preparation; and (5)  Perform such other duties as are or may be required by law or by ordinance. (c)  There shall be one assistant solicitor of the municipal court. (d)  The duties of the assistant solicitor shall be the same as those of the solicitor of the municipal court, plus any additional judicial duties that the solicitor, with the consent of the city council, may prescribe. (Code 1977, § 3-1003) Charter reference— Solicitor, § 4-110. Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-781 et seq. 
Sec. 62-29. - Public defender and assistant. (a)  There shall be a public defender, who shall be known as the public defender of the municipal court. (b)  The duties of the public defender of the municipal court shall be the representation of, and the provision of legal services to, indigent defendants who are tried in the municipal court and the representation of, and provision of legal services to, indigent defendants who appear before the municipal court for commitment purposes, including all necessary pretrial preparation and interviews. In addition, the public defender is authorized to: provide legal services to indigent defendants who are detained in City of Atlanta detention facilities; provide assistance with jail discharge planning; assist with coordination of social services for defendants; and apply for grant funding on behalf of the city to support these efforts, pursuant to the city's Procurement Code. (c)  There shall be one assistant public defender of the municipal court, whose starting salary shall be equal to the starting salary of the assistant solicitor. (d)  The duties of the assistant public defender shall be the same as those of the public defender plus any additional judicial duties that the public defender, with the consent of the city council, may prescribe. (Code 1977, § 3-1004; Ord. No. 2018-03(18-O-1045), § 2, 2-6-18 ; Ord. No. 2018-30(18-O-1400), § 1, 7-11-18 ) Charter reference— Public defender, § 4-111. Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-781 et seq. 
Sec. 62-30. - Judges, solicitor and public defender pro hac vice. (a)  There shall be ten judges pro hac vice of the municipal court who shall perform the same duties as the associate judges of the municipal court. (b)  There shall be two solicitors pro hac vice who shall perform the same duties of the assistant solicitor of the municipal court. These persons shall be paid a per diem fixed by the city council from the appropriate salary account. (c)  There shall be one public defender pro hac vice who shall perform the same duties as the assistant public defender. This person shall be paid a per diem fixed by the city council from the appropriate salary account. (Code 1977, § 3-1005) 
Sec. 62-31. - Bail established under certain circumstances. (a)  For offenses under the jurisdiction of the Atlanta Municipal Court, except as set forth in subsections 62-31 (b), (c), (d) and (f) below, the chief of corrections or the chief's designated representative shall release the accused from the Atlanta City Detention Center on their own recognizance or signature, without the requirement of posting any financial obligation prior to release. The chief of corrections or his designee shall release all such persons from custody immediately after booking. All such persons shall be provided with a written directive regarding the time and date that they must appear before the municipal court. (b)  For any offense containing an element of violence or threatened violence against a person, the defendant is to be detained until the initial appearance hearing, which shall be held as soon as practicable, but in no event later than 48 hours after the time of the arrest, or 72 hours after the time of arrest where the arrest occurs pursuant to a warrant. For purposes of this subsection 62-31(b), the following shall be deemed an "offense containing an element of violence or threatened violence:" (1)  City ordinance 106-81.1: Disorderly conduct- Act of violence toward another (2)  City ordinance 106-81.3: Disorderly conduct - Fighting (3)  City ordinance 106-81.7: Disorderly conduct- Physical obstruction of another (4)  O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391: Driving under the influence (5)  An offense which is bailable only before a judge of Georgia superior court (6)  Other offenses which the corrections chief reasonably believes involve violence or the threat of violence to a person (7)  Any citation that includes "DV" (domestic violence) written by the arresting officer at any location on the ticket regardless of the offense charged (8)  Idling and loitering for illicit sex (9)  A defendant who is currently serving probation or parole, regardless of the current offense (c)  If a person who has been released on a recognizance or signature bond under this ordinance is later arrested and thereafter booked into the Atlanta City Detention Center for an offense under the jurisdiction of the municipal court prior to the disposition of the earlier charge, the chief of corrections or the chiefs designee shall bring that person to the initial appearance hearing to be held as soon as practicable, but in no event later than 48 hours after arrest, or 72 hours after the time of arrest where the arrest occurs pursuant to a warrant. (d)  If a person who has been released on a recognizance or signature bond under this ordinance is later arrested and detained on a warrant for failure to appear in the municipal court during the pendency of the earlier charge, the chief of corrections or his designee shall bring that person to the initial appearance hearing to be held as soon as practicable, but in no later than 48 hours after arrest, or 72 hours after the time of arrest where the arrest occurs pursuant to a warrant. (e)  In cases where the municipal court conducts an initial appearance hearing pursuant to subsections (b), (c), or (d) above, and requires a cash bond or other secured financial obligation as a condition of pre-trial release, the court's written determination shall include a finding regarding the defendant's present ability to pay the financial condition set. The municipal court shall not establish a financial condition for pre-trial release that results in a defendant being detained solely because he or she does not have enough money to meet the financial requirement. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of a municipal court judge to impose any nonfinancial condition of release in accordance with existing law. (f)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the acceptance of bond set by an extra jurisdictional court. (g)  The chief judge of the municipal court is authorized to promulgate rules necessary for the administration of this section. (h)  Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority granted to the judges of the Atlanta Municipal Court by Georgia law. ( Ord. No. 2018-03(18-O-1045), § 3, 2-6-18 ) 
Sec. 62-32. - Appointment of judges to sign warrants after normal hours.     The chief judge of the municipal court shall designate, on a rotating basis, a municipal judge who shall be available to sign warrants upon sworn affidavits each day after the close of regular business and on weekends. (Code 1977, § 3-1010) 
Sec. 62-33. - Court counselor.     There shall be a court counselor who shall be known as the court counselor of the municipal court. The duties of the court counselor shall be to represent the building, fire prevention, treasury, and licensing bureaus in the municipal court, and in any appeals from those trials in the superior court on certiorari. (Code 1977, § 3-1006) 
Sec. 62-34. - Clerk. (a)  There shall be a clerk of the court who shall be known as the clerk of the municipal court. (b)  The duties of the clerk of the municipal court are to: (1)  Maintain a system of records; (2)  Be the custodian of the seal of the court with the authority to certify copies of all official records of the court; (3)  Maintain the proper books of accounts, including receipts and disbursements, which the court may maintain; and (4)  Perform such other duties as the chief judge may impose. (Code 1977, § 3-1007) Charter reference— Clerk/administration of municipal court, § 4-113. Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-781 et seq. 
Sec. 62-35. - Jurisdiction; imposition of punishment.     Every person accused of violating any section of this Code or any ordinance of the city, or any state offense that may properly be adjudicated in municipal court pursuant to state law shall be tried in the municipal court, unless referred by the chief judge of municipal court to city court for jury trial. Upon a finding of guilty, the municipal court may impose such punishment as is provided for by this Code. (Code 1977, § 3-1061; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 6, 1-10-05) Charter reference— Jurisdiction of municipal court, § 4-102. State Law reference— Limitations on sentences, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-5; miscellaneous municipal court jurisdictional provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6 et seq. 
Sec. 62-36. - Indigents.     The chief judge of the municipal court shall have the power to devise reasonable tests for the determination of indigency of defendants who appear before the municipal court. All professed indigents must sign a pauper's affidavit before they may be assisted by the public defender or the public defender's staff. (Code 1977, § 3-1008) 
Sec. 62-37. - Disposition of fines and forfeitures.     All fines and forfeitures received through the municipal court shall be forwarded to the chief financial officer. The chief financial officer and not the clerk of the municipal court shall transmit funds to the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund in accordance with the requirements of law. (Code 1977, § 3-1031) 
Sec. 62-38. - Fees for copies of records and certification. (a)  The clerk of the municipal court is authorized to make charges for the copying of records of the municipal court and issuing certificates therefor as provided in chapter 2, article XIV of this Code. (b)  Fees so collected shall be accounted for by the clerk of the municipal court and shall be paid into the city treasury through the medium of a miscellaneous receipt. (Code 1977, § 3-1086) 
Sec. 62-39. - Assessment of costs and jail fees against prosecutors in dismissal for want of probable cause. (a)  A municipal court judge may, in the discretion of the judge, assess costs and jail fees against the person who initiated the prosecution when, at a criminal proceeding for a violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city, the action is dismissed for want of probable cause or for want of prosecution. This subsection shall not apply to law enforcement personnel or any other city employee acting in an official capacity. (b)  Assessment costs and jail fees imposed by a municipal court judge in this article shall not exceed $300.00. (Code 1977, § 3-1087) 
Sec. 62-40. - Assessment of additional costs for benefit of peace officers' annuity and benefit fund. (a)  There shall be assessed by the judges of the municipal court in all cases tried by these judges for the violation of any state statute or this Code or other city ordinance, as a part of the costs thereof and in addition to all other costs, assessments and fines for such offenses as may be levied by the judges, the following sums of money: (1)  For any fine or bond forfeiture of more than $4.00 but not more than $25.00, the sum of $3.00. (2)  For any fine or bond forfeiture of more than $25.00 but not more than $50.00, the sum of $4.00. (3)  For any fine or bond forfeiture of more than $50.00 but not more than $100.00, the sum of $5.00. (4)  For any fine or bond forfeiture of more than $100.00, five percent of such fine or bond forfeiture. (b)  The clerk of the municipal court shall maintain accurate and full accounts of all these sums collected. The records shall show that the extra sums collected as called for in subsection (a) of this section are collected for the purpose of being turned over to the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund of the state, as required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60, and that the city is required to act as agent for that organization in collecting this sum. (c)  All these sums shall be remitted to the chief financial officer by the court effecting these collections so that they may in turn be forwarded to the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund as required by law. (d)  All records of the court assessing and collecting these funds shall be kept open for inspection and audit by the representatives of the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund. (Code 1977, § 3-1079) State Law reference— Levy of additional costs for peace officer's annuity and benefit fund, § 47-17-60. 
Sec. 62-41. - Authority to sentence to work on streets or public works, in police station or jail. (a)  When any person is convicted of any offense against this Code or other laws and ordinances of the city, it shall be discretionary with the municipal judge to punish this offender by ordering the offender to work on the streets or public works of the city or in the police station house or jail, under the supervision of the proper officers. (b)  The judge passing sentence or any of the judge's agents shall furnish to the chief of corrections or any duly authorized agents a listing of all offenders delivered to the city prison and shall furnish the commissioner of corrections or authorized agent the full details of the sentence imposed on this offender. (Code 1977, § 3-1080; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) Charter reference— Authority to provide for working out jail sentences, § 1-102(c)(33). Cross reference— General penalty for ordinance violations, § 1-8; correctional services, § 98-136 et seq. State Law reference— Working ordinance violators, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-30-8, 36-32-5. 
Sec. 62-42. - Sentences for convictions of more than one offense.     If a person shall be convicted of more than one offense and sentenced to imprisonment, these sentences shall be severally executed, the one after the other; provided, however, the municipal court judge may, in the judge's discretion, direct that these sentences run concurrently. (Code 1977, § 3-1081) Cross reference— General penalty for ordinance violations, § 1-8. 
Sec. 62-43. - Collection of fines, cash collateral; reports on disposition of cases. (a)  Where applicable pursuant to sections 62-1(c) and 62-31 of this chapter, the chief of corrections or the chief's designated representative shall collect all bond collateral for defendants on rates that may be prescribed by a judge of the municipal court, with a proper report to be given to the proper court. (b)  The chief judge of the municipal court or designated representative shall collect all fines assessed by the chief judge or any associate judges. The chief judge of the municipal court shall further report all fines so collected to the police chief or the police chief's designated representative and to forward with this report all collections. (c)  The chief of corrections or the chief's designated representative shall report daily all collections to the chief financial officer and daily to deposit all cash and other payments with the revenue collection administrator's office. (d)  Each judge and associate judge of the municipal court shall note on each charge or written accusation the disposition, except those on which collateral has been collected or those which have been collected by the violations bureau. (e)  Reserved (f)  The clerk of the municipal court shall render a monthly report of the number of cases on hand at the beginning of the month, the number of cases received during the month, the number of cases disposed of, the nature of the disposition and the cases remaining on hand at the end of the month. Any case remaining in effect for 60 or more days is to be set out separately, showing the number of times the case has been postponed and the reason for postponement. A copy of the monthly report is to be filed with the chief judge of the municipal court, the police chief and the chief financial officer. (g)  Any officer named in this section violating this section or any official aiding or abetting this violation shall be deemed guilty of a breach of duty and shall be subject to removal from office. (Code 1977, § 3-1082; Ord. No. 2018-03(18-O-1045), § 4, 2-6-18 ) 
Sec. 62-44. - Execution to collect fine.     Execution may issue if any fine is imposed by municipal court, to be levied upon the goods, chattels, lands, and tenements of the defendant fined, if the fine is not paid as required by law, which execution shall bear teste in the name of the mayor, and shall be signed officially by the clerk of court or a deputy clerk thereof. (Code 1977, § 3-1083; Ord. No. 2012-22(12-O-0398), § 1, 5-30-12) 
Sec. 62-45. - Pretrial release program.     There shall be a pretrial release agency of the municipal court. The director of the pretrial release agency shall report to the chief judge of the municipal court or the judge's designee. (Code 1977, § 3-1011) 
Sec. 62-46. - Pretrial diversion fee.     In every case that a defendant is allowed to participate in any pretrial diversion program under the supervision of the solicitor of the municipal court, there shall be imposed a fee as a condition of completion of the pretrial diversion program. Such a fee shall be in an amount not to exceed $300.00. Any fee may be waived or amended upon determination as to undue hardship, inability to pay and any other extenuating factors that prohibit collection of the fee. All fees collected shall be paid into the general fund of the city and shall be applied to defray the cost of the administration of the program. (Ord. No. 2002-24, § 1, 4-5-02; Ord. No. 2010-06(10-O-0307), § 1, 3-9-10) 
Sec. 62-47. - Authority to sentence to home confinement. (a)  When any person is convicted of any offense against this Code or other laws and ordinances of the city, it shall be discretionary with the municipal judge to punish this offender by ordering the offender to home confinement, under the supervision of the proper officers. (b)  The judge passing sentence or any of the judge's agents shall furnish to the Commissioner of the Department of Corrections or any duly authorized agents a listing of all offenders who have been sentenced in accordance with this section by delivering said list to the Municipal Jail and shall furnish the Commissioner of Corrections or authorized agent the full details of the sentence imposed on this offender. (Ord. No. 2009-19(09-O-0798), § 2, 5-26-09) 
Secs. 62-48—62-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COURT PROCEDURES 
Sec. 62-56. - Rules of practice.     In general, the municipal court shall be controlled by the rules of practice governing the superior court, so far as they are applicable to the municipal courts, and by a sound construction of the Charter and related laws and this Code and ordinances of the city. The rules of evidence and examination of witnesses shall be the same as in the superior courts, so far as these rules are applicable to the case on trial. (Code 1977, § 3-1070) 
Sec. 62-57. - Correct docketing required.     All cases in the municipal court must be docketed in the correct name of the accused and shall correctly describe the offense charged. The docketing of a defendant under a false or assumed name or under a false charge shall be sufficient ground for the removal of any officer guilty thereof who has any knowledge of the true name or the true charge. (Code 1977, § 3-1075) 
Sec. 62-58. - Trying person under fictitious name; accepting plea of guilty in the accused's absence. (a)  It shall be unlawful for the municipal judge to try a person under a feigned name, if the municipal judge has reason to believe a fraud is being practiced on the court and the public, by the use thereof and concealment of the true name. (b)  Upon the request of an accused who has made in writing, a knowing, intelligent and voluntary waiver of his right to be present, the municipal judge may entertain a plea of guilty in the absence of the accused. (c)  Violation of this section by the municipal judge shall be sufficient cause for removal from office. (Code 1977, § 3-1076; Ord. No. 2005-12, § 1, 2-28-05) 
Sec. 62-59. - Stenographic report of testimony required for trial of member of department of police.     If any member of the department of police is arraigned before the municipal judge on a charge of violating any state law or any section of this Code or any city ordinance, the police chief is required to have the testimony adduced at the trial stenographically reported. A copy of the evidence shall be furnished to the police chief. The taking down and reporting of these proceedings shall be done by a stenographer employed by the department of police at no additional expense to the city. (Code 1977, § 3-1077) 
Sec. 62-60. - Issuance of summons.     Any member of the department of police, the solicitor of the municipal court and the assistant solicitor, in all cases where a complaint is made or information is obtained of any violation of any of this Code or other laws or ordinances of the city, shall issue a summons, directed to the accused, requiring the accused to appear before the municipal court to answer this charge. The summons shall designate the time and place of trial and shall be signed by the member of the department of police, solicitor or assistant solicitor issuing it and a copy thereof shall be served upon the accused either personally or by leaving the copy at the accused's place of residence. (Code 1977, § 3-1062) Charter reference— Service of process, § 4-111. 
Sec. 62-61. - Issuance of warrants upon complaint.     Any person witnessing a violation of this Code or a city ordinance by another person may appear before a judge of a municipal court, the solicitor or the solicitor's assistant and there swear out a complaint for the violation. Upon the signing of this complaint, under oath by the complainant, a warrant may be issued by the municipal court judge directed to the alleged violator to be and appear in the court to answer the charges as contained in the complaint. However, if the prosecution is abandoned before trial, the officer who issued the warrant shall enter a judgment against the prosecutor for costs in the amount of $25.00 and enforce it by an execution in the name of the city or by an attachment for contempt. The term "prosecutor" shall not include the city solicitor or the solicitor's assistant. (Code 1977, § 3-1063) Charter reference— Service of process, § 4-114(c). 
Sec. 62-62. - Service of summons by revenue collection administrator.     The revenue collection administrator is authorized and empowered to serve a summons requiring a person to appear and answer before the municipal court, the same as police officers, the solicitor and assistant solicitor are so authorized. This service shall be as legal and binding upon the party receiving it as though the party were served by a member of the department of police. (Code 1977, § 3-1064) Charter reference— Service of process, § 4-114(c). 
Sec. 62-63. - Failing to appear to answer summons.     It shall be unlawful for any defendant lawfully summoned to answer charges in the municipal court to either fail, neglect or refuse to appear at the time and place specified in the summons or fail to provide a satisfactory explanation for this absence. The trial may be continued to such time as the municipal court may direct, and the court shall issue an order requiring the police chief, or other members of the department of police to arrest the defendant and bring the defendant before the court to answer both the initial charges and the charge for failing to appear at trial. The chief of corrections shall keep the defendant in custody until the defendant is brought before the court, unless the defendant posts bond for appearance, as provided by law. (Code 1977, § 3-1065; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 62-64. - Rights of accused.     In addition to all rights secured by other laws, any person charged with an offense against this Code or other ordinances of the city shall be informed by summons in writing served on such person of the nature of the cause of the accusation; shall have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in such person's behalf; shall have a speedy trial before the municipal judge; shall be confronted with the witnesses against such person and have the privilege of cross examination, as in the superior courts of the state; and shall have the privilege of defending, by counsel or by such person or both, as to such person shall seem proper. No person shall be condemned, fined or punished without full opportunity of being heard in such person's own defense. Additionally, any proven indigent shall be ensured the opportunity of being defended by the public defender or an assistant public defender. (Code 1977, § 3-1066) 
Sec. 62-65. - Issuance of subpoenas.     Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the municipal court to establish any fact, the clerk of the municipal court shall issue a subpoena directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case, which shall be served as other process by the police chief or other police officers. (Code 1977, § 3-1067) Charter reference— Service of process by police, § 4-114(c). 
Sec. 62-66. - Witness failing or refusing to obey subpoena.     If any person lawfully summoned as a witness before the municipal court shall either fail, neglect or refuse to attend the trial for which the person has been summoned or fail to provide a satisfactory explanation for this absence, the person may be cited for contempt and be fined in a sum not to exceed $50.00. If the cause is continued because of the absence of this person, the court may issue attachment against the person requiring the person to show cause on the day appointed for trial why the person should not be cited for contempt. The police chief or other police officer shall, by virtue of the attachment, arrest the person and keep the person in custody until the person is brought before the court, unless the person posts bond for appearance, as provided by law. (Code 1977, § 3-1068) Charter reference— Contempt powers of court, § 4-102(5). State Law reference— Municipal court judges to have powers of magistrates, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; contempt powers of magistrates, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-2(7). 
Sec. 62-67. - Interference with witnesses.     It shall be unlawful for any person, in any case pending or about to be made in the municipal court, by threats, intimidation, persuasion, payment, gift or promise of money or other things of value or by any other means whatever used toward a witness or any other person, to: (1)  Prevent or attempt to prevent a witness from appearing or from testifying to the whole truth; (2)  Induce or attempt to induce any witness to testify falsely or to change testimony; (3)  Interfere or attempt to interfere in any way with any witness; or (4)  In any way suppress or conceal or attempt to suppress or conceal any testimony in that case for the purpose of controlling or influencing the result thereof. (Code 1977, § 3-1069) State Law reference— Threatening or influencing witnesses, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-93. 
Sec. 62-68. - Continuances generally.     Where the ends of justice may require, all cases in the municipal court may be continued. However, in ruling upon requests for continuances, the judge shall use sound discretion in applying the general rules governing continuances. (Code 1977, § 3-1071) 
Sec. 62-69. - Motions for continuances.     All motions in the municipal court for the continuance of any case when the defendant is at liberty on bond shall be made by the defendant, the defendant's attorney at law or the defendant's attorney in fact in the court having jurisdiction and at the time the defendant is scheduled for trial. Whether a motion to continue a case shall be entertained except in open court and on the day set for a trial shall be left to the sound discretion of the judge. (Code 1977, § 3-1072) 
Sec. 62-70. - Procedure where evidence indicates person other than defendant has violated ordinance.     If on the trial of any case in the municipal court it appears that any other person besides the one on trial has violated a law or ordinance of the city, that person may then and there be tried, unless the case is continued for legal cause. (Code 1977, § 3-1073) 
Sec. 62-71. - Contempt.     Any person who, during a sitting of the municipal court, shall be guilty of a contempt of court or who refuses to abide by an order of the court or sentence shall be punished as provided in state law for contempt against the superior courts of this state. (Code 1977, § 3-1073) State Law reference— Municipal court judges to have powers of magistrates, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-3; contempt powers of magistrates, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-2(7). 
Secs. 62-72—62-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BAIL AND OTHER BONDS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Authority to provide for forfeiture and collection of appearance bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-4. 
Sec. 62-81. - Authority to take and accept bond.     The chief of corrections or the chief's designated representative is authorized to receive appearance bonds of defendants and witnesses, in the form of recognizance, signature, property, or cash or written bonds of professional bondspersons, or otherwise, pursuant to the provisions of sections 62-1(c) and 62-31 of this chapter to secure the attendance of defendants and witnesses in municipal court. If a particular defendant is charged with two or more offenses and bond is deemed necessary, a separate bond may be set for each offense. The bond shall remain in full force and effect until the disposition of the case and until the defendant is surrendered, or until otherwise directed by the municipal court or other court of law. The mayor may require professional bondspersons to deposit with the chief financial officer a sufficient fund to protect the interests of the city. The chief of corrections or the chief's designated representatives and the chief judge and associate judges of the municipal court shall promptly forward all bonds to the clerk of the court. (Code 1977, § 3-1032; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2018-03(18-O-1045), § 5, 2-6-18 ) 
Sec. 62-82. - Appointment of bond hearing judge.     When bonds are forfeited for nonappearance in the municipal court, the case entered on the bond for the purpose of establishing judgment in favor of the city against the principal and security in the bond shall be tried before a municipal judge designated by the chief judge as a bond hearing judge. The chief judge may make such designation on a rotating basis. (Code 1977, § 3-1039) 
Sec. 62-83. - Bond signed by surety through agent acting under power of attorney.     If an officer or employee of the department of corrections or clerk of the municipal court is charged with the duty of accepting and passing on the legality of an appearance or other bond, such officer or clerk may accept a bond signed by a surety through an agent acting under the power of attorney, whether the surety is a surety company or person, if the power is properly executed by the surety. However, the bond shall not be accepted, though the power of attorney is properly executed, if the officer or clerk passing upon the adequacy of the bond is not satisfied that the agent has authority to act for the alleged principal, and no power of attorney executed by a surety company shall be accepted by an officer unless this company has complied with the rules and regulations of the city and laws of the state. The bond shall not be accepted by the officer or clerk unless the person appearing before the officer or clerk, requesting to sign the bond, is an agent having the power of attorney to bind the surety, whether the surety is a company, corporation, firm, partnership, association or individual, and such person shall exhibit the power of attorney authorizing such person to bind the surety before being allowed to execute the bond. (Code 1977, § 3-1033) 
Sec. 62-84. - Imprisonment or detention in default of bond.     If either parties or witnesses in the municipal court shall fail or refuse to give bond and security or bond, as required of them, the persons so failing or refusing may be confined in the station house or jail or be kept under a guard to ensure their presence at trial or to testify, as the case may be. (Code 1977, § 3-1034) 
Sec. 62-85. - Forfeiture of bond for failure to appear. (a)  Any person charged in the municipal court with the violation of a section of this Code or an ordinance or an offense against the city who has posted a bond, including a recognizance or signature bond, for a personal appearance at a designated time and place and who fails to appear at this time shall forfeit the bond upon the call of the case for trial, and the court shall so declare in open court. (b)  Forfeiture of a bond, including a recognizance or signature bond, shall not be a bar to a subsequent prosecution of the accused for the violation. (Code 1977, § 3-1035; Ord. No. 2018-03(18-O-1045), § 6, 2-6-18 ) 
Sec. 62-86. - Bond forfeiture order to show cause. (a)  Upon failure of a person charged with a penal offense to appear before the municipal court at any time fixed for such person's hearing, the court may proceed to forfeit the bond or recognizance. (b)  If the court proceeds with forfeiture, the judge shall, upon the failure to appear, order an execution hearing for a date not sooner than 60 days but not later than 90 days after the failure to appear. Within 72 hours of the failure to appear, notice of the execution hearing shall be given by first class mail by the clerk of the municipal court to the principal and to each surety at the addresses given on the bond or by personal service to the surety at its home office or to its designated registered agent. Notice shall be served in the form of a scire facias, setting the date of the hearing. (c)  If at the execution hearing it is determined that judgment should be entered, the judge shall so order. (d)  Where applicable, on application filed within 60 days from payment of judgment, the court shall order remission under the following conditions: (1)  Provided the bond amount has been paid within 60 days after judgment and the delay has not prevented the proper prosecution of the principal, the court, on motion at a hearing upon proper notice having been given to the prosecuting attorney, shall direct a remission of 95 percent of the bond if the surety apprehended and surrendered the defendant or if the apprehension or surrender of the defendant was substantially procured by the surety or caused by the surety. Should the surety produce the principal within two years of the failure to appear, the surety shall be entitled to a refund of 50 percent of the bond payment; and (2)  The prosecuting attorney must be given at least 20 days' notice before a hearing is held on the application for remission and must be furnished with copy of the application along with the affidavits and other documentation and evidence supporting such application. Remission shall be granted on the condition of the payment of costs by the surety. (e)  A copy of the order shall be served upon the principal and surety if they can be found in the city, by the clerk of the municipal court or designated representative, at least 20 days before the time therein set for hearing. (Code 1977, §§ 3-1036, 3-1037; Ord. No. 2018-03(18-O-1045), § 7, 2-6-18 ) 
Sec. 62-87. - Judgment on bond, issuance and collection of executions; effect of noncompliance. (a)  Authority. If no sufficient cause is shown, the municipal judge or other officer presiding shall proceed to enter judgment against the principal and surety, under sections 62-85 and 62-86, for the amount of bond, including a recognizance or signature bond as applicable, and execution shall be issued for the amount of this judgment and placed in the hands of the municipal revenue collector, who shall proceed to collect it by levy and sale as in the case of tax executions. However, judgment shall not be entered against either principal or surety until service shall have been perfected. (b)  Suspension of bondsperson's permit for noncompliance. Upon failure of any bondsperson to comply with this section or section 62-86 within ten days of the issuance of the execution, the permit and right of the bondsperson shall automatically and without further action be suspended. (c)  Effect of suspension. The chief judge of any court under the jurisdiction of the city or the bond administrator shall immediately notify the chief of corrections in writing of the failure of any bondsperson or individual to comply with this section, and upon receipt of this notice the commissioner of corrections shall not permit this bondsperson or individual to visit persons incarcerated in the city jail. No bondsperson or individual shall have the right contemplated in this article to write further bonds for prisoners held by the city until this bondsperson's permit or individual's right has been reinstated by the mayor. (Code 1977, § 3-1038; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 2018-03(18-O-1045), § 8, 2-6-18 ) 
Sec. 62-88. - Discharge of surety by surrender of principal; notice of surrender.     Any surety upon a bail bond may surrender the principal at any time to the officer on duty at the station house, who shall confine the principal until the principal has been discharged by order of the municipal court or by giving other and good security. This delivery of the principal shall discharge the surety of all further liability upon this bond, and the court shall after final judgment relieve the surety of the penalty of the bond upon the surrender of the principal. The chief of corrections or designated representative shall promptly advise the bond administrator and the particular court involved of any principal surrendered. (Code 1977, § 3-1041; Ord. No. 2002-71, § 71, 9-16-02) 
Sec. 62-89. - Effect of original bond upon subsequent arrest on different offense.     If a person has been arrested and has posted bond to appear at the trial for the offense charged, a fee or charge having been paid to a professional bondsperson for this bond, and if this person is subsequently arrested for a different offense while out on bail, this subsequent arrest shall not operate as a discharge of the bail on the original offense if the person gives bond on the subsequent different offense. Upon this occurring, no professional bondsperson shall be entitled to collect an additional fee or make an additional charge for providing a bond on the original offense, the original bond remaining in effect upon the posting of bond on the subsequent different offense. (Code 1977, § 3-1042) 
Secs. 62-90—62-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROBATION 
Sec. 62-101. - Officers and employees of probation office.     All officers and employees of the probation office shall be under the supervision and direction of the chief judge of the municipal court. As to all employees of the office coming under the general employees civil service act, the chief judge shall be deemed the appointing authority. (Code 1977, § 3-1111) 
Sec. 62-102. - Continuation of case; defendant's failure to appear.     In all cases brought before the municipal judge, the municipal judge, in the judge's discretion, shall have the right to continue the case to some fixed day for further consideration and final determination and, pending this final decision, the defendant shall be permitted to go on the defendant's own recognizance, but the defendant's name, residence, business and such other information as may be desired shall be secured by the probation officer and a permanent record made thereof. If, before the date set for hearing, it appears that these offenses have been repeated, the municipal judge shall be notified thereof and the entire information placed in the municipal judge's hands, and the defendant shall be further notified of the time fixed for final hearing and to appear and abide the sentence. On the failure of the defendant to appear and abide the sentence of the court, the defendant shall be dealt with as for a contempt and subject to arrest, not only to serve the sentence imposed in this case but also for such additional sentence as the municipal judge may impose as the result of the contempt. (Code 1977, § 3-1112) 
Sec. 62-103. - Additional continuances.     The chief probation officer shall place a record in the hands of the municipal judge upon the arrival of the date initially set for hearing by the judge. It shall be in the discretion of the municipal judge to continue the case further or to have the defendant appear on the date named and abide the sentence imposed. If the municipal judge decides further to postpone the case, the defendant shall be notified of the date and time and shall appear and abide the sentence at that postponed time, subject to be dealt with as for a contempt, as provided in section 62-102. If the municipal judge decides to postpone the case indefinitely, the defendant shall be so advised and shall not be required to appear unless the municipal judge fixes a further time for a hearing or disposition of the case, when the defendant shall receive notice thereof and shall appear and abide the sentence of the court. (Code 1977, § 3-1113) 
Sec. 62-104. - Investigations; rules for defendants; records. (a)  Under this division, the chief probation officer, in exercising police powers, shall make personal investigation of each case; the conditions surrounding the individual and the family; the character, habits and the like, past and present, of the individual and family; and shall as well make a close and constant investigation of the conduct of the defendant, pending the probation provided, and see that the municipal judge is informed of this conduct, habits, labor and the like during this period. (b)  The chief probation officer shall establish rules under which defendants are required to report to the chief probation officer at stated intervals, but the chief probation officer shall not rely upon these reports entirely. (c)  The chief probation officer shall personally make investigations in such manner as may be deemed advisable and as often as necessary, to keep advised of the defendant's conduct, habits, employment and condition. (d)  The chief probation officer shall keep an accurate record of these reports as may be made to the chief probation office and such conditions as the chief probation office may ascertain personally for the information of the municipal judge and as a matter of permanent record. (Code 1977, § 3-1114) 
Secs. 62-105—62-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY COURT[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-03, § 7, repealed div. 1, §§ 62-126, 62-127, div. 2, §§ 62-141—62-144, pertaining to the violations bureau, in their entirety. Section 8 of said ordinance provided for the amendment of § 62-128 to read as herein set out. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Secs. 62-126, 62-127. - Reserved. 
Sec. 62-128. - Payment for attendance at court during off hours.     If any sheriff, deputy sheriff or member of any municipal or county police force shall be required by writ of subpoena to attend the municipal court or city court as a witness in behalf of the city or state during any hours except the regular duty hours to which the officer is assigned, such officer shall be paid the sum of $25.00 per day for such attendance. The claim for such witness fees shall be endorsed on the subpoena showing the dates of attendance and stating that attendance was required during the hours other than the regular duty hours to which the claimant was assigned, and the claimant shall verify this statement. The dates of attendance shall be certified by the solicitor of the municipal court, and the amount due shall be paid from funds allocated to the court for the payment of expenses of operating such court and the enforcement of the laws of the state relating to and regulating traffic. However, no such officer may claim or receive more than one witness fee per day for attendance in any court or before the grand jury, regardless of the number of subpoenas which such officer may have received, requiring the officer to appear in such court or before the grand jury in any one day. (Code 1977, § 7-3019; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 8, 1-10-05) 
Secs. 62-129—140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Editor's note— See editors note art. III this chapter. 
Secs. 62-141—62-144. - Reserved. 
Chapter 66 - ELECTIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— City council, § 2-36 et seq.; mayor, § 2-176 et seq.; limitations on campaign contributions for municipal office, § 2-824; sale of alcoholic beverages on election days authorized, § 10-210; candidate addressing police employees at police facilities, § 98-46; city employees required to resign prior to filing candidacy for office of mayor, president of city council, or office of councilperson, § 114-2. State Law reference— Elections generally, O.C.G.A. § 21-1-1 et seq.; Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 66-1. - Superintendent.     The municipal clerk is designated election superintendent in the city with all rights, powers and duties as provided by the Georgia Election Code, as now or hereafter amended (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.) and shall conduct all elections of the city in accordance with the Georgia Election Code, as now or hereafter amended. (Code 1977, §§ 1-2002, 1-3001; Ord. No. 2009-67(09-O-1888), § 1, 11-11-09) Editor's note— Section 66-1 has been revised to conform to charter §§ 5-101, 5-106 as amended 1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469. 
Sec. 66-2. - Precinct boundary lines and polling places.     The precincts polling places and maps showing precinct boundary lines within the City of Atlanta shall be designated, changed or created in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 21-2-260 to 21-2-270.     The precincts and polling places within the City of Atlanta in both Fulton and DeKalb Counties are specifically described in a document entitled "City of Atlanta Precincts and Polling Places, (as of November 20, 2017)." The city wide council districts boundary lines with corresponding precinct designations and boundary lines are specifically shown on a map titled "City of Atlanta Council Districts and Voting Precincts Map," dated December 04, 2017. Both are on file in the office of the municipal clerk, and are incorporated in this chapter and adopted by reference as the official "City of Atlanta Council Districts and Voting Precincts Map." (Code 1977, § 1-3002; Ord. No. 2001-81, § 1, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 2009-67(09-O-1888), § 1, 11-11-09; Ord. No. 2013-39(13-O-1194), § 1, 8-28-13 ; Ord. No. 2017-84(17-O-1774), § 1, 12-13-17 ) State Law reference— Precincts and polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-160 et seq. 
Sec. 66-3. - Qualification period and qualification fees for general and special elections. (a)  The qualification period for a city general or special election shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132. General election and special election shall be as defined by the Georgia Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.). (b)  Qualification fees shall be fixed as provided in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131. (c)  Specific dates for qualification and the amount of qualification fees, shall be adopted by ordinance or resolution and shall be published in the official organs of Fulton and DeKalb Counties and in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipal corporation, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131. (Code 1977, § 1-3007; Ord. No. 2009-67(09-O-1888), § 1, 11-11-09) Editor's note— Section 66-3 has been revised so as to eliminate conflict with O.C.G.A. § 21-3-91. See charter §§ 5-101, 5-106, as amended 1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469. 
Sec. 66-4. - Nomination by petition.     In addition to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132, a candidate for municipal office may qualify by filing a nomination petition as provided by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-170. (Code 1977, § 1-3004; Ord. No. 2009-67(09-O-1888), § 1, 11-11-09) Editor's note— Section 66-4 has been revised so as to eliminate conflict with O.C.G.A. § 21-3-91. See charter §§ 5-101, 5-106, as amended 1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469. State Law reference— Nominating petitions, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-91. 
Sec. 66-5. - Compensation of workers.     The election commissioner or manager in chief, commissioners or associate managers and clerks shall be compensated as provided by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-71 and any other applicable state law. (Code 1977, § 1-3003; Ord. No. 2009-67(09-O-1888), § 1, 11-11-09) Editor's note— Section 66-5 has been revised so as to eliminate conflict with O.C.G.A. § 21-3-370. See charter §§ 5-101, 5-106 as amended 1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469. 
Sec. 66-6. - Challenging right of elector to vote.     Challenges to the right of a person to vote in an election are covered by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-230. (Code 1977, § 1-3005; Ord. No. 2009-67(09-O-1888), § 1, 11-11-09) Editor's note— Section 66-6 has been altered to correct the statutory reference. 
Sec. 66-7. - Contesting election results.     Procedures for hearings on petitions to contest election results and appeals relating thereto are governed by O.C.G.A. §§ 21-2-520 to 21-2-529 and any other applicable state law. (Code 1977, § 1-3006; Ord. No. 2009-67(09-O-1888), § 1, 11-11-09) Editor's note— Section 66-7 has been revised so as to eliminate conflict with O.C.G.A. § 21-3-420 et seq. See charter §§ 5-101, 5-106, as amended as 1996 Ga. L. (Act No. 1019), p. 4469. 
Secs. 66-8—66-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Charter reference— Recall elections, § 5-301. Cross reference— Petitions to initiate legislation, § 2-40. 
Sec. 66-36. - Initiative.     Whenever 15 percent of the registered voters, as disclosed by the registration lists of the last preceding general municipal election, shall request in a petition filed in the office of the municipal clerk the submission of an ordinance or resolution, the substance of which is incorporated in the petition, for adoption by vote of the people, an election shall be called therefor within 30 days after it has been read by the council, and the election shall be held within 90 days after the date of the call. If at the election the resolution or ordinance receives a majority of the votes cast, it shall become operative and cannot be thereafter repealed except by an election similarly called. However, if the council adopts the resolution or ordinance for which a petition is filed, no election shall be called. (Code 1977, § 1-3021) 
Sec. 66-37. - Referendum. (a)  Whenever 15 percent of the registered voters, as disclosed by registration lists of the last preceding general municipal election, shall request, in a petition filed with the municipal clerk, amendments to the Charter or amendments to or repeals of ordinances or resolutions which may have already been adopted by the council, the amendments or repeals shall thereafter be submitted to the qualified voters of the city. Such petition shall specifically set forth the exact language of the proposed amendment or repeal. The council shall determine the validity of such petition within 50 days of its filing. If such petition is determined valid, within one week the council shall issue the call for a special election for the purpose of submitting such amendment or repeal to the registered electors of the city for their approval or rejection. The council shall set the date of the special election as provided in O.C.G.A. § 21-3-53. The council shall cause a notice of the date of the election to be published in a newspaper of general circulation once a week for two weeks immediately preceding such date. The voting on questions submitted to the people at the special election provided for in this section in what is known as the initiative and referendum shall be held in the same manner as the general election, under the same methods, and the result thereof shall be canvassed in the same manner and declared and reported to the council for confirmation. If the majority of the votes are cast against the ordinance or resolution, it shall be thereby repealed and revoked and shall not thereafter be of any effect nor shall it thereafter be adopted by the council until resubmitted to and adopted by the qualified voters of the city in the same manner as originally submitted. If a majority of the votes are cast in the affirmative, the ordinance or resolution shall stand and be effective in the same manner as other ordinances or resolutions of the city. If the council determines that the petition is not valid, it shall publish in detail, in a newspaper of general circulation in the week immediately following the date on which the petition is declared to be not valid, the reasons why such petition is not valid. (b)  The sponsor of a petition authorized by this section shall obtain copies of all official petitions from the municipal clerk. The municipal clerk shall approve all petitions as to form. The municipal clerk shall provide a place on each form for the person collecting signatures to provide such person's name, street address, city, county, state, ZIP code and telephone number and to swear that such person is a resident of the city and that the signatures were collected inside the boundaries of the city. The collection of signatures for the petition shall begin on the day the municipal clerk provides official copies to the sponsor of the petition. A petition authorized by this section shall not be accepted by the council for verification if more than 60 days have elapsed since the date the sponsor of the petition first obtained copies of the petition from the municipal clerk. (c)  The council shall be authorized to submit to the qualified voters of the city at any election any ordinance or resolution which it may deem proper. If a majority of voters shall vote for this ordinance or resolution, it shall be adopted. If a majority of the votes so cast are against the resolution or ordinance, it shall be defeated and shall not thereafter be adopted by the council until resubmitted to and adopted by the qualified voters of the city. If it receives a majority vote of the people and becomes effective, it can only be repealed by a majority vote of the qualified voters at a special election. (Code 1977, § 1-3022) State Law reference— Charter amendments, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 
Sec. 66-38. - Recall elections.     Any person holding an elective office of the city shall be subject to removal from office at a recall election in the manner provided by the Recall Act of 1989, O.C.G.A. § 21-4-1 et seq. (Code 1977, § 1-3011) Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 5-301. 