CODE OF THE CITY OF WALESKA, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2011 by Order of the City Council  Adopted April 2, 2012 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
WALESKA, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Mary Helen Lamb (Mayor) 
Dennis Cochran (Mayor Pro Tem) 
Lee Lamb (Council) 
Jon Costales (Council) 
Vickie Boswell (Council) 
Kristi Bosch (Council) 
Paul Ice (Council) 
City Council 
____________ 
John Meier  Law Office of John Meier II, LLC 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Robyn Smith 
City Clerk/Manager 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
WALESKA, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Doris Jones (Mayor) 
William L. (Bill) Cline (Mayor Pro Tem) 
Floyd A. Puckett (Treasurer) 
Edna S. Cook 
Mary Helen Lamb 
Dennis "Hill" Cochran 
Paul Ice 
City Council 
____________ 
Thompson, Meier and King 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Aimee Abernathy 
City Clerk/Manager 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Waleska, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the city's 1986 Code and ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1986 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Karen Barrington, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Dana M. Thompson for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Waleska, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Waleska, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Waleska, Georgia. 2011. 
ORDINANCE OF APRIL 2, 2012(1) 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF WALESKA, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WALESKA HEREBY ORDAINS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Waleska, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 28, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 2, 2012, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. Unless expressly provided: 
(1)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or confinement in such place of confinement as may be designated by the city council not to exceed 90 days, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after April 2, 2012 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall go in effect on April 2, 2012. 
SO RESOLVED this 2nd day of April, 2012 
  

Attest: 
  


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Published in this part is 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1348), page 6774. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the scheme of expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Other additions are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The City of Waleska in Cherokee County is reincorporated by the enactment of this Charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name of the "City of Waleska." References in this Charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Waleska. The city shall have perpetual existence. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time by local law or in the manner provided by general state law. The boundaries of this city shall be at all times shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk of the city and to be designated, as the case may be, "Official Map or Description of the Corporate Limits of the City of Waleska, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the mayor shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
(b)  The mayor and city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps, which it is designated to replace. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 1) 
Sec. 1.12. - Municipal powers. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. These powers shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this Charter; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-1-1 et seq.] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq.] or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Eminent domain. The city is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, heliports, commuter rail, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future; 
(10)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(11)  Fees. To establish fees and assessments of special districts for the purpose of business improvement districts; 
(12)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire-fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(13)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business in the city benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(14)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(15)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(16)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(17)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(18)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(19)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(20)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(21)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(22)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(23)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(24)  Ordinances, rules and regulations and plans. To make, establish, and adopt such bylaws, ordinances, policies, and rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience, and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, peace, order, and good government of the city; 
(25)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(26)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(27)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(28)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq.] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(29)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(30)  Public transportation. To organize and operate or contract for such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(31)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies and to prescribe the rates, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(32)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(33)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(34)  Roadways and commuter rail. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right of way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city for the bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(35)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; and to impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(36)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(37)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of any intoxicating liquors, and the use of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(38)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(39)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, re-evaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(40)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(41)  Taxicabs; vehicles for hire. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(42)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(43)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 2) 
Sec. 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE, ELECTIONS, AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; composition; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six councilmembers. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 3) 
Sec. 2.11. - Elections. 
(a)  The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by general law and this Charter. All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the Georgia Election Code [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], as now or hereafter amended. The city shall by ordinance prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the Georgia Election Code. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers who are in office on the effective date of this act shall serve until the expiration of the term of office to which they were elected and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(c)  The mayor and members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall be a United States citizen 18 years of age or older, has been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of the election of the mayor and councilmembers, continues to reside within the city during the member's period of service, and shall be registered and qualified to vote in the municipal elections of this city. 
(d)  The three councilmembers elected in November, 2005, whose terms normally expire on December 31, 2009, shall remain in office until December 31, 2009, and until their successors are elected and qualified. On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2009, and quadrenially thereafter, the successors to such three councilmembers shall be elected and shall serve for terms of office of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election. 
(e)  The mayor and three councilmembers elected in November, 2004, whose terms normally expire on December 31, 2008, shall remain in office until December 31, 2008, and until their successors are elected and qualified. On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2008, the successors to the mayor and such three councilmembers shall be elected and shall serve for terms of office of three years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election. On the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2011, and quadrenially thereafter, the successors to the mayor and such three councilmembers shall be elected and shall serve for terms of office of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 4; 2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 489), page 3716, § 1) 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancies in office. 
(a)  The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 45-1-1 et seq.], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment if less than 12 months remain in the unexpired term, otherwise by an election in accordance with Titles 21 and 45 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. §§ 21-1-1 et seq., O.C.G.A. § 45-1-1 et seq.], or other such laws as are or may hereafter be enacted or amended. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 5) 
Sec. 2.13. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels. 
Sec. 2.14. - Election by plurality. 
The candidate receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Sec. 2.15. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 6) 
Sec. 2.16. - Conflicts of interest; removal of officers. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents as per the ethics ordinance. 
(b)  The mayor, councilmembers, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 45-1-1 et seq.], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(c)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected officer is to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearing shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Cherokee County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Cherokee County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Waleska. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 7) 
Sec. 2.17. - [Repealed.] 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 7) 
ARTICLE III. - ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT, GENERAL AUTHORITY, AND ORDINANCES 

Sec. 3.10. - General power and authority. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 8) 
Sec. 3.11. - Organization. 
(a)  The city council shall hold an organizational meeting at the first regular meeting in January following an election. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America. 
(b)  By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall preside at all meetings of the city council and shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during any disability or absence of the mayor. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. The city council shall by majority vote elect a presiding officer from its number for any period in which the mayor pro tempore is disabled, absent, or acting as mayor. Such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of the council. The mayor pro tempore selected councilmember shall sign all contracts and ordinances in which the mayor has a disqualifying financial interest. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 9) 
Sec. 3.12. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 3.13. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be given as required by law. 
Sec. 3.14. - Procedures. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairmen and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 3.15. - Voting. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, four councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of four councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)  In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of councilmembers holding office, then the remaining councilmembers in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. A vote of a majority of the remaining councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
Sec. 3.16. - Ordinances. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be 'The Council of the City of Waleska hereby ordains …' and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided for in section 3.18 of this Charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall, as soon as possible, distribute copies to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
(c)  The difference between an ordinance and a resolution is that a resolution deals with matters of a special or temporary character and an ordinance prescribes some permanent rule of government. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 10) 
Sec. 3.17. - Effect of ordinances. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 3.18. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance shall not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency continues to exist. An emergency ordinance shall also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 3.19. - Codes. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of subsection (b) of section 3.16 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 3.20 of this Charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 3.20. - Codification of ordinances. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and shall contain such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Waleska, Georgia." Copies of the Code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first Code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code then in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation within the Code. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
Sec. 3.21. - Chief executive officer; delegation of powers. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. The mayor shall possess all of the executive and administrative powers granted to the city under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this Charter, except as otherwise specifically provided in this act. The mayor shall have the authority to delegate any one or more executive or administrative powers to a person or persons employed by the city and qualified in management and administration. 
Sec. 3.22. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes, and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)  Vote on matters before the city council and be counted toward a quorum as any other councilmember; 
(6)  Prepare and submit to the city council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital budget; and 
(7)  Fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city council shall by ordinance establish. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 11) 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 4.10. - Department heads. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department or agency. 
(e)  All directors under the supervision of the mayor shall be nominated by the mayor with confirmation of appointment by the city council. The mayor may suspend or remove directors under his supervision but such suspension or removal shall not be effective for ten calendar days following the mayor's giving written notice of such action and the reason therefor to the director involved and to the city council. The director involved may appeal to the city council which, after a hearing, may override the mayor's action by a vote of four councilmembers. 
Sec. 4.11. - Boards. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this Charter for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of that person's office, such oath shall be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of a majority of the city council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 12) 
Sec. 4.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, who shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall have actively practiced law for at least one year. The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of such person's position as city attorney. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city attorney together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 13) 
Sec. 4.13. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this Charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the city clerk. 
Sec. 4.14. - Treasurer. 
The city council shall appoint a city treasurer to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes to the city. The city treasurer shall also be responsible for the general duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer. The city council shall provide for the compensation of the treasurer. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules and regulations. 
The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of a position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and applications of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE V. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 5.10. - Municipal court. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Waleska. 
Sec. 5.11. - Judges. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. 
(c)  Compensation of the judge or judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of four members of the city council. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in section 3.14 of this Charter. 
Sec. 5.12. - Convening of court. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 5.13. - Powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have the authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed a fine of $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $500.00 or imprisonment for 90 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the actual cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety bond for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that state law has been violated. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(i)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(j)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Sec. 5.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Cherokee County, under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 5.15. - Rules. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
Sec. 5.16. - Contracts. 
In lieu of appointing a judge or judges of the municipal court, the mayor and councilmembers are authorized to contract with the governing authority of Cherokee County for the providing of municipal court functions and services as authorized by general law. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 14) 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation taxes and business license fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling within the city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individual or corporation who transacts business in this city or who practices or offers to practice any profession or calling within the city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 15) 
Sec. 6.15. - Sewer fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Roads. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess, charge, and collect the costs of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - Borrowing. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Accounting and budgeting. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.23. - Budget ordinance. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. The city council shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A [O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.]. 
Sec. 6.24. - Operating budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 16) 
Sec. 6.25. - Adoption. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  After the conducting of a budget hearing, the city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the day of the first meeting in August of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to section 6.24 of this Charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 17) 
Sec. 6.26. - Levy of taxes. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expense of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.27. - Changes in budget. 
The city council by majority vote may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes. 
Sec. 6.28. - Capital improvements. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in section 2.23 of this Charter. 
(b)  After the conducting of a public hearing, the city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the day of the first meeting in August of each year. No appropriations provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriations was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the mayor may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by majority vote of the city council. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 18) 
Sec. 6.29. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.30. - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city, unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by him to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to section 3.14 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.31. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.32. - Sale of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the sale of said cut off or separated parcels or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
(2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 833), page 4485, § 19) 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Rules and regulations. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - Charter language on other general matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.13. - Definitions and construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.14. - Specific repealer. 
An act creating a Charter for the Town of Waleska, approved November 13, 1889 (Ga. L. 1888-89, p. 1066), as amended, is repealed in its entirety. 
Sec. 7.15. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. The Charter is derived from 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1348), page 6774. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Code designation and citation. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the City of Waleska, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
Rules of construction. In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Waleska, Georgia. 
City council , council. The term "city council" or "council" means the governing authority of the city. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of the City of Waleska, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either … or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Cherokee County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means a court of the state having jurisdiction. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. With the approval of the city council, such power or duty may be delegated to the county or another governmental entity or to an officer or employee of the county or another governmental unit. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Judge. The term "judge" refers to a judge of the state having jurisdiction. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. Terms used in the singular include the plural. Terms used in the plural include the singular. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A., state acts. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. All references to state acts, whether by title or by year, act number and page number, year and page number or year and act number are such acts as amended. 
Officials, officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions, or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions, or other agencies of the city. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "the state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, courts, alleys, lanes, circles, viaducts and all other public streets and ways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof constituting the designated right-of-way. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes, references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of sections of this Code printed in boldface type, italics, or otherwise, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section or subsection, and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles thereof, or as any part thereof, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions, or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendment to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances or resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of the Code of the City of Waleska, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of the City of Waleska, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) to be numbered _____, that reads as follows:…." The new material may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, subdivisions, divisions, articles or chapters desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-7. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code. The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or confinement in such place of confinement as may be designated by the city council not to exceed 90 days, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); authority to punish ordinance violations by requiring labor, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8. 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, subsection or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, subsections or sections of this Code, as they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, subsection or section. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(2)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(4)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(5)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(6)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(7)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(8)  Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(9)  Dedicating, accepting or approving any plat or subdivision. 
(10)  Providing traffic regulations for specific areas, such as no-parking zones, stop intersections, etc., not in conflict with this Code. 
(11)  Levying ad valorem taxes that are not codified in this Code. 
(12)  Rezoning specific property. 
(13)  Adopted for purposes which have been consummated. 
(14)  That is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The city has contracted with the county for municipal court services. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - English language to be official language of city. 
(a)  Findings and declaration of purpose. The people of the city find and declare that: 
(1)  The English language is the common language of the city, of the state, and of the United States. 
(2)  The use of a common language removes barriers of misunderstanding and helps to unify the people of the city, the state, and the United States, and helps to enable the full economic and civic participation of all its citizens, regardless of national origin, creed, race, or other characteristics, and thus a compelling governmental interest exists in promoting, preserving, and strengthening the use of the English language. 
(3)  Proficiency in the English language, as well as in languages other than the English language, benefits the city both economically and culturally and should be encouraged. 
(4)  In addition to any other ways to promote proficiency in the English language, the government of the city can promote proficiency in English by using the English language in its official actions and activities. 
(5)  In today's modern society, the city may also need to protect and preserve the rights of those who speak only the English language to use or obtain governmental programs and benefits. 
(6)  The government of the city can reduce costs and promote efficiency in its roles as employer and as a government of the people, by using the English language in its official actions and activities. 
(b)  Official English declaration. 
(1)  The English language is the official language of the city. 
(2)  The city council shall take all steps necessary to ensure that the role of English as the common language of the city is preserved and enhanced. 
(3)  The government of the city shall make no policy that diminishes or ignores the role of English as the common language of the city. 
(4)  Official actions of the city that bind or commit the city or that give the appearance of presenting the official views or position of the city shall be taken in the English language, and in no other language. Unofficial or nonbinding translations or explanations of official actions may be provided separately in languages other than English, if they are appropriately labeled as such and reference is made to a method to obtain the official action. Unless otherwise required by federal law or the law of the state, no person has a right to such an unofficial or nonbinding translation or explanation, and no liability or commitment of the city shall be based on such a translation or explanation. 
(5)  No ordinance, decree, program, or policy of the city or any of its departments, offices, or agencies shall require the use of any language other than English for any documents, regulations, orders, transactions, proceedings, meetings, programs, or publications, except as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(6)  A person who speaks only the English language shall not be deemed ineligible to participate in any programs, benefits and opportunities, including employment, solely because the person speaks only the English language, except when required to speak another language as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(7)  No law, ordinance, decree, program, or policy of the city or any of its departments, offices or agencies shall penalize or impair the rights, obligations or opportunities available to any person solely because a person speaks only the English language. 
(c)  Exceptions. The city and its departments, offices or agencies may use a language other than English for any of the following purposes, whether or not the use would be considered part of an official action: 
(1)  To teach or encourage the learning of languages other than English. 
(2)  To protect the public health or safety. 
(3)  To teach English to those who are not fluent in the language. 
(4)  To comply with the Native American Languages Act, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, the Voting Rights Act, or any other federal law or law of the state. 
(5)  To protect the rights of criminal defendants and victims of crime. 
(6)  To promote trade, commerce, and tourism. 
(7)  To create or promote mottos or designations, inscribe public monuments, and perform other acts involving the customary use of a language other than English. 
(8)  To utilize terms of art or terms or phrases from other languages which are commonly used in communications otherwise in English. 
(d)  Private use protected. The declaration and use of English as the official language of the city should not be construed as infringing upon the rights of any person to use a language other than English in private communications or actions, including the right of government officials, including elected officials, to communicate with others while not performing official actions of the city. 
(e)  Interpretation. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as conflicting with the statutes of the United States, or the laws of the state. 
Sec. 2-2. - Records management. 
(a)  The council authorizes and adopts this section as a records management plan. 
(b)  The city clerk is hereby designated as the coordinator of the records management plan and is authorized to act for and on behalf of the city and the water system in directing and coordinating all records management matters under the Georgia Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq.). 
(c)  Records retention schedules approved by the mayor shall be documented in the record of the city council deliberations. Records shall be maintained in accordance with approved retention schedules. 
(d)  No record shall be destroyed except as authorized by a state records committee approved retention schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 2-4-7; Ord. of 11-4-1985) 
Secs. 2-3—2-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-30. - Compensation. 
The salary for the service of the mayor shall be $200.00 per city council meeting, not to exceed $400.00 in any given month. The salary for the service of a councilmember shall be $100.00 per city council meeting, not to exceed $200.00 in any given month. 
(Ord. of 2008) 
State Law reference— Authority to fix compensation of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Sec. 2-31. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the council are held at the city hall or at such other place as may be designated, on such days and at such times as may be designated by the council. 
(Code 1986, § 2-1-11) 
State Law reference— Open meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-32. - Adjourned meetings. 
If a quorum shall fail to attend any regular or special meeting of the council or if for any reason any meeting shall fail to complete transaction of the business before the meeting, the meeting may be adjourned to any date prior to the next regular meeting agreed upon by a majority of the members present. 
(Code 1986, § 2-1-12) 
Secs. 2-33—2-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-53. - Legal defense for city officials. 
The city will provide legal defense for all members of the boards and authorities of the city acting in their official and individual capacities. The provision of legal defense shall include indemnification for judgments, legal defenses, and expenses incurred after the individual's term of office has expired if the action arises out of an incident occurring while the member held the office to which he was appointed. This section shall not cover actions where a member may be personally liable to one who sustains special damages as a result of any official act of such member: 
(1)  If the act is done with the intent to violate the law; and 
(2)  If a jury or other finder of fact specifically makes such finding and imposes liability accordingly. 
Sec. 2-54. - Legal defense for city employees. 
The city agrees to provide legal representation to all city officers and city employees in any civil suit directed against such officer or employee for acts or omissions arising out of the performance or while acting under color of office of the city. It will be a policy of the city council to reimburse the officer or employee for any of the costs of any such judgment and the judgment itself, where the liability of the employee is based on facts other than his own willful misconduct, occurring in the performance of his duty, while he is acting under office of the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-9, 9-26-1997) 
Secs. 2-55—2-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE 

Sec. 2-82. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on July 1 and end on June 30 of each year. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-1) 
State Law reference— Establishment of fiscal year, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1. 
Sec. 2-83. - Recovery of expenditures related to providing services. 
It is intended that this section will provide a means for recovering the cost of city resources used to respond to and/or provide extraordinary services for situations caused by a person. 
(1)  General requirements. 
a.  All departments within the city government are hereby authorized to take appropriate steps to generate an invoice for services when, in their judgment, it was necessary to render the services in the best interest of the citizens of the city. 
b.  Services provided by the city may be the result of carelessness, willful intent, negligence, or a failure to take actions that will eliminate reoccurring situations which impact on the city's cost of providing services and its ability to provide services for all citizens. 
c.  In lieu of monetary reimbursement, the party receiving the services may replace supplies and equipment expended by the city with equal or greater quantities. Any such material must be of equal or better specifications than that expended. This method of reimbursement must be preapproved by the department being reimbursed. 
d.  Invoices shall be submitted to the city treasurer and/or the city council for approval prior to presenting the invoice to the party responsible for paying the reimbursement. 
e.  The cost used to calculate the invoice amounts shall be based on fair market values for the services, labor rates for city employees, advertised cost of goods and equipment, and actual cost. Compensation for overtime hours worked will be based on city policy. 
(2)  Preparing and submitting an invoice. 
a.  Department instructions, standard operating procedures, and instructions shall be followed when preparing invoices and obtaining approvals. 
b.  The city clerk shall be responsible for tracking the invoices and collecting the reimbursements. 
Secs. 2-84—2-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-110. - Agent of the city. 
The city clerk shall be the purchasing agent of the city, and shall: 
(1)  Arrange and negotiate the purchase or contract for all equipment, supplies, and contractual services for the city, and sell or otherwise dispose of all surplus city equipment and supplies; and 
(2)  Maintain an inventory of all materials, supplies, or equipment owned by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-3) 
Sec. 2-111. - Procedures. 
(a)  The city clerk shall maintain detailed records of all purchases and of any requirements for goods or services to be purchased. All requirements for goods and services shall permit competition whenever practical. 
(b)  All purchases shall be made in accordance with one of the following procedures, except as otherwise provided by resolution or ordinance: 
(1)  Public construction contracts shall be bid in accordance with state statutes. 
(2)  Purchases not exceeding $300.00 may be made by the city clerk/purchasing agent. 
(3)  Purchases over $300.00 shall be made provided there is money in the budget to cover the cost. There should be verbal or written quotations of three prices attached to the requisition when given to the city council. 
(4)  Sealed bids are recommended for all purchases over $5,000.00. 
(c)  The purchasing agent may reject any or all bids, or waive informalities in the bidding process. 
(d)  The purchasing agent may purchase from or in cooperation with other governmental agencies with or without competitive bids. 
(e)  The purchasing agent shall be responsible for developing and administering such other policies, rules and regulations not inconsistent with this section or state statutes which he deems necessary for the efficient procurement of goods and services. A copy of such policies, rules and regulations shall be filed with the city clerk. 
Secs. 2-112—2-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-136—2-153. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-154. - Powers and duties. 
It shall be the function and duty of the Cherokee County-Municipal Planning Commission to make such careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social, and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, or the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the development of its political jurisdiction. In particular, the commission shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Prepare a master plan or parts thereof for the development of its political jurisdiction. 
(2)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the appropriate governing authorities a zoning ordinance or resolution and a map for its political jurisdiction. 
(3)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the appropriate governing authorities regulations for the subdivision of land within its political jurisdiction, and administer the regulations that may be adopted. 
(4)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the appropriate governing authorities, a plat of an official map showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened or narrowed streets, public open spaces or public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings or other structures within such lines, within its political jurisdiction or a specified portion thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 6-1-3) 
Secs. 2-155—2-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED 

Secs. 2-161—2-173. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ETHICS 

Sec. 2-174 - Code of ethics for city council members 
(a)  Definitions. 
City council member shall be any person who is an elected city official, including the mayor, of the City of Waleska. 
Employee shall be any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the City of Waleska. 
Government or city shall be construed to mean the City of Waleska, Georgia government. 
(b)  Acceptance of gifts. City council members shall not solicit or accept directly or indirectly anything of value from any person, corporation, or group which: 
(1)  Has, or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or financial relationships with the City of Waleska; 
(2)  In exchange for anything of value seeks to have a council member exercise a matter of discretion in his or her favor; 
(3)  In exchange for the thing of value seeks to have interests which may be affected by the performance or non-performance of the official duty of the council member; 
(4)  This section shall not apply to campaign contributions which shall be reported in accordance with Georgia Laws. 
(c)  Intent. It is the intent of this section that city council members avoid any action whether or not specifically prohibited in the city's Code which might result in, or create the appearance of the following: 
(1)  Using public office for private gain; 
(2)  Impeding government efficiency or economy; or 
(3)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the government. 
(d)  Financial interests of members. City council members may not: 
(1)  Have direct or indirect financial interests that conflict substantially with their responsibilities and duties as government servants; or 
(2)  Engage in, directly or indirectly, financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained from their office. Aside from these restrictions, city council members are free to engage in lawful financial transactions to the same extent as private citizens. 
(e)  Use of public property. A city council member shall not use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he or she direct employees to use such property for these purposes. 
(f)  Use of confidential information. A city council member shall not directly or indirectly, make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, official information not made available to the general public. 
(g)  Coercion by council members. A city council member shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to him or persons within his immediate family, or those with whom a council member has business or financial ties. 
(h)  Voting in matters of personal interest. A city council member shall not vote on an ordinance or amendment in a city council meeting that would directly affect his or her private business. 
(i)  Unauthorized purchases. A city council member shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such expenditure. 
(j)  Meetings of the council. Meetings of the council shall be conducted in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotate, Title 50, Chapter 14, as amended, and Title 36, Chapter 80, Section 1 as amended, as it applies to municipalities. 
(k)  City attorneys used for private business. A city council member shall not use the attorney or attorneys who are under retainer by the city for personal or private business, without paying just compensation. 
(l)  Unauthorized use of public employees. A city council member shall not use his superior position to request or require an employee to: 
(1)  Do clerical work on behalf of his family, business, social, church or fraternal interests; 
(2)  Purchase goods and services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and 
(3)  Work for him personally without offering just compensation. 
(m)  Travel expenses. A city council member shall not draw per diem or expense monies from the city to attend a seminar, convention, or conference and then fail to attend the seminar, convention, or conference without refunding the pro-rata unused per diem or expense monies to the city. 
(n)  Penalties. The code of ethics to be observed by city council members are set forth above and any violation thereof shall subject the offender to disciplinary action which may include censure and either public or private reprimand. Power to administer a greater punishment shall include power to administer the lesser. 
(Ord. of 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-175. - Administration of ethics policy. 
(a)  Ethics committee. The ethics committee shall consist of three persons, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the council, and the third appointed by the two above named subjects for approval by a majority of the city council. The third member of the ethics committee shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. 
(b)  Receipt of complaints. 
(1)  All complaints against city council members shall be filed with the ethics committee. The ethics committee may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the Waleska City Council. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the ethics committee shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Waleska City Council. The ethics committee shall be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(3)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the ethics committee shall be empowered to dismiss those complaints which are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the ethics committee shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he might otherwise have at law or in equity against the respondent government servant. 
(4)  The ethics committee shall be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, to take evidence and hold hearings where provided for in the rules. 
(5)  The ethics committee shall be empowered to adopt forms for forms for formal complaints, subpoenas, notices, applications for reinstatement and any other written instruments necessary or desirable under these rules. 
(c)  Additional regulations. This article shall be cumulative to any other ordinance, resolution or act now existing. 
(d)  Right to appeal. Any final decision by the city council pursuant to this code of ethics for city council members shall be reviewable by the Superior Court of Cherokee County. The review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the city council which supported the decision of the council. Provided however, no action of the city council refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(e)  Conflict of interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. (GA. L. 1977, p. 3541, Sec. 1.9) 
(Ord. of 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-176. - Conflict of interest, political activities and code of ethics 
(a)  Acceptance of gifts, gratuities, special privileges. 
(1)  Employees shall not accept any gifts, loans, rewards, favors, or services t1hat may reasonably tend to improperly influence them in the discharge of their official duties. This limitation is not intended to prohibit the acceptance of articles of negligible value which are distributed generally nor to prohibit employees from accepting loans from regular lending institutions. It is particularly important that employees guard against relationships which might be construed as or give the appearance of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage or collusion. 
(2)  Employees shall not use or attempt to use their position to secure an economic benefit or advantages, special privileges or exemptions for themselves or others including the use of knowledge obtained through their employment or by virtue of their position. 
(3)  Employees shall not accept employment or engage in any business or professional activity, which they may reasonably expect, would require or induce them to disclose confidential information acquired by them by reason of their official position. 
(4)  Employees shall not accept payment from outside sources for professional services (i.e. teaching, instructing, speaking engagements, consulting, honorariums) when such activities are done on city time. 
(b)  Proprietorship of creations. All plans, designs, reports, specifications, drawings, devices, inventions, and other items produced or created by employees during working hours or through the use of city facilities or equipment or at the request of the city shall be and become the sole property of the city. 
(c)  Confidential information. Employees shall not disclose confidential information gained by reason of their official position, nor shall they otherwise use such information for their personal gain or benefit. 
(d)  Conflict of interest. 
(1)  If an employee of the city is an officer, director, agent or member of, or owns interest in any entity which is subject to the regulation of, or which has financial commitments with the city, they shall file a sworn statement to this effect with the city clerk. 
(2)  Employees shall not transact any business in their official capacity with any business entity of which he or she is an officer, director, agent, member, or in which he or she owns a controlling interest, excluding civic, charitable or religious organizations. 
(3)  Employees shall not have personal investment in any enterprise which will create a conflict or a perceived conflict between their private interest and the public interest. 
(e)  Political activity. 
(1)  No person employed by the city shall either publicly or otherwise hold himself out as a candidate in any City of Waleska election while holding employment with the city. 
(2)  City employees shall not take part in any political management or political campaigns in election of mayor or any member of the city council for the City of Waleska during any period of time for which he is expected to perform work or receive compensation from the city. 
(3)  No employee, official or other person shall solicit, orally or by letter, or be in any other manner concerned in obtaining any assessments, contributions, or services for any political party from any employee during his hours of duty, service, or work with the city. 
(4)  Employees shall not represent the city by wearing any uniform or portion thereof that is issued by the city while he is participating in any campaign at any time. 
(5)  The city in no way seeks to influence employees in their choice of party affiliations or candidates, recognizing that this is a matter for each person to decide. Therefore, nothing contained herein shall be construed to restrict the right of the employee to hold membership in and support a political party, to vote as he chooses, to express opinions on political subjects or candidates, to maintain political neutrality, to attend political parties after work hours, or to campaign actively during off duty hours in all areas of political activity. 
(6)  Employees shall not utilize any city equipment or vehicles in support of any political campaign. 
(Ord. of 2-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-177. - Outside employment. 
(a)  Limitations and approval requirement. 
(1)  City employment shall be considered to be the primary employment of all full-time employees. No employee may engage in outside employment which will interfere with the interests of city service. Standards by which some employment is not acceptable include, but is not limited to: 
a.  Illegal activity; 
b.  Employment that by virtue of association will reflect upon the reputation of the city; 
c.  High hazard or fatiguing work which might detract from or reduce city performance. 
(2)  Prior to beginning any regularly scheduled outside employment, employees will obtain specific written approval from their department head or his designee on request forms which indicate the name of the outside employer, the nature of the work, hours of work, address and telephone number where the employee can be reached. Such information will become a part of the employee's official personnel record. Employees are required to obtain approval from their department head or his designee for any change in a previously approved outside employment request. 
(3)  Any employee accepting or engaging in outside employment under the terms of this rule shall make arrangements with the outside employer to be available to respond immediately to any emergency call of duty whenever the department head or his designee shall determine that the employee's services are necessary. 
(4)  Employees sustaining injuries while engaged in outside employment are normally ineligible to receive benefits under the city's worker's compensation program. If an employee sustains an injury while engaged in outside employment, but is performing duties, within the scope of his city responsibilities (i.e. a police arrest), he may be eligible for partial city worker's compensation benefits. 
(5)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section will result in disciplinary action. 
(Ord. of 2-23-2015) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An Ord. of May 19, 2014, amended former ch. 3, Arts. I, II, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of May 16, 2013(1). Ord. of May 16, 2014, enacted provisions numbered as a new ch. 7, and in order to preserve the alphabetical sequence of chapter titles used in this Code, the editor has included these provisions as a new ch. 3 as herein set out. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adequate parking means one parking space for each 100 square feet of customer service area within the premises of an applicant. 
Administrator means the city clerk or city manager or his or her designee. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine. 
Bar means a business open to the public which sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises which is not a restaurant. 
Building code means and includes all building, plumbing and electrical codes and any similar technical code of the city. 
Business area means any street length between intersections where 50 percent or more is in use for business purposes. 
Church means any permanent building which houses the main sanctuary in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is publicly designated as a church, but shall not include a residence also used for religious purposes. The term "church" shall not include the temporary housing of a religious group in an otherwise commercial center. 
College means only those state, county, city, church or other colleges that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Distance means the measurement in horizontal lineal feet as defined in section 7-25. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Family means any person related to the holder of such license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to civil law. 
Good moral character means the propensity of the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest and open manner. 
(1)  A judgment of guilt is a criminal prosecution or a judgment in a civil action shall not be used in and of itself as proof of a person's lack of good moral character. It may be used as evidence in the determination and when so used the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence by showing that: 
a.  At the current time he has the ability to, and is likely to, serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner; and 
b.  He is rehabilitated, or that the substance of the former offense is not reasonably related to the occupation or profession for which he seeks a business license or business permit. 
(2)  The following criminal records shall not be used, examined or requested by the city in a determination of good moral character when used as a requirement to obtain a business license or business permit: 
a.  Records of an arrest not followed by a conviction. 
b.  Records of a conviction which has been reversed or vacated, including the arrest records relevant to that conviction. 
c.  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor or a felony unrelated to the person's likelihood to serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner. 
d.  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor for the conviction of which a person may not be incarcerated in a jail or prison. 
Indoor recreation establishment means an indoor facility that contains regulation-size courts or alleys where physical sporting activity takes place and equipment related to the activity is available for rent or sale. 
Judge means the judge of the municipal court of Waleska or the magistrate court of Cherokee County, by agreement of the city and Cherokee County. 
License means the authorization by the city council to engage in the sale or consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages. 
License means a person, real or artificial, holding any class of license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 40. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Municipal court means the municipal court of Waleska or the magistrate court of Cherokee County, by agreement of the city and Cherokee County. 
Park means any public lands owned or controlled by the city or any county of the state, in and upon which play facilities are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building, wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. The term "premises" shall also include any privately owned or leased courtyard or patio which is architecturally visibly defined. 
Private club means a corporation organized and existing under state laws, having at least 100 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly, semiannual or annual dues, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofitable purposes; no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any shareholder or member, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with a suitable kitchen, dining room space and equipment; and maintaining and using a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; provided that no member, officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages to the club or its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. 
Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one nor more than three families customarily reside and shall not include an apartment house having facilities for housing four or more families; or any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of an application. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and seating capacity of at least 60 people, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least two meals per day shall be served at least six days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted and food sales must be equal to or more than 50 percent of total sales. 
Retail means retail sales packaged to go and not for consumption on the premises. 
School means any state, county, city, church or other private school that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state and shall include the adjacent open land or fenced areas used for school purposes but this shall not include any portion of a private school, where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Service area means that in the event a lounge, private club or restaurant is located adjacent to an indoor recreational establishment and within the same building or structure, the recreational area is defined as being within the service area of such lounge, private club or restaurant and the consumption of alcoholic beverages within the recreational area is permitted. 
Wholesaler means any person, firm or corporation engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale any alcoholic beverages. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to this definition. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2; educational entities, O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690. 
Sec. 3-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter has been enacted for the purposes, among others, of: 
(1)  Promoting the health and general welfare of the community; 
(2)  Establishing reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  Protecting and preserving schools and churches; 
(4)  Giving effect to existing land use and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable consideration being given, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhoods and property values; and 
(5)  Protecting against the evils of concentration of the retail outlets for alcoholic beverages in one area or ownership or to prevent undesirable persons from engaging in or having any interest in alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Charter reference— Specific powers of city, § 1-13. 
Sec. 3-3. - Compliance with chapter required. 
(a)  No person shall sell or offer for sale in the city at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages without having first complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Familiarity with chapter. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of each licensee and employee thereof to be familiar with this chapter. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of each licensee to provide all new employees at the time of their employment, and all employees annually, with an orientation and training on the alcoholic beverage ordinance; provided that, the failure of the employer to provide such orientation and training or of the employees to participate shall not be a defense for an employee who does not follow the provisions of the alcoholic beverage ordinance; and provided that, a licensee shall keep a record of such orientation and training, which shall be subject to inspection. 
(3)  Licensees shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter by their officers, agents, and employees. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-4. - Penalties; revocation of license. 
(a)  Upon conviction in the municipal court of any violation of any provision of this chapter, unless otherwise provided, the punishment shall be as follows: 
(1)  First offense, a minimum fine of $500.00; 
(2)  Second offense, if within 12 months of the first offense, a minimum fine of $750.00; 
(3)  Third offense, if within 12 months of the second offense, a minimum fine of $1,000.00; or 
(4)  Otherwise punishment shall be as set by the judge as allowed by the city Charter. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a) of this section, a license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended, revoked or placed on probation by the city council for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to pay excise fees or any other fees or taxes required by the city. 
(2)  Disorderly conduct of the establishment. 
(3)  Acts of disturbance on the establishment. 
(4)  Violence on the establishment. 
(5)  Gambling on the establishment. 
(6)  Conviction of violating this chapter by any court with jurisdiction. 
(7)  Charges of or conviction of a felony by the licensee. 
(8)  Creation or maintenance of a nuisance on the establishment. 
(9)  Any false statement or material misrepresentation given in the application for the license. 
(10)  For any and other just cause. 
(c)  If it comes to the attention of the city council or city clerk or manager that the licensee has violated any provisions of this chapter, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  The city clerk or manager or his or her designee shall issue a notice of objection which shall include the address of the location and the specific allegations as to the violations of any provision of this chapter or any other provision of this Code. The notice of objection shall also include the recommended action to be taken. Further, any license issued under this chapter may be temporarily suspended by the city clerk or manager in his or her notice of objection for any reason outlined in subsection (b) of this section if it is determined that it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the public. The city clerk or manager will then notify the licensee in writing by certified mail or in person that a notice of objection has been filed and of any applicable temporary suspension. The notice to the licensee will include a copy of the notice of objection, and the time, place and date for a hearing before the city council on the matter. The hearing shall be within seven days of the date of the notice to the licensee. Extensions and necessary investigations will be granted and conducted at the discretion of the city council. 
(2)  At the hearing, the city and the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence and examine witnesses. After this hearing, the city council shall issue a notice of decision at which time the council will dismiss or affirm the objection and/or temporary suspension, and in case of affirmation, the city council may suspend, revoke or place on probation the license of the licensee. 
(3)  The decision of the city council shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for their decisions and shall be based upon the merits of the case. 
(4)  The decision of the city council shall be final but may be appealed to the appropriate court within 30 days of the date of the written decision. 
(5)  The decision of the city council shall be binding upon the retail party or holder of the license. 
(d)  When the license of any establishment has been revoked, no further license shall be issued under this chapter to the same person, firm or corporation at that location for a period of 24 months from the date of revocation. 
(e)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the city license to manufacture or deal in those products shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the city council or any municipal officer. 
(f)  All owners or officers of establishments licensed under this chapter shall be criminally responsible for any violation of this chapter by an employee thereof; provided the municipal court may only impose a just fine under this subsection. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Adoption of ordinances pursuant to house rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; powers of local governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 3-5. - License required. 
(a)  No malt beverages, wines, distilled spirits or any other alcoholic beverage shall be stored, delivered, sold or manufactured in the city except under a license issued pursuant to this chapter and then only for the specific beverage and manner of sale provided in the license. 
(b)  The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to any other requirements for business licenses under this Code and if other provisions of this Code conflict with this chapter then this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Power of city to grant license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; license required, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-3. 
Sec. 3-6. - Types of licenses; number of licenses; renewal. 
(a)  Licenses which may be issued under this chapter include: 
(1)  Retail: 
a.  Malt beverages. 
b.  Wine. 
c.  Consumption on premises/ancillary tasting room (malt beverages and wine only) (hereinafter referred to as an "ancillary tasting room license"). 
(2)  Consumption on the premises: 
a.  Malt beverages. 
b.  Wine. 
c.  Distilled spirits 
(b)  A person doing business at more than one place shall take out and pay for a separate license for each place of business. 
(c)  Licenses may be renewed as provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq. 
(d)  No license may be renewed if the licensee could be denied a new license under this chapter, except as provided in section 6-26 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Authority to grant license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; license required, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-3. 
Sec. 3-7. - Application procedure. 
The provisions of Chapter 12, article IV, pertaining to occupational license taxes, shall apply in addition to the following: 
(1)  All applications for new licenses under this chapter shall be accompanied by a payment in cash or by certified check, for all the minimum fees and occupational taxes provided for in this Code for the classification into which the applicant falls. 
(2)  The city application shall include a photostatic or other copy of all the appropriate state applications and other application forms developed by the administrator. 
(3)  The application shall also contain a form of oath providing that the information disclosed in the application is true and correct, and providing further that the applicant will abide by, observe and conduct his business according to the rules and regulations prescribed by the city, the acts of the general assembly, known as the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, as now or hereafter amended, and the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue in respect thereto. The oath shall be taken by the applicant and the agent in charge of the establishment if different from or additional to the applicant, and the oath shall be taken by the true owners. 
(4)  Any false statement, or material misrepresentation in any application under this chapter, shall be grounds for the revocation of any license granted under this article. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Power of city to grant, refuse, suspend or revoke alcoholic beverage license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; false application prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-27; false swearing prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-71. 
Sec. 3-8. - Plans required. 
All applicants for licenses under this chapter shall furnish plans and renderings of the proposed premises. The exterior of the premises shall be of a finished building material such as brick, stone, steel or wood, but not concrete block. The applicant shall comply with all building, health and similar city codes. Applicants shall obtain and file with their applications a certification of zoning compliance, certifying that the property where the applicant shall operate his business is zoned for the appropriate category as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-9. - Notice required. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses under this chapter shall give notice that an application has been filed and of the purpose of making such application by publication of an advertisement once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the date of consideration of the application by the city council. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to have this notice published in the city's legal organ in the format stipulated by the administrator. The applicant shall bear the cost for this publication. 
(1)  The first advertisement shall not appear more than 30 days prior to the date of such initial consideration. 
(2)  Such publication shall be made in the newspaper in which city legal advertisements are published. 
(3)  The notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business, and the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names of the partners, and if a corporation, the names of the officers. The date, time and place the initial consideration and determination will be made by the administrator and a statement that any objections to the issuance must be in writing and received by the administrator on or before the date and time of the consideration by the city council. 
(b)  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign or signs stating the following: 
"City of Waleska _______________ license applied for. Any objection to this application must be in writing and received by the Administrator of the City of Waleska,8891 Fincher Road on or before 5:00 p.m., on the ____________ day of _____________/_____________/____________, 20________________." 
The sign or signs shall be at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks or other public property which adjoins the location so as to be clearly legible by persons using such public area. The sign required in this section shall be posted on the property from the date of the first publication of the legal advertisement through the date of the initial consideration by the supervisor. The cost and placement of the sign shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-10. - Qualifications of applicant. 
(a)  No license shall be approved by the governing authority for any applicant who has not complied with the application provisions of this article. 
(b)  In addition to other application and licensing provisions as set forth in this article, it is the policy of the city that any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by, and be issued to, an owner who is a full time employee and, if not, then by and jointly to the owner and an agent who is a full time employee responsible for the sale of alcoholic beverages as prescribed in this chapter, on the premises applied for or on other such premises in the county owned by the owner. 
(1)  Where the applicant is a sole proprietor, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by, and shall be issued to, the sole proprietor if the sole proprietor is a full time employee and, if not, then by and jointly to the sole proprietor and an agent who is a full time employee responsible for the sale of alcoholic beverages as prescribed in this chapter, on the premises applied for or on other such premises in the county owned by the sole proprietor. 
(2)  Where the applicant is a partnership, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by, and shall be issued to, the partnership together with either a majority partner who is a full time employee and, if not, then by and jointly to a majority partner and an agent who is a full time employee responsible for the sale of alcoholic beverages as prescribed in this chapter, on the premises applied for or on other such premises in the county owned by the partnership. 
(3)  Where the applicant is a corporation, whether publicly traded or privately held, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by, and shall be issued to, the corporation together with an agent who is a full time employee responsible for the sale of alcoholic beverages as prescribed in this chapter, on the premises applied for or on other such premises in the county owned by the corporation. 
(4)  Where the owner is a private club, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by, and shall be issued to, the private club together with an officer of said club who is a full time employee and, if not, then by jointly to the private club together with an agent who is a full time employee responsible for the sale of alcoholic beverages as prescribed in this chapter, on the premises applied for or on other such premises in the county owned by the private club. 
(c)  An applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall make written application to the governing body of the city through the business license officer upon such forms to be prepared and approved by the governing body; provided that an applicant seeking more than one type of license or additional license must submit a separate application for each type of license sought. 
The written application upon the prescribed forms shall include each of the following: 
(1)  Information on the type of alcoholic beverage license sought. 
(2)  Information on the location which will be the site of the license sought, as follows: 
a.  The street address of the premises; 
b.  The names(s), home address(es), and home phone number(s) of the owners(s) of the premises; 
c.  Plans and renderings of the proposed premises, unless the city clerk certifies that such plans and renderings are on file, and the applicant certifies that such plans and renderings are correct; 
d.  A certification of zoning from the city or county, if so designated by the city, certifying that the place of the proposed business is properly zoned therefore; and 
e.  A certificate from a registered surveyor showing a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises and the distance to the nearest school, church, day care center, hospital, nursing home, or residence located within 1,000 feet, by the appropriate method of measurement as defined in section 3-25, Measurement of distances. 
(3)  Information on the business at the location of the proposed licensed premises, as follows: 
a.  The name, street address, and phone number of the business. 
b.  A description of the nature and character of the business; and 
c.  A copy of the warranty deed if the business owns the premises; if the business leases the premises, a copy of the lease agreement. 
(4)  Information on the applicant, as follows: 
a.  If a sole proprietor, then from the sole proprietor the name, home address, home phone number, date of birth, Social Security number, county of residency and length of residency, country of citizenship, percent of ownership, and a statement of arrests; and, in addition, if no such partner is a full time employee, then the same information is required for an agent who is a full time employee, provided that the person so named must meet all requirements of this article; 
b.  If partnership, then for each partner owning ten percent or more, the name, home address, home phone number, date of birth, Social Security number, county of residency and length of residency, country of citizenship, percent of ownership, and a statement of arrests; and, in addition, if no such partner is a full time employee, then the same information is required for an agent who is a full time employee, provided that the person so named must meet all requirements of this article; 
c.  If the applicant is a publicly traded corporation, then the corporate name, corporate chief executive office, corporate address, and corporate phone number; and in addition if the corporate chief executive officer is not a full time employee, then for an agent who is a full time employee, the name, home address, home phone number. Date of birth, Social Security number, county of residency and length of residency, country of citizenship and a statement of arrests, provide that the person so named must meet all requirements of this chapter; 
d.  If the applicant is a privately held corporation, then the corporate name, corporate chief, executive officer, corporate address, and corporate phone number; and for each person owning ten percent or more, the name, home address, home phone number, date of birth, Social Security number, length of residency in the county, country of citizenship, percent of ownership, and a statement of arrests; and in addition if no such owner is a full time employee, then for an agent who is a full time employee, the name, home address, home phone number, date of birth, Social Security number, county of residency and length of residency, country of citizenship, and statement of arrests, provided that the person so named must meet all requirements of this chapter; and 
e.  If the applicant is a private club, then the private club name, private club chief executive officer, private club address, private club phone number, and as statement of arrests for the chief executive officer; and in addition if the chief executive officer is not a full time employee, then for an agent who is a full time employee, the name, home address, home phone number, date of birth, Social Security number, county of residency and length of residency, country of citizenship, and as statement of arrests, provided that the person so named must meet all requirements of this chapter. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  The applicant shall furnish such other data, information or records as may be required by the governing body or its authorized officers in order to make a determination whether the applicant or agent meets the requirements of this article. 
(7)  The application must be sworn to by the applicant. 
(8)  In instances where the ownership of an existing licensed location is the same but the agent has changed, the new agent must apply, and all application provisions of this chapter shall apply, except that only information on the new agent shall be required on an abbreviated form provided through the city clerk or other designated official; provided that, a copy of the most recently approved application shall be attached; and further provided, that a certification must be made by the ownership or legally authorized designee other than the new agent, that all previous information on the most recently approved application remains true and correct to the best knowledge of the applicant. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-11. - Limitations on who can hold licenses. 
(a)  No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold any other license or an interest in any other license under the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  No person, related within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity under civil law to any wholesale licensee or employee thereof or any person with any interest therein, shall hold any other license or an interest in any other license issued under this chapter. 
(c)  No elected or full-time appointed official of the city or any person related within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity under civil law to such an official of the city shall own any interest in any license issued under this chapter unless one of the following conditions is met: 
(1)  The interest was obtained prior to election or appointment to office; 
(2)  The interest is declared in writing at the time the application for the license is made and the elected or full-time appointed official shall not participate in official action or consideration of the license; or 
(3)  The interest obtained in an ongoing business holding a license is declared in writing at the time of the acquisition and filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Ascertainable standards required to issue license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 3-12. - Prohibition against issuance to persons with criminal convictions. 
(a)  No license under this chapter shall be issued, renewed or transferred to any person, partnership or corporation where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application of any felony or convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application of any misdemeanor relating to any alcoholic beverage business or any state law, county or municipal ordinance violation relating to any alcoholic beverage business. 
(b)  The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty or nolo contenders or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime or the suspension or revocation of any alcoholic beverage license owned in whole or in part by persons listed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Authority to set standards for issue of license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 3-13. - Residency requirements; registered agent. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-4-23, no retail dealer's license or tax stamps for distilled spirits shall be sold to any person unless an application is filed with the commissioner, accompanied by a certificate by the judge of the probate court of the county of the applicant's residency certifying that the applicant has been a bona fide resident of the State of Georgia for at least three years and at the current place of residency for 12 months immediately preceding the application and reside in a county where distilled spirits may be legally sold under O.C.G.A. title 3, Ch. 4, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 3-4-20 et seq.) in the city. 
(b)  All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses under this chapter except as otherwise provided for, either the applicant or an individual the applicant designates to act as their agent shall provide proof of residency acceptable to the administrator that they have been a bona fide resident of the State of Georgia for three years and at the current place of residency for 12 months immediately prior to making application for the license. If the applicant designates an agent, that agent shall meet the residency requirements as stated herein above prior to making application and will be designated to be responsible for any matter relating to the license. 
(c)  All applications for licenses under this chapter by a corporation shall name in the application one or more persons meeting the residency requirements of subsection (b) above as the registered officer of the corporation and such officer shall be registered with the secretary of state's office. This representative of the corporation shall receive all communications, notices, service or process or other papers or documents, on behalf of the corporation in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any city license. The application shall give the mailing address of such registered officer, and the mailing to any registered officer at that address of any notice required to be given under this chapter or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the corporation. 
(d)  Such registered officer shall be a representative of the licensee corporation and must be approved by the administrator. The administrator shall refuse to approve any registered officer who is not a bona fide resident in accordance with subsection (b) above or who has been convicted, within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application of any felony or convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application of any misdemeanor relating to any alcoholic beverage business or any state law or county or municipal ordinance violation relating to any alcoholic beverage business. As used in this subsection, the term "conviction" shall have the same meaning as in section 3-12. 
(e)  If any registered officer shall cease to be the registered agent of the licensee corporation or shall cease to be a resident as specified in subsection (b) above or in any manner ceases to meet the requirements of subsection (d) of this section, the licensee shall notify the administrator in writing of such event and shall nominate a new registered officer within five days after such event occurs. Such new registered officer shall meet the requirements in subsections (c) and (d) of this section and must be approved by the administrator. The city shall charge a fee of $100.00 for a change of the corporation's registered officer; however, if the licensee corporation fails to notify the city and nominate a new registered officer within the five-day period, then the city shall charge an additional fee of $200.00 for a change of the corporation's registered officer and/or revoke the licensee's license. The application process includes the approval by the administrator of a revised application, fingerprinting of the applicant and a criminal history investigation. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Certificate of residence required for retail license to sell distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-23; powers of local governing authority to grant licenses generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 3-14. - Police investigation; tax record search. 
(a)  The administrator shall cause an inquiry to be made into the city tax records to determine if the applicant or other parties with an interest in an application for a license under this chapter has any outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent against his property or any other monies owing to the city. No license shall be issued or renewed until such debts are paid in full. 
(b)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any such permit or license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints to be forwarded to the state bureau of investigation, which shall search the files of the state crime information center for any instance of criminal activity during the two years immediately preceding the date of the application. The state bureau of investigation shall also submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification of records. The federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the governing authority submitting the fingerprints. 
(c)  If the appropriate law enforcement agency, or agency designated by the city, determines that the application is not in order, in view of the requirements of federal or state law or this Code and any law enforcement investigation, the appropriate law enforcement agency, or agency designated by the city will issue a detailed report to the administrator regarding the reasons for the denial, and the administrator shall then notify the applicant of the reasons for not forwarding the application to the city council for consideration. 
(d)  All applicants shall furnish all reasonable data, information and records requested of them by the administrator or police department and failure to furnish such data, information, contracts, documents, financial statements and other records within 30 days of the request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. 
(e)  The appropriate law enforcement agency, or agency designated by the city, shall require in addition to the licensee, fingerprinting and background investigation of any person having a 20 percent financial interest in the application. The appropriate law enforcement agency, or agency designated by the city, may require additional information from any sibling of any person with a financial interest, and the nominated registered agent of any corporate applicant. Should the applicant fail to produce such persons within 30 days of the request, the application may be denied. 
(f)  Applicants by filing an application agree to produce for oral interrogation any person or persons requested by the appropriate law enforcement agency, or agency designated by the city, and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such license. The failure to produce those persons within 30 days after being requested to do so may result in a denial of the application. 
(g)  The city may require 45 days for processing any application for a license required under this chapter. For investigative purposes, the appropriate law enforcement agency, or agency designated by the city, may extend the 45 days' processing period according to the licensee's compliance should the appropriate law enforcement agency, or agency designated by the city deem it necessary. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Application investigation, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 3-15. - License pending completion of building. 
Where a building in which any person intends to operate under the provisions of this chapter is, at the time of the application for the license, not in existence or not yet completed, a conditional license may be issued for the location provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this chapter. No sales or consumption shall be allowed in the establishment until it has been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-16. - Time limit on opening business; continuity of business. 
(a)  All licensees under this chapter must, within 90 days after the issuance of a city license, open for business. Failure to open for business shall constitute a forfeiture and cancellation of the issued licenses and no refund of license fees or occupational taxes shall be made. Any applicant unable to comply with the time limit of this section may make written request to the administrator for an extension of time not to exceed 90 days; and the administrator at his discretion may grant or deny the request. 
(b)  Any license issued under this chapter shall automatically be null and void where the licensed business has not operated or been open to the public for six consecutive months. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-17. - Denial of license application. 
(a)  The city council must take action to consider an application for a license required by this chapter within 45 days of the administrator receiving a complete application. 
(b)  The city council may deny a city license under this chapter on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure to meet state requirements for state license; 
(2)  Failure to pay required fees and taxes; 
(3)  Failure to provide valid information, documents and the like required by this chapter; 
(4)  False information in the application or attached documents; 
(5)  Improper residency of applicant, owner or registered agent; 
(6)  Failure to pass review by the appropriate law enforcement agency, or agency designated by the city; 
(7)  Failure to post and maintain proper signs and advertisements required in this chapter; 
(8)  Failure to meet distance, location exterior surface or building requirements; 
(9)  Prior convictions as provided in this chapter; or 
(10)  Failure to meet any other requirements in this chapter for a license of the class applied for. 
(c)  All decisions denying a license shall be in writing, with the reasons for denial stated and shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant. 
(d)  The applicant has 30 days from the date of written notice of the denial of a license application within which to petition for reconsideration by the city council. The applicant will be granted an opportunity to present additional information, evidence and cross examine witnesses before the city council. The city council's decision will be final. 
(e)  An application which has been denied shall not be resubmitted for 12 months after the denial unless there is a substantial change therein which would affect the reason for denial originally. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Ascertainable standards for denial, written notice of denial and an opportunity for a hearing are required by state law, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 3-18. - Additional standards for issuance, transfer of license. 
(a)  In the issuance of licenses or the transfer or renewal of licenses required by this chapter, the city council may, in its discretion, issue or deny any application for a license, renewal or transfer of an existing store location based upon the following standards, in addition to standards previously set forth: 
(1)  Where there is evidence that, even though there is compliance with the minimum distance to schools and churches, the type and number of schools or number of churches in the vicinity cause minors to frequent the immediate area. 
(2)  Where there is evidence that the location or type of structure could create difficulty in police supervision. 
(3)  Where there is evidence that there are no licenses granted in the area or where there is evidence that the proposed area already is adequately supplied with such licenses. 
(4)  Where there is evidence that a license for the location would have an adverse effect on the property values in the area. 
(5)  Where there is evidence that the license in that location would be detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking spaces for automobiles as required in the zoning ordinance. A licensee shall have sufficient parking on the premises so as to provide parking for his customers and so as to prevent parking on the streets or adjoining property. 
(6)  Where there is evidence that the licensee or his spouse is related to any distributor or wholesaler of malt beverages or employees thereof within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the civil law so that there might be special concessions granted the licensee to give him a competitive advantage over others not similarly privileged. 
(7)  For retail package license applicants, where there is evidence that the licensee applicant or his spouse is related in the first degree described therein to other licensees of malt beverages or wine in the city. 
(8)  Where there is evidence that alcoholic beverages have been sold by the applicant or at the establishment to intoxicated persons or to a minor. 
(9)  Where there is evidence that the conducting of the business creates a disturbance, congregation of intoxicated persons, congregation of minors, allows minors to purchase, drink or possess alcoholic beverages on the premises, or causes law enforcement to answer complaints or provide extra surveillance of the premises. More than three minors without the supervision of a parent or under supervision of an adult authorized by a parent shall be prima facie evidence of a congregation of minors. 
(b)  In addition to subsection (a) of this section and in determining whether or not any license applied for shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  If the applicant is a previous holder of a license, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual law enforcement observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(2)  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
(3)  The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought. 
(4)  If applicant's spouse shall not be able to meet the qualifications of an applicant, particularly if it appears that the applicant's spouse or another person is using the applicant as a guise or dummy to obtain a license. 
(c)  The applicant has 30 days from the date of written notice of the denial of a license application within which to petition for reconsideration by the city council. The applicant will be granted an opportunity to present additional information, evidence and cross examine witnesses before the city council. The city council's decision will be final. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-19. - Inspections. 
Any establishment holding a license issued under this chapter shall at all times, during the period allowable by law for operation of the business, be open to inspection by any law enforcement officer or any license inspector of the city or to any person designated by the city clerk or manager. In addition, if the premises are being used after hours by employees or the owners or their agents, the premises may be inspected at this time by the designated persons in this section. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-20. - Open containers prohibited. 
(a)  No bottle or other container of alcoholic beverages shall be opened or consumed by any person on the premises, upon which the place of business is conducted and licensed under this chapter, whether the bottle or other container so opened or consumed was bought or obtained at that place of business or elsewhere unless the premises is licensed for consumption on the premises under this chapter. 
(b)  No establishment licensed under this chapter to sell alcoholic beverages shall allow a person to leave those premises with alcoholic beverages in an open cup, bottle, can or other open container. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to city-sanctioned events. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-21. - Hours and days of operation. 
(a)  Sales by consumption on premises licensees. No licensee under this chapter or person employed by a licensee shall sell, offer for sale, transfer or offer to transfer to others any malt beverages, wine, distilled spirits or other alcoholic beverage for consumption on the premises between the hours of 12:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week; Sunday sales are not permitted in the City of Waleska. 
(b)  Malt beverages and wine package sales. No licensee under this chapter or person employed by a licensee shall sell, offer for sale, transfer or offer to transfer to others any packaged malt beverages or wine between the hours of 12:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week; and no person shall purchase, receive or offer to receive from a licensee or person employed by a licensee any malt beverages or wine between the hours of 12:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. There shall be no package sale of distilled spirits in the City of Waleska. Sunday sales are not permitted in the city. 
(c)  Sales on election days. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b), the sale by wholesale and retail of alcoholic beverages, shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; however, nothing in this subsection shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 500 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Regulation of sale on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7; sale on Sunday, Christmas, election day, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 3-22. - Places where drinking prohibited during certain hours. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation owning or operating a place of business licensed under this chapter shall permit any person to drink any wine, beer, distilled spirits or other alcoholic beverage upon the business premises between the hours of 12:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. 
(b)  No person shall drink any wine, beer, distilled spirits or other alcoholic beverage while upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or public places of the city, upon or within any vehicle upon the premises or in any adjacent parking area of any business establishment holding a license under this chapter. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the forgoing, the mayor and council may permit, with respect to special city sanctioned events, the consumption of wine, beer, distilled spirits or other alcoholic beverage while upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or public places of the city, upon a vote of the city council approving such action for such event. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Regulation of hours of sale, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-7, 3-3-20. 
Sec. 3-23. - Drive-in, curb service prohibited. 
(a)  Curb service by retail or consumption on the premises licensees under this chapter or delivery of any alcoholic beverages off the licensed premises is prohibited. 
(b)  Drive-in service windows at premises licensed under this chapter are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-24. - Offenses involving minors. 
(a)  No person under 21 years of age shall buy or allow to be bought for him any alcoholic beverage from any place where these beverages are kept. 
(b)  No person in charge of, or employed in, any place of business where alcoholic beverages are kept, shall permit any person under 21 years of age to buy or allow to be bought for any person under 21 years of age any alcoholic beverages in or from the place of business or to frequent or loiter about the premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(c)  No person shall furnish or serve any person under 21 years of age with any alcoholic beverage. A valid driver's license may be reasonably accepted by the person hereunder as sufficient evidence of age. 
(d)  No person under 21 years of age shall falsely represent his age, in any manner whatever, for the purpose of illegally obtaining any alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. However, the provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(f)  No person who is under 21 years of age shall have in his possession, or under his control, at any place whatever in the city, any alcoholic beverage. 
(g)  Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute an offense under this chapter and shall be punishable in the municipal court; provided, violation of this section by persons who have not yet reached the age of 17 shall be handled as provided by the juvenile court code of the state. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Furnishing to, purchase of or possession by person under 21 years of age of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; dispensing, selling by person under 18 years of age, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24. 
Sec. 3-25. - Measurement of distances. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by law, all measurements, to determine distances, required by this chapter, for the issuance of city beverage licenses, shall be measured in lineal feet by the most direct route of travel as follows: 
(1)  Consumption on premises restaurant; shall be measured from any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of a license by the shortest route along a public thoroughfare (street, alley or sidewalk); as the traffic or pedestrian flows; to the nearest door of entry of any school, church, college or day care. 
(2)  All other; shall be measured from any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of a license by the shortest route along a public thoroughfare (street, alley or sidewalk); as the traffic or pedestrian flows; to the property line of the tract on which is located the school ground, church, college campus or day care. 
(b)  The table below lists the distance in feet which various types of alcoholic beverage sales establishments must meet from an existing regulated land use. 

 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Sales of alcoholic beverages near churches, school buildings or other sites, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 3-26. - Existing licensed business; compliance. 
(a)  To prevent an unconstitutional taking of property, all licensees for alcoholic beverages within the city in compliance with city ordinance requirements involving residency, distance, location, parking and type of building structure in effect at the time of first receiving the license and continuing to be in compliance therewith shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter involving residency, distance, location, parking and type of building structure. Renewals of such licenses shall also be deemed in compliance under this section to the extent provided in this subsection. 
(b)  Transfers of business ownership at the same location shall be deemed in compliance under this section with regard to the city Code requirements involving distance, location, parking and type of building structure, provided that such business complied with such requirements at the time a license was first issued for such business and further provided that such business has continuously been in compliance with such requirements. These transfers may be approved by the administrator, provided the transferee meets all of the license requirements for a new license. 
(c)  Business transfers to new locations and new licenses must comply with all requirements of this chapter and must be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Secs. 3-27—3-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE TAX AND REGULATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 3-61—3-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED 

Secs. 3-81—3-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION 

Sec. 3-101. - Additional application, fee, structure requirements. 
In addition to the application and license requirements of this chapter in article I, the following shall be required for licenses under this division: 
(1)  Upon filing of the application, the city shall require the applicant to deposit a processing fee of $500.00 to cover the expense of investigation and processing of the application and that fee is not refundable. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  The dining area or service area of any business licensed under this division must be a minimum of 1,000 square feet. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Local government authority to regulate, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; authority to adopt rules for issuance of license, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-110. 
Sec. 3-102. - Manager's permit. 
(a)  Every person licensed under this chapter for the retail sale of malt beverages, wine, or distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall employ one or more persons as manager for the licensed establishment. At least one manager shall be at the licensee's premises during all times that alcoholic beverages are being consumed thereon, and such manager shall be in charge of the premises and responsible for the actions of the employees and customers of the licensed establishment. Each such manager shall obtain a manager's permit as provided in this section, and this permit shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance. 
(b)  Each person wishing to obtain a manager's permit must make application on a form provided by the city or the city's designee within three days of the date of employment. Such application shall include proof of residency as required in article I, subsection 6-13(a) and (b) of this chapter. Upon receiving the completed application, the city or designated law enforcement agency shall arrange to have the applicant photographed and fingerprinted and to place these records on file in the city. The city shall be authorized to issue a manager's permit after verifying the facts in the application. 
(c)  Licensees and managers under this section shall keep a copy of the permit on file at all times in the establishment and shall make these permits available for inspection during operating hours. 
(d)  Any person who has been convicted of a violation of any law or ordinance governing the sale of alcoholic beverages or sale or possession of illegal drugs in the past five years shall be ineligible to receive a manager's permit. 
(e)  If any manager of the licensee shall cease to be an employee of the licensee or shall cease to be a resident as required in subsection (b) above or in any manner ceases to meet the requirements of this section, the manager's permit shall be deemed null and void. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate licensee, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; authority to adopt rules governing license to sell distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-110. 
Sec. 3-103. - Happy hour promotions. 
(a)  All on-premises licensees are prohibited from selling or giving away alcoholic beverages under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Serving multiple drinks for a single price or offering all you can drink for a set price during a set time. 
(2)  Making a single price the basis for a required purchase of two or more servings. 
(3)  Serving alcoholic beverages by the pitcher, except to two or more persons at any one time. 
(4)  Offering free drinks or reduced-price drinks to any segment of the population for any period of time as an inducement to patronize the premises. 
(5)  Selling alcoholic beverages for less than half the normal retail price, or selling alcoholic beverages in pitchers or in jumbo sizes for less than the normal retail price. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the dispensing of drinks in pitchers or in jumbo sizes, provided that such pitchers or jumbo sizes shall be available at all times that the licensee is open for business and the usual, customary or established retail price for such drinks shall not be reduced. 
(6)  Using coupons or other special promotional items as an inducement to purchase alcoholic beverages. 
(7)  Sponsoring, conducting or allowing contests or other promotions which have as their primary purpose increasing the consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(8)  Offering or delivering any free alcoholic beverage to the general public. 
(9)  Offering alcoholic beverages under any special pricing or promotion of any nature whatsoever after 7:00 p.m. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to private functions not open to the public. The term "private function not open to the public" shall mean any function wherein the licensee has agreed to the use of the licensee's establishment by a person, firm or organization for a set period of time for valuable consideration. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate sale, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 3-104. - Servers limited to employees. 
Drinks shall be served only by employees of the establishments licensed for on-premises consumption. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-105. - Lewd dancing prohibited. 
No licensee under this division shall permit professional belly dancers, strip dancing, exotic dancing or any exhibitions of any like kind by whatever name called in connection with the operation of a restaurant, lounge or private club. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Prohibited conduct on licensed premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq.. 
Sec. 3-106, 3-107. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-108. - Premises. 
Premises means the definite closed-in locality, whether room, shop, or building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, and may not include an attached patio, deck or other outside space. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Secs. 3-109—3-119. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-120. - Ancillary tastings permitted. 
The holder of a retail sales license shall be eligible for an ancillary tasting license to provide samples of malt beverages and/or wine offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-121. - Tasting limitations. 
(a)  Tastings shall be on limited occasions either when a customer requests a sample of a malt beverage or wine offered for sale within the premises or in conjunction with sampling designed to promote malt beverage or wine appreciation and education. 
(b)  Tastings of malt beverages or wine shall be limited to one consecutive two-hour period in any one day. Tastings shall not exceed two ounces, and no person shall consume more than eight ounces in any one day on the premises. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-122. - Serving limitations. 
(a)  Malt beverages and/or wine products used in conjunction with tasting shall be opened and poured by the licensee or a person who has obtained a manager's permit as specified in section 3-102. 
(b)  No open containers of malt beverages and/or wine shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(c)  Tastings are permitted on the licensed premises only as specified in section 3-108 
(d)  Holders of an ancillary tasting license shall not charge for tastings, but may accept donations for a charitable organization of their choice. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-123. - Additional fee required. 
The annual fee for an ancillary tasting license shall be set by the city council. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Secs. 3-124—3-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 3-131. - Penalties and revocation. 
(a)  Any licensee who fails to pay the taxes imposed in this division by the city, or fails to pay any amount of such tax required to be collected and paid to the city, within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent per month of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof. 
(b)  The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at a rate of one percent per month. Interest shall be assessed for each month, or fraction thereof, from the day of the month that the amount or any portion thereof should have been paid until the date of payment. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-132. - Malt beverages. 
There is levied an excise tax on the sale of malt beverages within the city as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; and 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Charter reference— Excise taxes, § 6.14. 
Cross reference— Local excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80. 
Sec. 3-133. - Wine. 
There is levied an excise tax on the sale or use of wine by the package an excise tax of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Charter reference— Excise taxes, § 6.14. 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Sec. 3-134. - Distilled spirits by the drink. 
(a)  There is levied an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in the amount of three percent of the charge to the public for the beverage. The tax imposed on retail consumption dealers shall be payable as provided in this section. 
(b)  Every licensee shall, at the time of collecting for food and drinks served, give to the purchaser a receipt on which the price of alcoholic beverages served shall be itemized separately. Where the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the licensee may be deferred in a like manner; however, the licensee shall be liable therefore at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred. 
(c)  Every licensee or its agent is authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed in this division from purchasers of alcoholic beverages by the drink sold within its licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the city's designee to facilitate the collection of this tax. 
(d)  All taxes collected by any licensee or agent under this division shall be due and payable to the city on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective calendar month, as set forth in this division. 
(e)  On or before the 20th day of the month, a return for the preceding calendar month shall be filed with the city's designee in such form as the city may prescribe by every licensee liable for the payment of tax under this division. The return shall be accompanied by remittance to the city's designee of all taxes collected or due as shown on the return. 
(f)  All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink; amount of tax collected or authorized due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the county marshal. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-135. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-136. - Payment of tax; records and reports; penalty. 
(a)  All taxes, except those levied in section 3-135, shall be imposed on the wholesale dealer, computable and payable monthly. Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping or delivering alcoholic beverages to any retail dealer in the incorporated areas of the city, whether delivered to the dealer's place of business for resale, shall, as a condition to the privilege of carrying on such business in the city: 
(1)  Keep true and correct records of all sales, shipments and deliveries of such alcoholic beverages to each retail dealer; and such records shall be preserved for a period of one year and shall be made available on request for inspection by any duly authorized representative of the city. 
(2)  Collect from each retail dealer at the time of delivery of the alcoholic beverages the amount of tax due under the terms of this division and hold the same in trust for the city until such amount is remitted to the city as next provided. 
(3)  On or before the 20th of each calendar month make a verified and comprehensive report to the city clerk which shall correctly show all sales and deliveries of alcoholic beverages made to or for retail dealers in the city for the month immediately preceding the report. The report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retail dealer, the amount collected under the terms of this chapter, including copies of all sales invoices to each retail dealer, and such other information as may be called for by the city council. The report shall be accompanied by remittance to the city clerk of all taxes collected or due as shown on the report. 
(b)  Failure of the wholesale dealer or distributor to remit the taxes required in this division will result in a penalty of ten percent of the tax due in addition to the tax due. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
State Law reference— Maintenance of records, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-6; unlawful distribution, sale, penalties, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-27. 
Sec. 3-137. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-138. - Requirements of wholesalers generally. 
All wholesalers shall comply with this chapter before they can sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any establishment in the city. Deliveries shall be made in a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesaler licensed as set out in this division, and shall be subject to inspection by duly authorized authorities of the city at all times when deliveries are made. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-139. - Failure to collect taxes at delivery; failure to report or remit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesale dealer or distributor, person, firm or corporation to deliver any alcoholic beverages to any retail dealer within the incorporated areas of the city without collecting the taxes provided for in this division at the time of delivery. 
(b)  If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports provided for in this division, the city council shall notify the party in writing, and if the reports are not made and the taxes remitted within five days from the date of the notice, the council may withdraw from the wholesale dealer or distributor the privilege of doing business in the city by notifying the state revenue commissioner of the failure and by notifying the retail dealer that further acceptance of deliveries from the wholesaler, until the taxes are paid, may subject the retail dealer to penalty for violation of section 7-140 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-140. - Unpaid taxes, sales are violation. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation to sell at retail within the incorporated areas of the city any alcoholic beverages on which the taxes provided for in this division have not been paid. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Sec. 3-141. - Suspension, revocation or prohibition of retailer's license. 
A violation of this division or other sections of this chapter shall authorize the city council to suspend, revoke or place on probation, with or without conditions, the license of any retail party or holder in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in section 7-4. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2014) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Animals generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandon means the act of placing an animal on public property or within a public building, unattended or uncared for, or on or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian, or tenant of the private property. An animal shall also be considered abandoned when it has been unattended and without adequate food, water, ventilation or shelter, for a period in excess of 36 hours, regardless of where such animal may be found or kept. 
Adequate food means sufficient quantity of noncontaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance that is appropriate to the species, breed, size, age, and health of the animal, or at the direction of a licensed veterinarian, which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid, or contaminated food is not adequate food. 
Adequate shelter means a protective covering for an animal that is of adequate size and provides adequate protection to maintain the animal in a state of good health, and that prevents pain, suffering, or significant risk to the animal's health. Adequate shelter shall consist of a completely enclosed structure with four sides with a door opening, a constructed floor, and a roof. It should also be clean, dry, and compatible with current weather conditions, in addition to age, size, species, and condition of the animal. The structure should be of sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, turn around, lie down, and go in and out of the structure comfortably. To be adequate, some type of bedding that is quick drying, such as hay or pine straw, must be provided to maintain comfortable temperatures within the structure during times when the ambient, outside temperature is below freezing. In addition, the structure shall include a heavy plastic or rubber flap to cover the door and/or window openings during the months of November through March. From April through October, the structure shall either be shaded or moved out of direct sunlight. If the shelter is made of wood, it shall be raised at least two inches off the ground to prevent seepage or rotting. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, lean-tos, metal or plastic drums, boxes, abandoned vehicles, porches, decks, or material that does not provide sufficient protection from the elements. 
Adequate space means a sufficient safe space for adequate exercise suitable to the age, size, species, and breed of animal. For dogs, adequate space means an enclosure with a minimum of 150 square feet per dog. 
Adequate water means clear, drinkable water in adequate supply. Examples of inadequate water include, but are not limited to: snow, ice, and rancid/contaminated water. 
Animal means any living organism, except a plant, bacterium, or human, which can move voluntarily and has specialized sense organs, included domesticated animals and fowl. 
Animal control board means the board constituted and appointed by the board of commissioners to perform the duties of the animal control board under this chapter. 
Animal control facility means and includes any vehicle, building, structure, pasture, paddock, pond, impoundment area or premises where any animal is kept or housed by the county for the purpose of impounding or harboring stray, homeless, abandoned, unwanted, neglected or abused animals. 
Animal control officer means an individual or individuals subject to the jurisdiction of the governing authority to carry out the duties of an animal control officer, or, with the consent of the county, the city may assign the duties to the county marshal or his/her designees. 
Cruelty means causing death or unjustifiable pain or suffering to an animal by an act, an omission, or neglect. 
Dangerous dog means a classification made by an animal control officer for any dog that has without provocation inflicted severe injury on a human being or another domestic animal or, if such dog has previously been classified as a potentially dangerous dog, has aggressively bitten, attacked or endangered the safety of a human being or domestic animal without provocation. However, no dog may be declared dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. The definition shall not be construed to include any dog that is part of a governmental organization or a trained guard dog in performance of its duties. 
Dogs running at large means any dog not under immediate control, not on a leash, not at heel, not beside a competent person, not in a vehicle driven or parked, or not confined within the property limits of his owner. Hunting and tracking dogs are under the control of the owner when hunting with the landowner's permission. 
Domestic animal means an animal that, through long association with humans, has been adapted to human living conditions. 
Fighting dog means any dog that is owned, possessed, kept, harbored, trained, or maintained for the purpose of fighting. Fighting dogs are illegal in the city. 
Guard or protection dog means any dog trained for the purpose of protecting individuals from assault and/or preventing property loss or damage. A dog shall not be considered a guard or protection dog if it otherwise meets the criteria for being defined as a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog, or vicious dog. 
Impoundment means the act of taking physical possession and control of an animal by an animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law and transporting it to the animal control facility. 
Livestock means and includes horses, cows, goats, pigs, or any other hoofed animal used for pleasure or profit. Fowl and rabbits are expressly included within this definition. 
Necessary veterinary care means veterinary medical attention appropriate to the circumstances, whenever an animal is known or suspected to have suffered an injury, accidental or deliberate, or exhibits signs of disease process such as shock, temperature fluctuation, tremors, swelling, broken bones, open wounds, inability to eat or drink, blistering, irregular or abnormal breathing, partial or total paralysis, abnormal discharge or bleeding, mange, or other signs of health problems. 
Owner means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, and/or other legal entity, who or which owns, possesses, harbors, keeps, feeds, maintains, or knowingly causes or knowingly permits an animal to be harbored or kept, or has an animal in his/her care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his/her premises. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, any adult at whose residence a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is kept or found shall be presumed to be an owner of such dog and shall have the burden of rebutting such presumption. If an animal has more than one owner, any one of such owners may be prosecuted for violations whether or not any other owners are also prosecuted. 
Police officer means any law enforcement officer empowered to make arrests or cause to be issued citations or summonses in unincorporated areas of the county. 
Potentially dangerous dog means a classification made by an animal control officer for any dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to make unprovoked attacks, cause injuries, or otherwise threaten the safety of any human being or domestic animal. Potentially dangerous dog shall also mean any dog which, when unprovoked, inflicts a bite upon a human being or domestic animal or chases or approaches a human being or domestic animal on any public property in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of an attack. A dog shall not be considered a potentially dangerous dog if the attack, injury, or threatening conduct by the dog was sustained by, or targeted at, a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure that meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  A structure which is suitable to prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the dog from escaping; 
(2)  A structure with secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides; 
(3)  A structure whose sides are adequately constructed at the bottom so as to prevent the dog's escape by digging under the sides; 
(4)  A structure which provides appropriate protection from the elements for the dog. The structure must contain adequate shelter inside it; 
(5)  A structure which is inside a perimeter or area fence; 
(6)  The gate to the structure shall be of the inward-opening type and shall be kept securely fastened except when tending to the animal's needs such as cleaning the kennel or providing food and water. 
Provocation means committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or possessor of the animal, or teasing, tormenting, or abusing the animal or committing or attempting to commit a crime against a person. 
Sanitary conditions means an animal living space, shelter, or exercise area that is not contaminated by health hazards, irritants, pollutants, items, or conditions that endanger or pose a risk to an animal's health. 
Severe injury means any injury which results in a broken bone, lacerations severe enough to require multiple sutures or to render cosmetic surgery necessary or appropriate, puncture wounds that intrude below the surface of the skin, or death. 
Vicious dog means any dog that is known by its owner, guardian, custodian, or possessor to otherwise meet the criteria for the defined terms of "dangerous dog" or "potentially dangerous dog," but which dog has not yet been classified by an animal control officer as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, and any fighting dog (although fighting dogs are illegal in the city and the county). Such term shall not include a dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties. A dog shall not be considered a vicious dog if the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-26) 
Sec. 4-2. - Enforcement and penalties for violation of chapter. 
(a)  By agreement of the county and the city, this chapter shall be enforced by the county marshal's office. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the assistance of law enforcement persons within their jurisdiction. This chapter provides that the city shall be subject to the fees charged by the marshal's office and that all fees charged by the county marshal's office shall be retained by the county to defray the costs of the marshal's office related to animal control. 
(b)  Any person violating this chapter may be issued a citation and summons to appear before a court of competent jurisdiction, and the offending animal may be immediately impounded by the marshal's office pending disposition of the citation by the court. Any person violating this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(c)  In addition to any other penalties allowed by law, the court, as part of any sentence, may do a combination of any of the following: 
(1)  Prohibit the offender from owning, possessing, or having on the offender's premises in the city any animal during the term of the sentence; 
(2)  Order that the animal be removed from the city; 
(3)  Order that the animal be surrendered to the county animal control facility; 
(4)  Order that the animal be humanely euthanized; 
(5)  Order restitution to the victim. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-27) 
Sec. 4-3. - Restraint. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian of any dog to fail to keep a dog under restraint or control as provided for in this section. 
(b)  A dog is considered not under restraint or control when it is running at large, whether wearing a collar and tag or not. Reasonable care and precautions shall be taken to prevent the dog from leaving the real property limits of its owner, guardian, possessor, or custodian, and to ensure that: 
(1)  It is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other proper enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition; and that such enclosure is securely fastened at any time the animal is left unattended; or 
(2)  It is on a leash and under the control of a competent person, or it is off leash and obedient to and under voice command of a competent person who is in the immediate proximity of the dog any time it is not restrained as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section while on the owner's property. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian of any animal to restrain or anchor an animal by means of a tether, chain, cable, rope or cord, as a permanent method of restraint. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the following additional precautions shall be taken by the owners, possessors, guardians or custodians of vicious dogs in recognition of the fact that the owners, possessors, guardians or custodians of such vicious dogs must be aggressively responsible for them even in the absence of classification by the marshal's office as dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs: 
(1)  Owners, possessors, guardians, or custodians of vicious dogs who maintain their dogs out-of-doors shall fence a portion of their property with a second perimeter or area fence. 
a.  Within this perimeter or area fence, the vicious animal must be humanely confined inside a pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides. The sides must either be buried two feet into the ground or sunken into a concrete pad. 
b.  The gate to the kennel shall be inward-opening and shall be kept locked, except when tending to the animal's needs such as cleaning the kennel or providing food and water. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian of a vicious dog to be outside of its proper enclosure as provided for in this section, unless the dog is properly muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting, and the dog is attended by the owner, and the dog is restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. The leash shall be no longer than six feet in length and the animal must be kept at least 15 feet within the perimeter boundaries of the property, unless the perimeter boundary is securely fenced. 
(3)  Maintain at all times either a policy of insurance or a surety bond in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 to cover claims for any personal injuries inflicted by the dog, which policy or surety bond shall be issued by an insurer or surety, as the case may be, authorized to transact business in this state. 
(4)  Except when being transported to a licensed veterinary facility, vicious dogs shall not be allowed off the property of the owner. Should transport to veterinary care be needed, the animal shall be securely and humanely confined within a vehicle. Movement of the animal from the residence of the owner to and from the transporting vehicle and to and from the veterinary facility shall be conducted with the animal securely leashed by a leash no longer than six feet in length and muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting. 
(5)  The premises where a vicious dog is kept shall be posted with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dog on the premises that presents a danger to human beings. Such signs shall include a symbol sufficient to convey without words the message that there is a dog on the premises that presents a danger to human beings. The signs shall be conspicuously displayed on each exterior side of the enclosure for each 50 feet of enclosure, with a minimum of two, as well as a sign on each ingress or egress point to the enclosure. The signs shall be a minimum of ten inches high and 14 inches long. 
(6)  The owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian of a vicious dog shall, prior to placing dogs on property, have the dog microchip registered, at his/her own expense, and provide the registration number to the marshal's office. The owner shall keep the registration information updated. 
(7)  The owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian of a vicious dog shall report to the marshal's office within 12 hours of any of the following: 
a.  Escape of the dog; 
b.  An attack on a human or domestic animal by the dog; 
c.  Transfer of ownership of the dog; 
d.  Death of the dog. 
(d)  In addition to the requirements in subsection (b)(1) of this section, the following additional precautions shall be taken by the owners, possessors, guardians, or custodians of guard or protection dogs: 
(1)  Owners, possessors, guardians or custodians of any guard or protection dog must confine all such dogs within a perimeter fence sufficient to prevent the dog's escape, with all points of ingress and egress securely locked at all times. 
(2)  A "beware of dog" sign shall be conspicuously displayed on each exterior side of the enclosure for each 50 feet of enclosure, with a minimum of two, as well as a sign on each ingress or egress point to the enclosure. Signs shall be a minimum of ten inches high and 14 inches long. 
(3)  The owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian shall, prior to placing dogs on the property, have the dogs microchip registered, at his/her own expense, and provide the registration number to the marshal's office. There shall be a fee for each guard or protection dog for the first year or any part thereof that the dog is in the county and a renewal fee for each dog every year thereafter as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. The renewal fee shall be paid by January 30 of each year. 
(4)  The owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian shall report to the marshal's office within 12 hours of any of the following: 
a.  Escape of the dog; 
b.  An attack on a human or animal by the dog; 
c.  Transfer of ownership of the dog; 
d.  Death of the dog; 
(5)  A guard or protection dog shall be deemed under control only when the dog is properly muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting, and the dog is attended by the owner, and the dog is restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. The leash shall be no longer than six feet in length. 
(e)  Dogs found running at large or in violation of this section may be immediately impounded by officers of the marshal's office or any law enforcement officer. Any animal that is impounded under this section shall not be returned to its owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian in any event without strict proof of compliance with the provisions of this section. If the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian has not complied with the provisions of this section within 20 days of the date the dog was impounded or within 20 days of the date of disposition of the charges by the court if the marshal's office has determined to hold the dog pending such disposition, said dog shall be euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(f)  The marshal's office or any law enforcement officer may pursue the dog onto private property to effect capture of a dog believed to be in violation of this section. Any law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall have the authority to enter onto private or public property for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-28) 
State Law reference— Control of dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-24, 4-8-25; control of vicious dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-42. 
Sec. 4-4. - Abandoned animals. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon or to aid in the abandonment of any animal. An animal relinquished through written agreement with the marshal's office, licensed rescue group, licensed shelter, licensed veterinarians, individual, or other entity shall not be deemed abandoned but shall be considered relinquished to the respective entity. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-29) 
State Law reference— Abandonment of domesticated animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-15.1; abandonment of dead animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-3; abandonment of dead dogs, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-1, 4-8-2. 
Sec. 4-5. - Transient dogs and cats. 
Any dog or cat shipped or transported through the city or entering the city only for the purpose of a temporary stay, when such stay shall not exceed 15 days, shall be exempt from collar, and tag sections of this chapter. However, all other provisions of this chapter are applicable to such transient animals. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-30) 
Sec. 4-6. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of cruelty towards any animal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally train, breed, possess, harbor, keep, and have custody or control of an animal for the purpose of animal fighting. It shall be unlawful to be a spectator at or bet on an animal fighting activity. The intentional fighting of dogs, dog and hog, and cocks is expressly prohibited. 
(c)  Licensed veterinarians who perform surgery or euthanasia and animal control officers who euthanize animals under the direction of the marshal's office per the guidelines of the Georgia Veterinary Medical Association, state department of agriculture, and this chapter shall not be guilty of cruelty to animals. 
(d)  A person shall not be guilty of cruelty when the person is protecting his life, the life of another person or animal that is being attacked by an animal that is attempting to severely harm or kill him/her or another person or animal, provided that the person being attacked is not committing a crime or is not aggravating or inciting the animal to attack, and has not aggravated, injured, abused, or assaulted the animal in the past. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-31) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; cruelty to dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5. 
Sec. 4-7. - Public nuisance animal. 
(a)  A public nuisance animal shall mean and include any animal that: 
(1)  Damages the property of anyone other than the owner; 
(2)  Attacks a human or another animal without provocation; 
(3)  Makes any vocalizations for an extended period of time. These time limits do not apply if the vocalizations are given as a warning to the presence of an intruder. Officers enforcing this subsection are not required to measure the vocalizations with the use of a sound level meter. Upon notification of a complaint concerning such vocalizations, the owner of such animal shall be given a written warning indicating that such animal is creating a disturbance, so long as the complainant provides the officer with the address of the owner. If the disturbance is not resolved within two days or a subsequent complaint is made for such animal by a different individual, who resides at a different location from the first complainant, a court summons shall be issued in accordance with the requirements of this chapter; 
(4)  Creates unsanitary conditions or offensive and objectionable odors in enclosures or surroundings and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept; 
(5)  Is in heat and not confined within a secure enclosure to prevent unintentional breeding; or 
(6)  Chases vehicles, bicycles, or people. 
(b)  Any such public nuisance animal may be impounded immediately by an animal control officer and the owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian may be charged for a violation of this section. The animal may remain impounded pending disposition of the charges by the court. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-32) 
Sec. 4-8. - Adoption. 
(a)  The marshal's office may offer for adoption any animal unredeemed or unclaimed by the owner after five days or, if the animal is voluntarily surrendered to the marshal's office by the owner of the animal, the animal may be offered for adoption immediately. 
(1)  All persons adopting animals shall be over 18 years of age and shall provide adequate and humane care, feeding, shelter and protection from the weather and veterinary treatment as required. 
(2)  Any person adopting an animal shall not use the animal for fighting and shall not engage in any research involving the use of the animal or supply the animal to any individual or institution which may use the animal in research. Other prohibitions may apply pursuant to ordinance adopted by the county. 
(3)  The frequency with which animals may be adopted and placed in any household may be restricted in the discretion of the marshal's office. 
(b)  Any person adopting an animal from the county animal shelter is subject to any ordinance, rules and regulations adopted by the county and shall pay an adoption fee in an amount stated in the county animal shelter schedule of fees, and charges may also include all or part of the costs of an examination and rabies inoculation and all or part of the costs associated with neutering or spaying dogs and cats. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-33) 
Sec. 4-9. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Any animal, seized or impounded by an animal control officer, or any officer empowered to act by law shall be detained at the animal control facility. The marshal's office shall notify by mail the owner of such animal, if known or can be reasonably ascertained, that the animal has been impounded. The owner of any animal impounded may, within five days after the mailing of the notice, reclaim the animal by the payment of an impoundment fee, plus a boarding fee for each day the animal was impounded, and the cost of rabies vaccination if the animal has not been vaccinated within the prescribed time period, unless the marshal's office has determined that the animal should be held pending disposition of charges by the court. These fees, as applicable, shall also apply to biting animals held for rabies observation at the animal control facility. 
(b)  If any animal seized or impounded by the marshal's office evidences advanced symptoms of contagious, infectious or fatal diseases, is seriously ill or severely injured, the marshal's office shall seek the services of a licensed veterinarian who will determine whether to treat the animal or humanely euthanize the animal; or in the absence of an available veterinarian, the marshal's office may, upon approval of the marshal, proceed with euthanization and prepare a complete report on the reason for euthanization. This action may be taken to control the spread of disease or to eliminate any further pain and suffering of an animal. Every attempt will be made to stabilize an owned animal. 
(c)  Upon approval of the marshal and at the request and expense of the owner, impoundment may be at a veterinary or licensed kennel of the owner's choosing, provided that the owner can demonstrate to the marshal's office that the owner cannot cause the animal to be released from the boarding facility without the approval of the marshal's office. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-34) 
Sec. 4-10. - Humane disposition. 
(a)  If an animal is not claimed by the owner within five days of the mailing of notice to the owner, or an animal of unknown ownership is not adopted within five days of impoundment, then it shall be the duty of the marshal's office to euthanize the animal in as humane and painless a manner as possible. An animal deemed to be highly desirable for adoption may be kept beyond the five-day limitation, provided that the animal does not evidence any apparent signs of illness, injury, contagious or infectious diseases and that space is available to house the animal, at the discretion of the marshal. Animals may be released to approved rescue groups or to approved foster homes authorized to accept animals if not claimed or adopted as provided. Animals shall not be provided to any public or private institution, animal dealer or other individual who may use or supply the animal for research purposes. 
(b)  Any animal which is suffering excessively or any animal which represents a real danger to persons or other animals, without regard to the period of confinement as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall be euthanized by officers of the marshal's office in as humane a manner as possible. 
(c)  When, in the opinion of the marshal, a diseased or injured animal, taken into custody, is in need of immediate treatment, so as to lessen the animal's suffering or to prevent the spread of a communicable disease to other animals, he shall immediately obtain the services of or place the animal with a licensed veterinarian for the purpose of administering necessary treatment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-35) 
Sec. 4-11. - Biting animals and quarantine. 
(a)  In accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the county board of health, all dogs and cats known to have bitten or scratched a person shall be confined to the animal control facility, veterinarian's hospital, or at a boarding facility approved by the marshal or under home supervision with the approval of the marshal for a period of ten days. All expenses incurred for boarding the animal during this period of time shall be paid by the owner or possessor of the biting animal. 
(b)  In accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the state department of public health, all pets or wild animals, other than a dog or cat, known to have bitten a person, or any animal which cannot be held for a rabies observation period, shall be euthanized and a lab specimen of brain tissue sent to the state department of epidemiology for testing and control of rabies. 
(c)  Unvaccinated or unwanted animals bitten or scratched by a known potentially rabid animal shall be euthanized immediately. If the owner of the unvaccinated animal is unwilling to have the animal euthanized, upon approval of the marshal, the exposed animal shall be placed in quarantine for six months and vaccinated one month prior to being released. The owner or possessor is responsible for quarantining the exposed unvaccinated animal in strict compliance with the policies and procedures of the animal control unit and county board of health and for all costs associated with same. 
(d)  Dogs and cats that are bitten or scratched by a known or potentially rabid animal that are current on their vaccinations shall be revaccinated immediately, confined, and observed for 45 days. Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by the marshal. 
(e)  For purposes of subsections (c) and (d) of this section, any animal bitten or scratched by a bat or wild carnivorous mammal, including, but not limited to, bobcats, raccoons, foxes, skunks, or coyotes, which are not available for testing, should be considered exposed to rabies. 
(f)  Failure to comply with the quarantine and/or confinement requirements of this section, the marshal's office, or the county board of health constitutes a violation of this chapter and may result in the impoundment of the animal. In that event, the owner or possessor remains responsible for all veterinary, boarding, and other expenses incurred on behalf of the quarantined animal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-36) 
Sec. 4-12. - Livestock. 
(a)  All livestock shall be properly housed with adequate food and adequate water and confined within a fenced enclosure. The fenced enclosure shall be maintained in such a manner as to keep any average livestock animal from escaping the enclosed compound and causing damage, accidents, or injury to any person or property. Owners of such livestock shall be liable for any damage, accidents, or injuries. Such maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, repair or replacement of anchor post assemblies whenever they show signs of weakness, refastening loose wires to posts, splicing broken wires when necessary, and keeping the fence wires properly stretched. Those who provide boarding/pasturing space and/or services for hire shall have the responsibility for enclosure maintenance as described in this subsection. 
(b)  No person shall tie, stake or fasten any livestock within any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place within the county or in such manner that the animal has access to any portion of any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, or other public place. 
(c)  Owners or possessors of livestock impounded for violation of this chapter or any state and/or federal laws, will be charged in accordance with actual costs of impoundment, plus impounding and boarding fees. 
(d)  Impounded livestock shall be held for a period of 21 days. If such impounded animals are not claimed by the owner during that period of time, the animals may be given to persons willing to accept them, in the discretion of the marshal's office. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-38) 
Sec. 4-13. - Wildlife. 
All complaints and matters concerning wild animals not of a domestic nature and complaints involving game animals or protected species and/or hunting, shall be forwarded to the state department of natural resources, game and fish division, or the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Law Enforcement Division, for proper disposition, i.e., compliance, apprehension, control and/or enforcement, as may be necessary and as provided by state and federal rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-38) 
Sec. 4-14. - Dead animals. 
(a)  Officers of the marshal's office are authorized to remove dead animals from public property, including public schools, parks, and roadways. Carcasses on private property must be disposed of by the animal or property owner or possessor in accordance with state laws and regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of a dead animal, its parts, or blood on the land of another without the permission of the owner of the land. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of a dead animal in a well or open pit of any kind, on private or public land. Any dog, cat or small animal carcass to be picked up for disposal by the marshal's office from a private residence must first be contained in a plastic bag and delivered to the right-of-way of the road or street for disposal. All dead livestock, including horses, cattle and any other large animal must be disposed of by the animal owner or property owner/possessor in accordance with state and local regulations. 
(b)  This section shall not prohibit the city from contracting with a private waste disposal company for the disposal of dead animals within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-39) 
Sec. 4-15. - Vaccines used and time of vaccination. 
(a)  All dogs and cats owned, possessed, harbored, or residing within the limits of the city shall be inoculated for the prevention of rabies by a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state, using only those vaccines prescribed and/or approved by the state department of human resources. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or maintain any dog or cat that does not have a current rabies inoculation. All dogs and cats shall be vaccinated against rabies before and no later than four months of age. Any dog or cat found not vaccinated by four months of age must have the consent of a licensed veterinarian stating the reasons. 
(c)  Any person keeping, owning, harboring or having any type of animal in his/her possession, excluding dogs and cats, is not required to have the animal vaccinated against rabies but does so at his own risk and assumes all liabilities for adverse actions of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-40) 
Sec. 4-16. - Certificate of vaccination. 
(a)  Upon administering antirabies vaccines, a certificate of vaccination must be issued and signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccine, to provide evidence of vaccination. 
(b)  Any veterinarian is authorized and required in connection with his practice to issue certificates of vaccination, provided he furnishes one copy to the animal owner, one copy to the marshal's office upon request by the marshal's office, and one copy is retained by the veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-41) 
Sec. 4-17. - Animal license. 
The owner, possessor, or harborer of each dog or cat residing in the city must obtain and possess a current rabies vaccination certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that the animal has been vaccinated against rabies. Upon vaccination, county veterinarians shall be responsible for issuing a metal tag with a vaccination and identification number. Tags must be renewed within 30 days of the expiration date of the vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-42) 
Sec. 4-18. - Collar and rabies vaccination tag. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each dog and cat owner or possessor to provide a collar and tag for each dog and cat, and the tag and collar shall be on the animal at all times when the animal is not under the immediate control of the owner or possessor of the animal. Animals participating in organized or controlled competitions are exempt from this section only for the duration of the competition. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued, or to remove such tags from any animal without the consent of its owner or possessor. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-44) 
Sec. 4-19. - Vaccination of dogs and cats. 
No person who is not licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state shall vaccinate dogs and cats against rabies. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-44) 
Sec. 4-20. - Citations; summons; subpoenas. 
(a)  The animal control officer or law enforcement officer, at his/her discretion, may choose not to impound the animal or livestock found in violation of any section of this chapter, but may return the animal to its owner or possessor and issue or cause to be issued a summons directing the owner or possessor of the animal or livestock to appear before a court of competent jurisdiction on a certain day to stand trial for the violation of this chapter. 
(b)  If a violation of this chapter has not been personally witnessed by the animal control officer or a county law enforcement officer, a subpoena may be issued to any witness or the person complaining to appear on the day and time set for trial to testify. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-46) 
Sec. 4-21. - Liability of the city, county, marshal's office, officers, and employees. 
The city, the county, the marshal's office, and its officers and employees shall not be held responsible or liable for any accidents, diseases, injuries, or deaths to any animal while being impounded or boarded at the animal control facility or any facility designated by the marshal's office to house such animal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-46) 
Sec. 4-22. - Interference with animal control officers. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with any animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the county vehicle used to transport the animal, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the animal control facility, or by any other method which would block or hinder any officer referred to in this section from performing his/her duties. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-47) 
Sec. 4-23. - Animal neglect. 
(a)  Any animal or livestock owner or possessor who fails to provide adequate drink, adequate food, adequate space, adequate shelter, sanitary conditions, necessary veterinary care, and/or who causes unnecessary suffering of any animal or livestock shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to leave animals unattended in a parked vehicle without proper ventilation to prevent the animal from suffering physical distress from heat exhaustion. 
(c)  Any animal control officer or other officer empowered to act by law may impound any animal found to be neglected, as defined by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-48) 
Sec. 4-24. - Duty of animal owners to be responsible owners. 
It shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of any animal to exercise reasonable care and take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property, and animals from injuries or damage which might result from their animal's behavior. If the owner or custodian of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-49) 
Sec. 4-25. - Hoarders. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect animals and fail to provide them with humane/adequate care, collect dead animals that are not properly disposed of as required by this chapter, or collect, house, or harbor animals in filthy, unsanitary conditions that constitute a health hazard to the animals being kept, and/or to the animals or residents of adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-50) 
Sec. 4-26. - Right of entry. 
A law enforcement officer may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle when the ambient temperature is 80 degrees Fahrenheit or above outside the vehicle. If the vehicle is damaged during such removal, the law enforcement officer shall not be liable for any damage to the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-51) 
Sec. 4-27. - Animals transported in vehicles. 
(a)  No animal shall be transported on a public road in an open vehicle including an open top vehicle or open truck bed, unless the animal is humanely secured so as to prevent the animal from escaping out of the vehicle, getting tangled, or having the ability to extend over the edge of the vehicle that could result in an injury or strangulation of the animal while the vehicle is in motion. 
(b)  No animal shall be transported in the trunk of a vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-52) 
Sec. 4-28. - Training guard or protection dogs. 
It is unlawful to train a guard or protection dog, unless the trainer holds a state kennel license, a city business license, and maintains at all times either a policy of insurance or a surety bond in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 to cover claims for any personal injuries inflicted by the dog or dogs being trained, which policy or surety bond shall be issued by an insurer or surety, as the case may be, authorized to transact business in this state. It is unlawful to train a guard or protection dog on public property, including but not limited to, public parks. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-53) 
Sec. 4-29. - Dying or coloring certain animals or fowl for display, sale, gift prohibited. 
It is unlawful to sell, offer for sale, give away, or display living baby chicks, ducklings, or other fowl, amphibians, reptiles or rabbits which have been dyed, colored or otherwise treated so as to impart to them an artificial color. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-54) 
Sec. 4-30. - Limitation on ownership. 
(a)  Any person who has been convicted of cruelty, neglect, abandonment or hoarding of an animal as provided in this chapter or has been required to or voluntarily relinquished ownership of such animal, may not own, possess, or have on his premises in the city any animal for one year from the date of conviction. A nolo contendere plea is considered a conviction for the purpose of this section. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the court from imposing a greater length of time. 
(b)  Any person who has been convicted of failure to keep an animal under restraint while on the owner's property as provided in this chapter and has been required to provide additional confinement requirements and has not complied with the court's order, may not be allowed to own a pet in their city household for one year from the date of conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-55) 
Sec. 4-31. - Backyard breeders. 
It is unlawful for any person who does not hold a license from the state department of agriculture to breed an animal if they are required by the state department of agriculture to be licensed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-56) 
[Sec. 4-32. - Sales of dogs and cats.] 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Animal control facility means any animal control center or animal shelter, maintained by or under contract with any state, county or municipality, whose mission and practice is, in whole, or in significant part, the rescue, care, and placement of stray, abandoned, or surrendered animals in permanent homes or with rescue organizations, and which does not breed animals. 
(2)  Animal rescue organization means any not for profit organization which has tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue, care, and placement of stray, abandoned, or surrendered animals in permanent homes, and which does not breed animals. 
(3)  Cat means a member of the species of domestic cat, Felis Catus. 
(4)  Dog means a member of the specifics of domestic dog, Canis Familiaris. 
(5)  Offer for sale means to sell, offer for adoption, advertise for the sale of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a dog or cat. 
(6)  Pet shop means a retail establishment where animals sold, exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public at retail. Such definition shall not include a private residence not generally open to the public, an animal control facility, a veterinarian's office, or animal rescue organization as defined. 
(b)  Restrictions on the sale of dogs and cats. 
A pet shop may not sell, exchange, barter, offer for sale, auction, or otherwise deliver or transfer a cat or a dog. Nothing in this section shall prevent a pet shop from providing space and appropriate care for cats and dogs owned by an animal control facility or an animal rescue organization and maintained at the pet shop for the purpose of adopting those animals to the public. 
(c)  Disclosures. 
A pet shop that provides space for the adoption of cats or dogs shall post, in a conspicuous location on the cage or enclosure of the each such animal, a sign stating the name of the animal control facility or animal rescue organization which owns the dog or cat offered for the adoption. 
(d)  Penalties. 
Each failure to post a sign for an individual dog or cat as required by this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
Each dog or cat sold, exchanged, bartered, offered for sale, auctioned, delivered, or transferred in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense of up to $500.00 per violation. 
Each day's failure to comply with this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2017-6, 5-22-2017) 
Secs. 4-33—4-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS DOG CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 4-71. - Title and purpose. 
The purpose of this article shall be to implement the provisions of the Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. (the "Act"), relating to dangerous dog control, and in some instances, to strengthen the requirements of the Act in furtherance of a community that is safe and secure from the harms of dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs. Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to amend or supersede any other ordinances relating to animal control. Violations of this article shall be punishable as provided in the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-71) 
Sec. 4-72. - Exceptions. 
No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog as a result of an injury upon a human being or other animal inflicted at a time when the dog was being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties. No dog shall be considered a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog as a result of an injury inflicted by the dog upon a person who, at the time of injury, was committing a willful trespass or other tort; who was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or had done so in the past; or who was attempting to commit a crime. If the person injured is a child of tender years, the age, understanding, and capacity of such child shall be considered to determine whether such child was capable of committing a willful trespass or other tort or a crime. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-72) 
Sec. 4-73. - Classification as dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; notice to owner. 
(a)  When the animal control officer classifies any dog as a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog under this article, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner of such classification. The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the owner's last known address. If a dog has more than one owner, notice to one owner shall be sufficient for purposes of this article. If there is a question as to the dog's ownership, notice shall be deemed sufficient if sent to the last person who received a citation for the dog. 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that form the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or a potentially dangerous dog. 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing on the classification within 15 days from the date of the notice. 
(4)  The notice shall state that the city council shall conduct the hearing. 
(5)  The notice shall state that if the owner does not request such a hearing within 15 days from the date of the notice, the classification of the dog as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be final and conclusive for all purposes. 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the city council and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such a request. 
(b)  (1)  When the city council receives a request for a hearing from an owner, it shall schedule such a hearing within 30 days of receipt of the request. The city council shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of the date, time, and place of the hearing; such notice shall be made to the owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence. 
(2)  The city council shall also receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as it may find reasonably necessary to make a determination to sustain, modify, or overrule the classification of the dog by the animal control officer. Within ten days of the date of the hearing, the city council shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of its determination on the matter. If the determination is made that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(3)  Unless the city council determines that a later date is appropriate in a particular case, the effective date of the determination shall be the date of the animal control officer's classification. 
(c)  If the identity of the owner of a dog which the animal control officer has classified as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog cannot be determined, the dog shall be immediately confiscated. If the dog's owner claims such a dog, the dog shall be released to its owner, together with a copy of the notice specified in subsection (a) of this section, upon proof of strict compliance with all provisions of this chapter. If the dog remains unclaimed for five days, the dog shall be euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. Under no circumstances shall such dog be placed for adoption. In addition, all fees as described in this article must be paid before the dog will be released. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-73) 
State Law reference— Dangerous dog classification procedures, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24. 
Sec. 4-74. - Requirements for possession of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(a)  Any owner, possessor, guardian, or custodian of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall be jointly and severally responsible with all other owners, possessors, guardians, or custodians of such dog for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall own, possess, keep, harbor, or have custody or control of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog except in compliance with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  In addition to the requirements for a proper enclosure set forth in section 4-3(b)(1), owners, possessors, guardians or custodians who maintain their dangerous or potentially dangerous dog out-of-doors shall fence a portion of their property with a second perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter or area fence, the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must be humanely confined inside a pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides. The sides must either be buried two feet into the ground or sunken into a concrete pad. The gate to the kennel shall be inward-opening and shall be kept locked, except when tending to the animal's needs such as cleaning the kennel or providing food and water. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog to be outside of its proper enclosure as provided for in section 4-3(b)(1) and subsection (b)(1) of this section, unless the dog is properly muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting, and the dog is attended by the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian, and the dog is restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. The leash shall be no longer than six feet in length and the animal must be kept at least 15 feet within the perimeter boundaries of the property unless the perimeter boundary is securely fenced. 
(3)  The premises where a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is kept shall be posted with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dog on the premises that presents a danger to human beings. Such signs shall include a symbol sufficient to convey without words the message that there is a dog on the premises which presents a danger to human beings. The signs shall be conspicuously displayed on each side of the enclosure for each 50 feet of enclosure, with a minimum of two signs, as well as a sign on each ingress and egress point to the enclosure. The signs shall be a minimum of ten inches high and 14 inches long. 
(4)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall maintain at all times either a policy of insurance or a surety bond in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 to cover claims for any personal injuries inflicted by the dog, which policy or surety bond shall be issued by an insurer or surety, as the case may be, authorized to transact business in this state. 
(5)  The animal control officer or his designee shall have the right to inspect randomly and without notice a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog which is required to be confined pursuant to this section. 
(6)  The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall, prior to placing dogs on property, have the dog microchip registered, at his/her own expense, and provide the registration number to the marshal's office. The owner shall keep the registration information updated. 
(7)  Except when being transported to a licensed veterinary facility, dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs shall not be allowed off the property of the owner. 
(8)  Should transport to veterinary care be needed, the animal shall be securely and humanely confined within a vehicle. Movement of the animal from the residence of the owner to and from the transporting vehicle and to and from the veterinary facility shall be conducted with the animal securely leashed by a leash no longer than six feet in length and muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-74) 
State Law reference— Requirements for keeping dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24 et seq. 
Sec. 4-75. - Registration of dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs. 
(a)  No dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be permitted to remain within the city, unless it is registered in accordance with this section. In addition to the annual registration fees provided otherwise in this chapter, the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall pay an annual registration fee and shall register such owner's dog as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog according to the classification and determination previously made under this article. No dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be registered unless the owner can provide sufficient evidence that all of the provisions of section 4-74 have been and are being met. 
(b)  The registration provided by this section shall be nontransferable. The registration shall be renewed annually or upon the earlier transfer of ownership or possession of the dog or a change in the location of the dog's primary habitat. 
(c)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the state shall register the dog as required in this article within 30 days after becoming a resident. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who moves from one jurisdiction to another within the state shall register the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(d)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements of this article are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-75) 
State Law reference— Registration of dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25. 
Sec. 4-76. - Transfer of ownership or possession. 
Upon the transfer of ownership or possession of any dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, the transferor shall provide the dog control officer with the name, address, and telephone numbers of the new owner of the dog and of the effective date of the transfer. Any transferee of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be presumed to have notice of the dog's classification as such. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-76) 
Sec. 4-77. - Notice to dog control officer. 
The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer in person or by telephone within 24 hours of the occurrence of any one of the following events: 
(1)  The dog has escaped or has otherwise ceased to be in the custody of the owner for any reason, unless the owner knows such dog to be physically secured and restrained or confined in the custody of another competent adult. 
(2)  Such dog has attacked a human being or other animal. 
(3)  Such dog has been sold, given, or otherwise transferred to the ownership or possession of another person. 
(4)  The dog has died. 
(5)  The dog is leaving the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-77) 
Sec. 4-78. - Confiscation and disposition of dogs. 
(a)  If an animal control officer or police officer has probable cause to believe that a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is being harbored in violation of this article, such officer or agent may do one of the following: 
(1)  Order the violation immediately corrected and cite the owner of the dog to appear in court for the violation; or 
(2)  If the violation cannot be immediately corrected and the dog is posing a threat to human beings or other domestic animals, the dog may be seized and impounded, in which case the owner will be cited to appear in court for the violation. Upon approval of the marshal and at the owner's request and expense, such impoundment may be at a veterinarian or licensed kennel of the owner's choosing. 
(b)  Absent an order from the court to the contrary, any dog which has been confiscated under this section shall be returned to its owner only following disposition by the court on the citation and only then upon the owner's proof of strict compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment of actual boarding expenses, plus reasonable confiscation costs, which shall be $100.00 upon the first confiscation of any dog, $200.00 upon the second, and $400.00 upon the third or subsequent confiscation. 
(c)  If the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article and paid such confiscation costs within 20 days following disposition by the court, the dog shall be euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-78) 
Sec. 4-79. - Report to district attorney and solicitor. 
The animal control officer shall report to the district attorney the conduct of any owner which the animal control officer believes may constitute a felony under the Act. The animal control officer shall report to the solicitor the conduct of any owner that the animal control officer reasonably believes may constitute a misdemeanor under the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-79) 
Sec. 4-80. - Penalties. 
In addition to any other penalty that is available under this Code, the owner, possessor, guardian or custodian of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog who violates this article shall be subject, at a minimum, to the penalties as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, § 10-80) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State building codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Erosion and sedimentation control regulation adopted. 
The provisions of chapter 26, article III of the Code of Ordinances, Cherokee County, Georgia, as now or hereafter amended, are hereby adopted by reference. 
State Law reference— Control of soil erosion and sedimentation, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-2. - Provisions regarding compliance with county building codes adopted. 
The provisions of sections 14-1 and 14-2 of the Code of Ordinances, Cherokee County, Georgia, as now are hereafter amended, are adopted by reference. 
Secs. 6-3—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT/FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter loadbearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the administrator's, city engineer's or other designee's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1—30, A—99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other floodprone areas as referenced in section 6-71. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year; also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building See Structure . 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before January 4, 2010. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before January 4, 2010. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map or FHBM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which are necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology; also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the start of construction commenced after January 4, 2010, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after January 4, 2010. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city engineer to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any article requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (i) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (ii) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(2); Ord. of 1-28-2019, § 1) 
Sec. 6-32. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Generally. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(b)  Notice of violation. If the local permitting authority determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the local permitting authority by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(c)  Sanctions and remedies. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the local permitting authority shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the local permitting authority may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Stop work order. The local permitting authority may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The local permitting authority may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The local permitting authority may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the local permitting authority may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the local permitting authority shall deem appropriate (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the local permitting authority has taken one or more of the actions described above, the local permitting authority may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the local permitting authority may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in appropriate municipal, magistrate or recorders court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(7)) 
Sec. 6-33. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(1.1)) 
Sec. 6-34. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all areas within the city. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(1.2); Ord. of 1-28-2019, § 2) 
Sec. 6-35. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(1.5)) 
Sec. 6-36. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(1.7)) 
Secs. 6-37—6-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 6-71. - Basis for area of special flood hazard; flood area maps and studies. 
For the purposes of this article, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. (For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for the city, dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference.) 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
b.  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the city or permitting authority. 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; or 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology approved by the city or permitting authority. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at city hall. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(1.4)) 
Sec. 6-72. - Designation of article administrator. 
The city engineer or other designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(1.3)) 
Sec. 6-73. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to ensure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the administrator shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of divisions 3 and 4 of this article; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(3.4)) 
Sec. 6-74. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the local permitting authority a permit application on a form provided by the local permitting authority for that purpose. 
(c)  No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this article. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(3.1)) 
Sec. 6-75. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
(a)  An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor; 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 6-152(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in section 6-151(5); 
e.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structures; 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions, base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this article. 
(b)  The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(3.2)) 
Sec. 6-76. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
(a)  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the city engineer a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(b)  Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city engineer shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(3.3)) 
Sec. 6-77. - Variance procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the local permitting authority, or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated hereinabove. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this article shall be submitted to the local permitting authority. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the local permitting authority. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the local permitting authority shall have the right to appeal such decision to the appointed board as established by mayor and council in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the appointed board. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appointed board may appeal such decision to the appropriate court, as provided in O.C.G.A § 5-4-1. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the local permitting authority and appointed board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(8)  Conditions for variances. 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the local permitting authority and appointed board shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the local permitting authority and the appointed board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(6)) 
Secs. 6-78—6-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 6-111. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Studied A-zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the local permitting authority. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the local permitting authority, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the local permitting authority. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(4.1)) 
Sec. 6-112. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA-approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the local permitting authority. If floodway data is not available from the local permitting authority, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the local permitting authority. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(4.2)) 
Sec. 6-113. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under subsection (a) of this section shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average groundwater table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average groundwater table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 6-114; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the local permitting authority using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(4.3)) 
Sec. 6-114. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 6-154 apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the state and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the local permitting authority prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the local permitting authority. Cross sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(4.4)) 
Sec. 6-115. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) of this section; 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the local permitting authority until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the local permitting authority. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(4.5)) 
Sec. 6-116. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The local permitting authority may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the local permitting authority. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(4.6)) 
Secs. 6-117—6-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 6-151. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of principal buildings (residential and non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 6-113, 6-114, and 6-115 have been met; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater: 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; and 
(12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future-condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(5.1); Ord. of 1-28-2019, § 3) 
Sec. 6-152. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
The following provisions, in addition to those in section 6-151, shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 6-113, 6-114 and 6-115 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 6-113, 6-114 and 6-115 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 6-151(5). 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 6-113, 6-114, and 6-115 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 6-113, 6-114, and 6-115 have been met, all substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 6-151(5). 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 6-113, 6-114, and 6-115 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 6-113, 6-114, and 6-115 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 6-151(5). New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 6-113, 6-114, and 6-115 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the administrator. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvements of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 6-113, 6-114, and 6-115 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 6-113, 6-114, and 6-115 have been met, all substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 6-151(5). Substantial improvements that have met all of the requirements of sections 6-113, 6-114, and 6-115 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the administrator. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar nonhabitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with section 6-151(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings—substantial improvements (section 6-152(1)b), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New and substantially improved manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 6-113, 6-114 and 6-115 have been met. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of section 6-151(7). 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(5.2); Ord. of 1-28-2019, §§ 4—6) 
Sec. 6-153. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 6-151(5). 
(b)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 6-151(5). 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(5.3); Ord. of 1-28-2019, § 7) 
Sec. 6-154. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
(a)  For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. 
(b)  If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with section 6-151(5). 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(5.4)) 
Sec. 6-155. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 6-151(5); 
(2)  Substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(5.5)) 
Sec. 6-156. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data. 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required. 
(c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 6-75. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters, and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(f)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the city to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. of 2010(1), § 2(5.6)) 
Chapter 8 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - False alarms. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
Alarm means any signal (audio or visually, recorded or live) transmitted to the city or county, indicating a predetermined condition exists when said alarm is received either: 
(1)  By telephone line to a designated position on an alarm panel; 
(2)  By a private alarm service company relayed to the 911 communications center telephone; 
(3)  By an automated telephone alarm system, playing a recorded message when received on the 911 communications center telephone; or 
(4)  By an audible/visual signal relayed to the 911 communications center by a third party. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system where none of the emergencies for which the alarm system has been installed, have in fact occurred. 
Response means the dispatch of any law enforcement or fire unit to the premises where an alarm has been activated. 
Telephone alarm system means any alarm system which automatically transmits by telephone line a recorded electronic or mechanical signal to a telephone instrument at the 911 communications center. Such system must be totally automated and require no relaying or action by a human being. 
(b)  Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for anyone to activate any robbery, burglary, or fire alarm, except in the event of an actual or attempted burglary, robbery or fire. It shall be unlawful for anyone to notify the city or county of an activated alarm with the knowledge that such activation was apparently caused by an electrical or other malfunction of the system or by lack of adequate maintenance of the alarm system without at the same time notifying the law enforcement of such apparent malfunctions. All alarm systems shall be installed as per NFPA 72 and any reference codes that apply to NFPA 72. 
(c)  Service fees imposed. 
(1)  For each fire response to a false alarm, a report shall be made and forwarded to the fire marshal's office. The fire marshal shall take the following actions: 
a.  For the first false alarm from a premises within a six-month period, the fire marshal shall forward to the property owner or premises lessee a copy of the report, a copy of this chapter, and a statement that continued false alarms will lead to a service fee; 
b.  For the second false alarm from a premises within a 12-month period, the fire marshal shall cause the alarm system to be inspected by a state-licensed alarm low-voltage contractor and to prescribe necessary corrective action; 
c.  For the third false alarm within a 12-month period, the property owner or lessee shall be charged a fee of $50.00; 
d.  For the fourth false alarm and all succeeding alarms within a 12-month period, the property owner or lessee shall be charged a fee up to $1,000.00 per alarm and each additional alarm thereafter; 
e.  For cases which need immediate action with more than ten alarms, the fire marshal shall have the authority to cease a business' activity with a 24-hour notice. 
(2)  The marshal's office or his designee shall be responsible for issuing citations for fees imposed. 
(3)  The false alarm shall not be considered for purposes of assessing a fee if: 
a.  Within ten days from the occurrence of a false alarm, the owner or lessee of the premises can demonstrate to the fire marshal, as applicable, that the alarm system in question has actually been examined by an authorized repair service who certifies in writing that the system is currently in good working order; provided, however, no more than one letter may be submitted by an owner or lessee within a six-month period in order to avoid a fee assessment; 
b.  The false alarm was not caused by employee error at a business location; 
c.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than one such letter may be submitted by an owner or lessee of a premises within a 12-month period in order to avoid a fee assessment as provided by this subsection; 
d.  The alarm was activated by inclement weather. 
Secs. 8-2—8-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-11. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by a county, the governor or the President of the United States. 
Emergency means any natural or manmade event requiring the activation of the Local emergency operations plan. 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation: 
(1)  Firefighting services; 
(2)  Police services (public safety); 
(3)  Medical and health services; 
(4)  Rescue; 
(5)  Engineering; 
(6)  Warning services; 
(7)  Communications; 
(8)  Defense from radiological, chemical, and other special weapons; 
(9)  Evacuation of persons from stricken areas; 
(10)  Emergency welfare services; 
(11)  Emergency transportation; 
(12)  Nuclear power plant protection; 
(13)  Temporary restoration of public service utility services; and 
(14)  Other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Local emergency management director means the person nominated by the local governments and appointed by the state emergency management director to implement the local emergency operations plan. 
State emergency management director means the person appointed by the governor to head the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. of 5-31-2008, § I) 
Sec. 8-12. - Local organization for emergency management. 
In agreement with the governing officials of the cities within the county, there is hereby established the Cherokee County, Georgia, County Emergency Management Agency. The chairperson of the county commissioners has given the authority and control of the county emergency management program to the county sheriff effective August 16, 2005. The county sheriff shall nominate, for appointment by the state emergency management director, a director of the county emergency management agency. Upon appointment, the local emergency management agency director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operations of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the executive officer or governing body. The director of the county emergency management agency shall also serve as the single point of contact for the NIMS/ICS program. When appointed, the local emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of the county on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist local officials in organizing county departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with county and city departments, the county emergency operations plan for emergency functions. Such plan will be in consonance with the state emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities within the county for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  Submit reports as required by governmental officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activities, etc. 
(6)  Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operations center. 
(7)  Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating staff during periods of emergency, and under the supervision of county sheriff. 
(Ord. of 5-31-2008, § II) 
State Law reference— Local emergency management organizations, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 8-13. - Cherokee County emergency management agency. 
(a)  The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing county and city departments. The emergency support functions (ESFs) and department/agency assignments are as follows: 

 
(b)  Heads of county departments listed in subsection (a) of this section are responsible for developing appropriate annexes and standard operating procedures (SOPs) to the emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes and/or SOPs will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Ord. of 5-31-2008, § III) 
Sec. 8-14. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster or any other emergency which may effect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the chairperson of the county commissioners separately, or jointly with the mayors of cities located within the county, or in their absence their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such periods as such emergency or disaster continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, and to obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for emergency management purposes; 
(2)  To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of any emergency or disaster resulting from manmade or natural causes or enemy attack and to direct and coordinate the development of emergency management plans and programs in accordance with the policies and plans set by the federal and state emergency management agencies; 
(3)  To appoint, employ, remove, or provide, with or without compensation, chiefs of services, warning personnel, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and other emergency management workers; 
(4)  To establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers to serve as command posts during an emergency or disaster; 
(5)  Subject to the order of the governor or the chief executive of the political subdivision, to assign and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of the subdivision relating to firefighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical and related services, and to police, transportation, construction, and similar items or services for emergency management purposes, within or outside of the physical limits of the subdivision; 
(6)  In addition to the heretofore stated powers and authorities, to acquire, temporarily or permanently, by purchase, lease, or otherwise, sites required for installation of temporary housing units for disaster victims; and to enter into whatever arrangements, including purchase, of temporary housing units and payment of transportation charges, which are necessary to prepare or equip such sites to utilize the housing units. 
(Ord. of 5-31-2008, § IV) 
State Law reference— Powers of local emergency management agencies, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 8-15. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county or one of the cities located within the county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. Immunity does not apply in cases of willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith. 
(Ord. of 5-31-2008, § V) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-35. 
Secs. 8-16—8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CIVIL EMERGENCIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-21. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting the state or the United States, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the city council shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the mayor any two members of the city councilmembers without regard to or compliance with time consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city council, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, designee, or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city council as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city council, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of this Code, or any portion thereof, where: 
(1)  The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
(2)  Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(3)  Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city council, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees, or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city council, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle, or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and the city. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the city council or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
Sec. 8-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fee means any fee or rate charged by the city or its designee for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. Fees shall not include those fees collected by the city on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the city pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
State of emergency means, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means the period of time that the disaster or emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. The subsequent recovery period shall not exceed six months after the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated, unless extended by official action of the city council. 
Temporary dwelling means any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle, or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations in a particular zoning district. 
Secs. 8-23—8-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 

Sec. 8-44. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew means a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this division from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals, unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, includes those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, and utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the city council, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
State of emergency means, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Ord. of 1999, § 2) 
Sec. 8-45. - Institution of curfew. 
(a)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the city council, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the city council, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the city. 
(b)  All of the city shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Ord. of 1999, § 1) 
Sec. 8-46. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings, or any other public places in all or a delineated part of the city during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Ord. of 1999, § 3) 
Chapter 9 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
ARTICLE I. - LANDSCAPING RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 9-1. - Landscape watering restrictions. 
(a)  Short title. This section may be known and referred to as the "Outdoor Landscape Watering Ordinance." 
(b)  Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(c)  Enforcement. 
(1)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section. 
(2)  The code enforcement officer shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(3)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 2010(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 9-2—9-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CAR WASH RECYCLING 

Sec. 9-11. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to reduce water consumption form commercial car wash facilities by requiring all new conveyor car washes to install operational recycled water systems. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  This article applies to all new conveyor car washes permitted and constructed after February 1, 2017, regardless of the water source. 
(2)  The provisions of this ordinance do not apply to conveyor commercial car washes that were permitted or constructed before February 1, 2017. 
(3)  The provisions of this ordinance do not apply to self-service car washes or in-bay car washes. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2017, § 1) 
Sec. 9-12. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this ordinance, have the meaning defined in this section: 
(1)  In-bay automatic car wash means a commercial car wash where the driver pulls into the bay and parks the car. The vehicle remains stationary while a machine moves back and forth over the vehicle to clean it, instead of the vehicle moving through the tunnel. 
(2)  Conveyor car wash means a commercial car wash where the car moves on a conveyor belt during the wash. The driver of the vehicle can remain in the vehicle or wait outside of the vehicle. 
(3)  Recycled water system means a water system that captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles. 
(4)  Self-service car wash means a commercial car wash where the customers wash their cars themselves with spray wands and brushes. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2017, § 1) 
Sec. 9-13. - Commercial car wash water recycling requirement. 
All new commercial conveyor car washes, permitted and constructed after February 1, 2017, must install operational recycled water systems. A minimum of 50 percent of water utilized will be recycled. 
(Ord. of 1-23-2017, § 1) 
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Fire protection services are provided by the county. 

Sec. 10-1. - County standards adopted. 
The provisions of chapter 28 of the Code of Ordinances, Cherokee County, Georgia as now or hereafter amended are hereby adopted by reference. 
Sec. 10-2. - Tampering with alarm system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously, or mischievously interfere or tamper with any fire alarm box or any of the appliances or apparatus connected therewith, located within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-4) 
Sec. 10-3. - Protection of fire hydrants. 
No person shall plant any vegetation, shrubbery, trees, flowers, or plantings of any kind within a radius of six feet of any fire hydrant within the city limits. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2-5; Ord. of 9-14-1987) 
Chapter 12 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - County business regulations adopted. 
The provisions of chapter 18, article III of the Code of Ordinances, Cherokee County, Georgia, as now or hereafter amended, are hereby adopted by reference. 
Sec. 12-2. - Vehicles for hire regulations adopted. 
The provisions of chapter 66 of the Code of Ordinances, Cherokee County, Georgia, as now or hereafter amended, are hereby adopted by reference. 
Sec. 12-3. - Collection of delinquent taxes, fees or other revenue; interest. 
(a)  For the collection of delinquent taxes, a fi. fa. shall be issued by the city clerk and executed by the sheriff's department under the procedure provided by the laws of the state governing execution of process from the superior court, or by use of any other available process and remedies. 
(b)  A lien shall exist against all property on which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment day of January 1 of each year, which shall be superior to all other liens except that it shall have equal dignity with those for federal, state or county taxes. 
(c)  The amount due on all delinquent fi. fas. issued under subsection (a) of this section, as well as any interest or penalty thereon, shall be listed as a part of and in addition to the annual ad valorem tax bill. 
(d)  Any license, privilege or permit granted by the city shall be revoked by the city clerk for the failure to pay any money due the city for taxes, fees, penalties, interests, fines or other revenue, within three calendar-months and ten days after any payment is due; provided that any person aggrieved by the order may, within ten days thereof, appeal to the council, who, after a hearing thereon, may approve or modify the order or restore the license privilege or permit by adopting a motion to that effect but only upon finding that the city clerk's action was not factually or legally correct. 
(e)  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all fi. fas. issued hereunder shall earn interest at the maximum rate allowed by state law, and no penalty shall be charged except in lieu of interest. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-13) 
Sec. 12-4. - Exemption requirement. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this chapter shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 80 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-30) 
Sec. 12-5. - Tax on financial institutions. 
(a)  Financial institutions business license tax. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, and state building and loan associations at the rate of one-fourth of one percent (0.25 percent) of the gross receipts of said institutions. The term "gross receipts" shall means gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this section, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $200.00 per year. 
(b)  Due date; filing of return. 
(1)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. 
(2)  The due date of taxes levied by this section shall be April 2 of each year. 
(Ord. of 3-8-1999, § 2-5-44) 
Secs. 12-6—12-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 

Sec. 12-29. - Tax rate. 
An annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city is hereby levied. The millage rate therefor shall be established each year by ordinance. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-11) 
Sec. 12-30. - Tax due and payable. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes due the city shall be billed and paid in one payment. 
(b)  Ad valorem tax bills, as adjusted to conform to the tax digest of the county, shall be payable on or before December 20. In the event of adjustment by the state revenue commissioner, the city shall, within a reasonable time thereafter as may be determined by resolution of the council after receipt from the county of the adjustment information, refund any overpayments or bill for any underpayments. 
(Code 1986, § 2-5-12) 
Secs. 12-31—12-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL/MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Excise tax on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 12-49. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Guestroom means a room occupied or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy by one or more occupants. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied or is intended or designed for occupancy by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. The term does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention building, or other building in which human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including but not limited to the owner or proprietor of such premises, a lessee, sublessee, mortgagor in possession or licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding such date. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or other group or combination acting as a unit, excepting the United States of America and the state, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax provided for in this article. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
Sec. 12-50. - Administration and enforcement of article; records. 
(a)  Authorized agents. Authorized agents of the city shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Additional rules and regulations. Authorized agents of the city shall have the power and the authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state or the constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of taxes under this article. 
(c)  Required records. Every operator renting guestrooms in the city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city may require. 
(d)  Examination of records. Authorized officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the city may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and other facilities of any person renting guestrooms and any person liable for the tax, and may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return is made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports. In administration of the tax, the city may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in his or their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city when required by the city, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the dates of occupancy, and such other information as the city may require. 
(f)  Confidentiality of information. Any person having an administrative duty under this article shall not make known, in any manner whatsoever, the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses or expenditure, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit any return or copy thereof, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof, to be seen or examined by any person not having administrative duty under this article. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, and interest and penalties. 
Sec. 12-51. - Levy; rate. 
There shall be paid a tax of six percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the city. 
Sec. 12-52. - Persons liable for tax; extinguishment of liability. 
Every person occupying a guestroom in a hotel in this city is liable for the tax imposed by this article. His liability is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to the city, except that a receipt is sufficient to relieve the occupant from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers, provided such receipt is from an operator maintaining a place of business in the city or from an operator who is authorized by the city under such rules and regulations prescribed, to collect the tax and who is, for the purpose of this article, regarded as an operator maintaining a place of business in the city. 
Sec. 12-53. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed under this article upon: 
(1)  A permanent resident. 
(2)  A corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, or for more than one of such purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
(3)  An occupant whose rent will be paid directly by warrant on funds of the federal, state or city government, or any other government within the state or the United States. 
Sec. 12-54. - Registration of operators; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the city shall immediately register with the city, on a form provided by the city. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business, the location of the place of business, and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as authorized agents of the city may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in the case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner; and in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or someone specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. The city shall, within ten days after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of such registrant. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable, and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificate shall be nonassignable, and shall be returned to the city upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. 
Sec. 12-55. - Collection by operator. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in the city as provided in section 12-52, and renting guestrooms in the city, shall collect the tax imposed by this article at the time of collecting the rent from the occupant, and on demand shall give the occupant a receipt therefor. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The city council shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax. 
Sec. 12-56. - Unlawful advertising regarding tax. 
It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any guest, directly or indirectly, that the tax imposed by this article or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rental of the guestroom, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
Sec. 12-57. - Returns; payment. 
(a)  Due date for payment. The tax imposed by this article shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of occupancy of any hotel in the city. All amounts of such taxes collected by an operator are due and payable to the city between the first and 20th day of the calendar month next following the calendar month or fiscal period for which the return is being filed. 
(b)  Filing of return. Each operator or person liable for payment of the tax shall file a return monthly with the city in such form as the city may prescribe. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, rents exempt from tax, taxable rent, amount of tax collected, or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as required by the city. 
(d)  Collection allowance. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction for submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due. 
(e)  Extension of time for filing return or paying tax. For good cause, the city may extend, for a period not to exceed one month, the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension of time may be granted. Any person to whom an extension of time has been granted, who makes a return and pays the tax within the period of extension, shall pay, in addition to the tax, interest on the amount thereof at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, for the period of such extension, to the time of making the return and payment. 
Sec. 12-58. - Deficiency or overpayment; late payment. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax. If the city is not satisfied with the returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within its possession or that may come into its possession. One or more than one deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one or more than one period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency or late payment. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the first day after the close of the prior monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the city may offset overpayment for a period against underpayments for another period, against penalties, and against the interest on underpayments. However, if it is determined by the city that overpayment of occupancy tax was made by the occupants to the operator, all overpayments of tax will be made to the city without any operator's compensation for collection of the overpayment. 
(d)  Penalty for delinquent payment. When a return or remittance is delinquent, the operator shall not be allowed the applicable compensation for accounting for and remitting the tax, and he must remit the total amount due. The total amount due is the gross tax, without deduction for the operator's compensation, plus interest, plus a specific penalty, to be added to the tax, of ten percent of the gross tax due per month, from the first day after the close of each monthly period for which the tax is due until the date of payment. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade tax. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provision of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto in addition to interest and penalties due to late payment. 
(f)  Service of notices. Authorized agents of the city shall give to the operator written notice of its determination under this section. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If served by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States post office. 
(g)  Time limit for service of notice of deficiency determination. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the fifth day of the calendar month for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires later. 
Sec. 12-59. - Collection of unpaid tax; refunds. 
(a)  Determination of tax when no return made. If any person fails to make a return as required by this article, the city shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return, and shall be based upon any information which is in the possession of city, or which may come into its possession. Upon the basis of this estimate, the city shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the city, adding to the sum, per month, from the day after the close of each monthly period for which tax is due until the date of payment, a penalty equal to ten percent thereof. One or more than one determination may be made for one or for more than one period. 
(b)  Notice to persons holding credits or property of delinquent taxpayer. If any person is delinquent in the payment of the amount required to be paid by him, or if a determination has been made against him which remains unpaid, the city may, not later than three years after the payment becomes delinquent, give notice thereof by registered mail to all persons in the city who have in their possession or under their control any credits or other personal property belonging to the delinquent person, or owing any debts to the delinquent person. After receiving the notice, the persons so notified may not transfer or dispose of any such credits, other personal property or debts in their possession or under their control at the time they receive the notice until the city consents to a transfer or disposition or until 20 days elapse after the receipt of the notice. All persons so notified shall, within five days after receipt of the notice, advise the city of all such credits, other personal property or debts in their possession, under their control or owing by them. 
(c)  Action to collect tax. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city may bring an action in the courts of this state or any other state, or of the United States, in the name of the city, to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest, court fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(d)  Duty of successors of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assignees shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such obligation until the former owner produces a receipt from the city showing that the city has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(e)  Failure of successor of operator to withhold tax. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the tax from the purchase price as required by this section, he becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him, to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after purchase, the city shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the city of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the city to mail the notice will release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold the tax from the purchase price as provided in this section. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out his business, or at the time the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
(f)  Refunds. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be refunded, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the city council within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be audited and shall be made on forms provided by the city. If the claim is approved by the city council, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts that are due and payable from the person from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance executors. 
Sec. 12-60. - Failure to register or furnish return or other data; making false return or report. 
Any operator or other person who: 
(1)  Fails to register as required in this article; 
(2)  Fails to furnish any return required to be made; 
(3)  Fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city; or 
(4)  Renders a false or fraudulent return; 
is guilty of an offense. Any person required to make, render, sign, or verify any report under this article who makes any false or fraudulent report with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due under this article is guilty of an offense. 
Secs. 12-61—12-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OCCUPATION TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Occupation tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 12-79. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Location of office shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The term "practitioner of profession or occupation" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license, fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. The term "regulatory fee" may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-22) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 12-80. - Application of provisions to prior ordinances. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided: 
(1)  For the issuing and enforcing the execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances; 
(2)  That imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax; 
(3)  For failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance; or 
(4)  Failure to comply with any other provisions hereof; 
shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-40) 
Sec. 12-81. - Requirement for public hearing. 
After January 1, 1996, the council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-42) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6. 
Sec. 12-82. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city manager, city clerk and authorized law enforcement to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city manager, city clerk and authorized law enforcement, and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city as often as it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted hereunder. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-41) 
Sec. 12-83. - Required for dealings in the city. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or to any authorized law enforcement officer upon request. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-21) 
Sec. 12-84. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee in the amount established by the city shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is as follows: 
Building and construction contractors, $5.00 for each subcontractor and worker  Carnivals  Taxicab and limousine operators  Tattoo artists  Stables  Shooting galleries and firearm ranges  Scrap metal processors  Pawnbrokers  Food service establishments  Dealers in precious metals  Firearms dealers  Peddlers  Parking lots  Nursing and personal care homes  Newspaper vending boxes  Modeling agencies  Massage parlors  Landfills  Auto and motorcycle racing  Boardinghouses  Businesses which provide appearance bonds  Boxing and wrestling promoters  Hotels and motels  Hypnotists  Handwriting analysts  Health clubs, gyms and spas  Fortunetellers  Garbage collectors  Escort services  Burglar and fire alarm installers  Locksmiths 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-23) 
State Law reference— Regulatory fee, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9; administrative fee, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10. 
Sec. 12-85. - Tax levied. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner as follows: 
One to three employees, per employee ..... $30.00 
Four to eight employees, per employee ..... 25.00 
Nine to 99 employees, per employee ..... 15.00 
Plus administrative fee ..... 25.00 
(b)  In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees from commencing date to the end of the calendar year. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-24; Ord. of 4-2-2012(2)) 
State Law reference— Levy of occupation tax, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7. 
Sec. 12-86. - Imposed on businesses with no state location. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-25) 
State Law reference— Levy of tax on persons with no location in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7. 
Sec. 12-87. - Dominant business lines to be identified on business registrations. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-26) 
Sec. 12-88. - Multiple business locations. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-27) 
Sec. 12-89. - Election of tax. 
(a)  Practitioners of professions, as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(c)(18), shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees. 
(2)  A fee of $50.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the number of employees of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 of each year. 
(b)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-28) 
State Law reference— Taxation of professions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(e). 
Sec. 12-90. - Tax due and payable. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year, unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by January 30 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession or trade, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a $25.00 penalty imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be guilty of an offense. 
(b)  In addition to the remedies in subsection (a) of this section, an authorized law enforcement officer may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-29) 
Sec. 12-91. - Evidence of state registration required. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state, pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43, shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-31) 
Sec. 12-92. - Evidence of qualification. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-32) 
Sec. 12-93. - Businesses not covered by this article; charitable exemption. 
(a)  The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A title 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.). 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marking associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 32-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(b)  No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from such tax or registration on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 80 percent or more of the entire proceeds from such business is devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-30, 2-5-34) 
Sec. 12-94. - Special provisions for insurance companies. 
(a)  Insurer license fees. There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $15.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by subsection (b) of this section, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $15.00. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(b)  License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits, or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional annual license fee of $10.00 per location. 
(c)  Insurance agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc. not otherwise licensed. There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by subsection (a) of this section, in the amount of $30.00 for each such location within the city. 
(d)  Gross premium tax imposed on life insurers. There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this subsection, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this subsection is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Gross premium tax, all other insurers. There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this subsection, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(f)  Due date for license fees. License fees imposed in subsections (a) through (c) of this section shall be due and payable on February 15 of each year. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-35) 
Sec. 12-95. - Multiple locations or lines of businesses. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-36) 
Sec. 12-96. - Books and records inspections. 
In any case the city council, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The city shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city and, upon demand of the city clerk, city manager, or authorized law enforcement officer, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of ten percent will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-37) 
Sec. 12-97. - Revocation for failure to pay. 
(a)  Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be ipso facto revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with provisions found in section 12-96. In the case of those practitioners, when the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(b)  Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in the city after the registration for said business has been revoked as specified in section 12-94 shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage of the amount due or a flat fee fine. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-38) 
Sec. 12-98. - Lien for delinquent taxes. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the city clerk or city manager, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the person liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent. The lien shall cover the property in the city or the person liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances and charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and dated from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by a law enforcement officer authorized by the city upon the property of the defendant located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and charter of said city and the law of the state. 
(Ord. of 1995, § 2-5-39) 
Secs. 12-99—12-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND CANVASSING 

Sec. 12-147. - Registration. 
(a)  Requirement. Any person peddling, soliciting, or canvassing within the city shall be required to register and obtain an identification card as provided by this article. 
(b)  Fee; identification card. Any person desiring to peddle, solicit, or canvass within the city shall pay to the city clerk or his designated representative a registration fee as fixed from time to time by the council and shall make application with the chief of police for an identification card which shall show payment of the registration fee and the days that the registrant has registered to peddle, solicit, or canvass within the city. 
(c)  Exhibition of registration card. Each registrant shall at all times while in the city have upon his person the registration card and shall exhibit the same when requested to do so by any law enforcement officer or by any municipal authority and by any person being solicited. Possession of this registration card shall not in any way represent an endorsement or approval of any products or project by the city. 
(d)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, canvass or solicit after sundown. It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle within the fire zone of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, canvass, or solicit without having registered with the city clerk in accordance with this article or to peddle, solicit, or canvass without having on his person and in his possession an identification card issued in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-2-1, 7-2-4) 
Secs. 12-148—12-168. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BILLIARD AND POOL ROOMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local regulation of billiards, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq.; municipal authority to enact additional regulations, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-6. 

Sec. 12-169. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billiard room means any public place where the game of billiards is permitted to be played and for which a charge is made for use of equipment. 
Billiards means any of the several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic edge of cushions, with balls which are impelled by a cue, and includes all forms of the game known as "carom billiards," "pocket billiards" (formerly called pool) and "English billiards." 
(Code 1986, § 7-3-2; Ord. of 2-11-1981) 
Sec. 12-170. - Unlawful hours. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or manager of any billiard or pool room in the city to permit such establishment to be open for business after 11:00 p.m. each night, or before 9:00 a.m. each morning. It shall be unlawful for any billiard room to operate billiard tables on Sunday. 
(Code 1986, § 7-3-4; Ord. of 2-11-1981) 
Sec. 12-171. - Minors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having charge of or control of any pool room or billiard room open to the public to admit into such room any minor, whether for the purpose of playing billiards or pool or not. 
(Code 1986, § 7-3-5; Ord. of 2-11-1981) 
Sec. 12-172. - Clear view of premises required. 
The owner, operator, or manager of any billiard or pool room in the city shall not permit to be used on such premises any screens, shades, partitions, or other devices of like character which shall have the effect of obstructing the view through the windows or doors of the place where the billiard or pool tables are kept. In addition thereto, any billiard room shall have a minimum of 30 square feet of unobstructed window space on the entrance side of the establishment. 
(Code 1986, § 7-3-6; Ord. of 2-11-1981) 
Sec. 12-173. - Gambling unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or manager of any billiard or pool room open for public use to allow gambling of any kind to occur upon such premises. 
(Code 1986, § 7-3-7; Ord. of 2-11-1981) 
Sec. 12-174. - No intoxicating liquors. 
No person shall be allowed upon the premises who is under the influence of intoxicants or who is using intoxicants, and it shall be the duty of the operator of the establishment to have removed from the premises of the billiard establishment any person intoxicated or using intoxicants in any manner. 
(Code 1986, § 7-3-8; Ord. of 2-11-1981) 
Sec. 12-175. - Requirements prior to licensing. 
All requirements of this article or any amendments enacted thereafter shall be met in total prior to the issuance of any license for the operation of a billiard room. 
(Code 1986, § 7-3-9; Ord. of 2-11-1981) 
Sec. 12-176. - Violations. 
Upon the violation or alleged violation of any of the provisions of this article, the council shall have the right to suspend temporarily any license granted under this article and such temporary suspension shall be in full force and effect until the next regularly scheduled council meeting of the city. At such regularly scheduled council meeting, the licensee shall be given an opportunity to show cause why his license should not be permanently revoked for violation of the provisions of this article. At such hearing, if it is determined that the provisions of this article have been violated, the council, by a majority vote, may suspend permanently the license granted herein, and the same shall be revoked for cause. 
(Code 1986, § 7-3-10; Ord. of 2-11-1981) 
Sec. 12-177. - Posting. 
Every licensee shall post in the establishment licensed herein a full copy of this article in a conspicuous place for the information of his patrons. 
(Code 1986, § 7-3-11; Ord. of 2-11-1981) 
Sec. 12-178. - Club and other billiard rooms not affected by article provisions. 
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to include billiard tables or billiard rooms operated by private industrial concerns, Young Men's Christian Associations, religious orders, charitable institutions, state, county or city institutions, fraternal orders, or bona fide clubs using such tables for members or employees only. 
(Code 1986, § 7-3-12; Ord. of 2-11-1981) 
Chapter 14 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Nuisance conditions. 
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal, or rodent upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in a sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The pollution of public water; 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway, or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including, without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple family complexes, such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(8)  All walls, trees, and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities; 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators, and the like, unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed; 
(11)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; 
(12)  The accumulation and presence of litter, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42, on any property adjoining or abutting any public street or way or other public property within the city limits, and visible therefrom; 
(13)  The maintenance and presence of any junked or wrecked vehicle, or any inoperative vehicle, or any motor vehicle for which current state registration and licensing has not been obtained, on any property adjoining or abutting any public street or way or other public property within the city limits, and visible therefrom. For the purposes of this subsection, a vehicle is inoperative if it is incapable of movement by its own power, or if it remains in place for a period of more than seven days, and in neither case is within a carport or parking way or driveway; 
(14)  The carrying on of any land use not authorized by the land use classification and zoning ordinance of the county; and 
(15)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-1; Ord. of 5-5-1986) 
Secs. 14-2—14-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT ABATEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisance abatement generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-20. - Complaint procedure. 
(a)  Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the sheriff's department or the county marshal. The sheriff's department or county marshal shall investigate and may place the complaint on the appropriate county court docket for a hearing on the basis of the investigation. The court, after a ten-day notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon and upon finding that a nuisance does exist shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control, or tenant in possession stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(b)  Animal control officers, license and building inspectors shall and may also receive complaints, investigate the same, and place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as the sheriff's department or the county marshal. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-3) 
Sec. 14-21. - Failure to abate. 
(a)  In any case where: 
(1)  The owner, agent, or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified; 
(2)  The owner, agent, or tenant cannot be served with notice; or 
(3)  The nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the judge of the court, that it must be immediately abated; 
the judge of the court may issue an order to the city authorizing the city to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition and to take whatever action is deemed necessary to demolish, remove or otherwise abate such condition, and the expense thereof shall be charged against the owner of the property in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for city taxes. 
(b)  Execution shall issue for such costs as for city taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of the execution shall thereafter be the same as for city taxes. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-4) 
Sec. 14-22. - Nuisance per se, exception; summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one, and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-5) 
Sec. 14-23. - Offense. 
It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent, or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 9-2-6) 
Secs. 14-24—14-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-49. - Definitions. 
Terms not defined herein shall have its meaning as defined in the zoning chapter, building codes and any other applicable portion of this Code. Whenever the term "dwelling unit," "dwelling room," "property," "building," "roominghouse," "rooming unit," or "story" is stated in this article, they shall be construed as though it were followed by the term "or any part thereof." The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the person authorized by the city council and charged with the responsibility for administering the provisions of this article. This term is also synonymous with the term "public officer." 
Authorized litter receptacle means a litter storage and/or collection receptacle as defined or required by this article. 
Building means any structure upon a property, presently or formerly used or intended to be used in whole or in part, for residential uses or the purpose of commerce, trade, manufacture, business, government, worship, education, office, medical, storage, or any other purpose. 
Business building means any structure, whether public or private, that is adapted for occupancy, for transaction of business, for rendering professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale, or storage of goods, wares, or merchandise, or for the performance of work or labor, including hotels, apartment buildings, roominghouses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theatres, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories, and all outhouses, sheds, barns, and other structures on property used for business purposes. 
Certified mail means that class or type of mail designated by the U.S. Postal Service as "certified mail" and also includes the class or type of mail designated as "registered mail" and "registered mail, return receipt requested." 
Collector car means a car or light truck more than 20 years old that is in good operating and cosmetic condition or in the process of being restored to good condition. 
Commercial, industrial, or heavy vehicle or equipment means any of the following: 
(1)  Any vehicle with more than two axles; 
(2)  Any vehicle exceeding a gross vehicle weight rating of 20,000 pounds; or 
(3)  Any bulldozer, tractor/backhoe, or similar heavy construction equipment. 
This definition shall not apply to school buses as that term is defined herein. 
Compost pile means plant debris, soil, and other putrescible wastes stacked so as to encourage rapid decomposition for the ultimate use as plant fertilizer. 
Demolish means to destroy a building and to remove all debris and waste materials from the lot on which the building stood. 
Deteriorate means to decay, decompose, degenerate, disintegrate, or weaken to an extent that an object's intended use is compromised. 
Deterioration or deteriorated means the fact or process of decay or degeneration which has progressed to the point where it has resulted in or will soon result in making an object or mechanism unsafe, unsanitary, inoperable, unusable, or unsuitable for its intended use, including but not limited to the advanced stage of rot, rust, mold, vermin ingestion, infestation, or destruction. 
Drop box means a container for the disposal of litter of a capacity of at least ten cubic yards and not more than 30 cubic yards. 
Dumpster means a bulk container used for the collection of garbage, refuse, trash, and litter. The use of this term is generic and does not refer to a bulk container manufactured by a specific manufacturer. 
Dumpster monitor means the administrator or his designee. 
Dwelling means a building that contains one or more dwelling units intended or designed to be used, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be occupied for living purposes, including single-family, duplex and multifamily residential buildings, roominghouses and boardinghouses, fraternities, sororities, dormitories, manufactured homes, and industrialized homes, but not including hotels and motels. 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, designed for the exclusive use of a family maintaining a household. 
Emergency means a condition which is a violation of this article and which constitutes an imminent danger calling for immediate action in order to avoid death, injury, or illness to a human or the destruction or severe damaging of real or personal property. 
Exterior property means open space on the property and on any adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such property. 
Extermination means the control or eradication of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods. 
Family means an individual, or two or more persons related by genetics, adoption, or marriage, or a group of up to two persons who are not related by genetics, adoption or marriage. 
Garbage means any spoiled or discarded animal or vegetative material resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food for humans or animals, as well as other organic waste material subject to rapid decomposition, including trash to which such material has adhered. 
Garbage bag means a plastic, or other similar nonporous materials, bag, or sack designed specifically to contain garbage or household trash in a secure, airtight manner. Such bags shall also include suitable means of closure to ensure that the material contained therein is not exposed to the outside air. 
Graffiti means images or letters scratched, scrawled, painted, or marked in any manner on property, which is unsightly and unwanted by the property's owner or occupant. 
Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet, sampler, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copy of any matter of literature, political or nonpolitical, for profit or nonprofit, for commercial or noncommercial purposes not included in the definition of the term "newspaper"; except the term "handbill" shall not include any notice or any document relating to legal proceedings, court proceedings, or action of any government agency including the city. 
Hazardous means a condition which is a violation of this article and which the administrator has determined to be likely to result in the death, injury or illness of a human or in severe damage to real or personal property. 
Hazardous refuse means materials, such as poison, acids, caustics, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter, and explosives. 
Heavy vehicle or equipment. See Commercial, industrial or heavy vehicles or equipment. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans, or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Infestation means the presence of insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests within or contiguous to a structure or property. 
Inoperable vehicle means any automobile, vehicle, trailer of any type, or any parts thereof, which is an inoperative or junk condition by reason of its having been wrecked, dismantled, abandoned, discarded, or which does not have a valid license plate where required and it is incapable of movement by its own power, or it remains in place for a period of more than seven days. 
Inspector means any employee of the city whose responsibilities include enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
Intended means: 
(1)  The purpose, operation, and/or arrangement for which something has been designed or built; or 
(2)  The purpose, operation, and/or arrangement for which something is currently safely and legally being used. 
Interested party means: 
(1)  The owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the city courthouse or by the clerk of the court. 
Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of an easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected, and persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Junk vehicle means any vehicle which either does not have lawfully affixed on it an unexpired license plate or tax stamp, or which vehicle is wrecked, dismantled, or partially dismantled to the extent it may not be lawfully driven on the public roads. 
Junkyard includes land on which two or more junk vehicles are parked, standing, or allowed to remain. 
Litter means all garbage, refuse, waste materials, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals, or any other discarded, used, or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Litter receptacle means a container for the disposal of litter of not more than 60-gallon capacity; provided that garbage containers or other waste containers serving single-family or multifamily residences are not included in this definition. 
Medium-duty truck or equipment means a truck or trailer with a gross vehicle weight rating between 10,000 and 20,000 pounds, or equipment of the nature of a standard farm or landscaping tractor or skid steer or inloader. 
Multiple dwelling means any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units. 
Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation, any newspaper duly entered with the U.S. Postal Service, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and, in addition thereto, means and includes any periodical or magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year and sold or distributed to the public. 
Nonresidential means any structure or portion of a structure occupied or intended to be occupied, in whole or in part, for a use other than a dwelling, home, residing place, living space or sleeping space for one or more human beings, either permanently or transiently. 
Occupant means any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, eating, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling, building, or structure, or part thereof, in which dwelling units are let. 
Owner means any person, firm, corporation, or entity who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Has legal title to any property, dwelling, dwelling unit, building, or structure, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Has charge, care, or control of any property, dwelling, dwelling unit, building, or structure, as owner or agent of the owner, prime tenant, real estate agent, mortgagor, bank, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article to the same extent as the owner. 
Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center, or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Property means any lot, unit or parcel of land inclusive of any dwelling, building, structure or improvements located thereon. This also includes vacant lots that do not have any dwelling, building, structure, or improvement located thereon. 
Public record means deeds, mortgages, and other instruments of record relating to land titles. 
Rat control means block sanitation, distribution of rat poison, and/or the setting of rat traps or such other methods recommended by a licensed pest control operator, as may be approved to control the rat, rodent, and/or vermin population. 
Rat harborage means any condition under which rats, rodents, and/or vermin may find shelter or protection, and shall include any construction or condition which permits the entrances of rats into any business building. 
Ratproofing means collectively a form of ratproofing, rodentproofing, and verminproofing which will prevent the ingress of rats into business buildings through the exterior walls, ground, or first floors, basements, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings, foundations, and other places that may be reached and entered by rats climbing, burrowing, or otherwise. The material to be used for ratproofing shall include cement concrete, brick masonry laid in cement concrete mortar, sheet metal, 24- or 26-gauge wire cloth of not less than 19-gauge having a mesh not larger than three-eighths of an inch. All material for ratproofing shall be of such strength and thickness as to be impervious to rat gnawing. Windows and other openings for light or ventilation that may be reached or entered by rats shall be covered with wire cloth screen incorporated in a metal frame conforming to the above gauge and dimensions. All exterior doors shall be protected against the gnawing of rats by the use of materials prescribed above. When closed, all exterior doors shall have a maximum clearance between doors, door sills, and jambs of not exceeding three-eighths of an inch. 
Recreational vehicle means any vehicular-type unit designed primarily as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use that either has its own motorized power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The term "recreational vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, travel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers, and motor homes. This shall also include boats, personal watercraft, wave runners, all-terrain vehicles, trailers of any type, or school buses. Recreational vehicles are not permitted to have attachments such as stairs, steps, handrails, porches, decks, and the like. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, residue from street cleaning and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Regular mail means that class of mail designated by the U.S. Postal Service as "first class" mail. The term "regular mail" shall also include post cards and postal cards. 
Residential means any structure or portion of a structure occupied or intended to be occupied, in whole or in part, for a dwelling, home, residing place, living space or sleeping space for one or more human beings, either permanently or transiently. 
Residential district or residential property or residential-zoned property means property approved for residential use according to the zoning chapter. 
Responsible person means an owner, operator, and/or a person designated in this article as being responsible for meeting the standards of this article. 
Road or street shall be mutually inclusive, and shall likewise be deemed to include any alley, lane, court, and other thoroughfare, however described or designated. 
Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms within a dwelling used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
Roominghouse means any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units in which space is let by the owner or occupant to three or more persons who are not related by genetics, adoption, or marriage. 
Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage. The term "rubbish" includes the residue from the burning of wood, coal, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches or trunks, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust or other similar materials. 
Safe means a condition that is not likely to do harm to humans or to real or personal property. 
Sanitary means the absence of a condition that is conducive to the spreading of disease or illness, or conducive to harboring insects, rodents, or other pests. 
Scavenge or scavenging means any unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
School bus means any school bus owned or operated by a public school system, or any school bus owned or operated by any private educational facility doing business in the city. 
Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearings, walls, columns, beams, or gutters, except repair or replacement of supporting members. 
Structure means anything constructed or placed upon a property which is supported by the ground or which is supported by any other structure, including, but not limited to, garages, sheds, and racks, but not including a currently operable licensed vehicle, trailer, or recreational vehicle. 
Trash means waste materials and items which are not in good repair or are discarded and which are of little or no value, including, but not limited to, plaster, paper, wrappings, plant cuttings, household furnishings, used or salvaged building materials, packing and clothing, appliances, equipment, machinery or parts thereof, scrap metal, scrap lumber, masonry blocks, disassembled vehicle parts, or dismantled portions of vehicles. 
Unfit for human habitation means the designation of dwellings or dwelling units as so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin-infested that such creates a serious hazard to the health or safety or which lack illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or the public. The term "unfit for human habitation" specifically includes, but is not limited to, dwellings or dwelling units that lack basic sanitation, such as connection to public water and sewer or septic necessary for supply of potable water. 
Unsafe means a condition that is reasonably likely to do harm to humans or property if not corrected or stopped. 
Vehicle means any means of conveyance, whether self-propelled or not, that is designed to travel on the ground or on water or in the air, including, but not limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers, recreational vehicles, boats, airplanes, train-cars, and any means of conveyance which are designed to be pulled by motorized vehicles upon the roadway, such as boat trailers, wagons, balers, motorcycle trailers, auto-transport trailers, and any other trailer designed to haul specific items attached to vehicles on the roadway. 
Vermin means rodents, birds, and insects that are destructive to real or personal property or injurious to health. 
Weeds means vegetative growth including, but not limited to, kudzu, poison ivy, jimsonweed, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, plants of obnoxious odors, or other similar unsightly vegetative growths. The term "weeds" does not include cultivated flowers, fruits and vegetables, and gardens. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass, clippings, shrubs, and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
Sec. 14-50. - Penalties. 
(a)  Authorized agents of the city are hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all the provisions of this article. Failure to comply with any requirement of this article shall constitute a violation subject to citation and penalty, as provided herein. 
(b)  Upon the first violation of any of the provisions of this article, a warning citation shall be issued. Upon the second violation of any of the provisions of this article, a citation shall be issued and the individual shall go before the court. For purposes of sentencing, the first citation before the court shall be deemed the first offense; however, consideration may be given by the court to the previous warning citation. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to preclude the city from pursuing any and all other remedies provided by law, including, but not limited to, pursuit of a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or other appropriate legal action, or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate the unlawful use or activity. 
(d)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. Additionally, each day of noncompliance with the terms of this article is considered a separate offense. 
Sec. 14-51. - Findings and determination of necessity. 
(a)  The city council finds that there are a number of residential and nonresidential properties in the city that are poorly maintained and neglected by their owners. These properties adversely affect citizens who own or occupy nearby buildings and dwellings by lowering property values and rental values. 
(b)  These adverse effects also increase the incidence of vandalism and fire. The city council finds that the elimination and prevention of these conditions is necessary and is in the best interest of the city and its citizens. 
(c)  Additionally, the city council finds that in the city there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation, or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use, and are inimical to the welfare and are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. The city council finds that it is necessary and in the best interest of the city and its citizens to utilize the authority granted to the city by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17 to repair, close or demolish unfit dwellings or structures. 
Sec. 14-52. - Scope and applicability. 
This article shall apply to all commercial, office, industrial, multifamily and single-family residential structures and properties, and any person owning, occupying, managing or controlling any such property in the city. This article shall constitute the minimum requirements and standards for existing structures and property, as well as any future construction. 
(1)  Every property (including unimproved lots) and every building, dwelling, or structure in the city, whether occupied or vacant, shall conform to the requirements of this article, regardless of when such building, dwelling, or structure may have been constructed, altered, or repaired. When a building, dwelling or structure is vacant, the owner, immediately upon vacating, shall ensure the interior has been cleaned of trash, rubbish, and debris, secure the building, dwelling or structure in a closed and inaccessible manner until occupied, and continue maintaining the exterior of the property in compliance with this article. 
(2)  The provisions of this article shall not be mandatory for existing buildings, dwellings or structures designated by the state or the city as historic buildings when such buildings, dwellings or structures are judged by the administrator to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety, and welfare. 
(3)  Where parking in open areas is used jointly for the benefit of two or more owners or tenants, the responsibility for maintaining these parking areas in compliance with this article shall be the joint and several responsibility of the owners and tenants. 
Secs. 14-53—14-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 14-80. - Property maintenance required. 
All property regulated by this article, whether occupied or unoccupied, shall meet or exceed the standards of this article. All property shall be maintained in a manner so as to ensure that the property is not unsafe, uninhabitable, or a nuisance. 
Sec. 14-81. - Unoccupied structure security. 
A dwelling, building or structure that is not physically occupied by a person, or any such part thereof, shall be kept secured by the owner against unauthorized entry and water damage. 
Sec. 14-82. - Swimming pools. 
Stagnant water in swimming pools conducive to the breeding or harboring of mosquitoes or other insects shall not be permitted or maintained on any property. All swimming pools shall have a five-foot continuous barrier around the pool in accordance with the requirements of appendix G of the International Residential Code, as adopted by the county, for single-family residential pools and the county board of health swimming pool regulations for community and commercial pools, all as amended from time to time. 
Sec. 14-83. - Outdoor storage. 
There shall not be maintained on a property for more than 15-calendar days any used or damaged lumber, junk, trash, garbage, debris, scrap metal, concrete, sand, asphalt, cans, bottles, tires, salvage materials, boxes, containers, bins, and abandoned, discarded, inoperative. or unusable furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, sinks, toilets, cabinets, or other household fixtures, yard waste, or equipment stored so as to be visible from any public road or from an adjoining property, unless appropriate permits have been obtained from the city. Nothing herein shall preclude the storage of stacked firewood for use on the property. This section shall not apply to construction sites for which all applicable permits have been issued by the city and such storage is compliant with all other applicable rules and regulations. 
Sec. 14-84. - Trees and shrubs. 
No tree, shrub or other vegetation shall block safe vision on a sidewalk, drive, or road. No dead tree, dead parts thereof, fallen trees, or fallen parts thereof that threaten adjacent structures, people, property, or public roads shall be permitted on any property regulated by this article. 
Sec. 14-85. - Grass, underbrush or weeds. 
No grass, underbrush, or weeds shall be permitted or allowed to grow to a height greater than 12 inches above ground level; however, this does not apply to property lawfully used for agricultural purposes, city-designated green space of residentially zoned property, or areas of residentially zoned property existing in their natural, undisturbed state. 
Sec. 14-86. - Health and sanitation. 
All exterior property shall be sanitary and free of trash and garbage. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the composting of vegetative materials is allowed provided that it does not create odors, health hazards or nuisances. 
Sec. 14-87. - Graffiti. 
Any person who causes graffiti to appear on property shall be subject to penalty under this article, as well as all other applicable criminal laws. The owner of the property on which the graffiti appears shall be responsible for removal of the graffiti, whether by cleaning the graffiti off, painting over the graffiti, or otherwise. Failure by the property owner to remove the graffiti within 30 days of written notice to do so by the administrator shall constitute a violation of this article by the property owner. 
Sec. 14-88. - Tenant responsibility for maintenance. 
A tenant, in addition to the owner, shall be responsible for complying with the standards of this article on that portion of the property controlled exclusively by the tenant. 
Sec. 14-89. - Owner responsibility for maintenance. 
The owner of a property shall be responsible for complying with the standards set forth in this article, except as otherwise stated in this article. 
Sec. 14-90. - Maintenance of real property after casualty damage. 
All buildings or structures not being presently and physically occupied, which have been rendered hazardous by fire or other acts of nature, shall immediately be made secure by the owner and/or operator to prevent unauthorized access to the hazardous property. If the property remains physically unoccupied and hazardous to public health and safety 90 days after the casualty damage occurred, the owner and/or operator shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of this article, including division 7 of this article for abatement of a nuisance. 
Secs. 14-91—14-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RAT INFESTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 14-109. - Business buildings. 
(a)  The owners of all business buildings shall have such buildings ratproofed, and kept ratproofed in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Whenever conditions inside or under any such business buildings, or on any property on which a business building is located, provide harborage for rats such that the administrator deems it necessary that such harborage be eliminated, the administrator shall order the owner to take such steps toward the elimination of the harborage as the administrator, in his discretion, deems essential. Failure to obey an order of the administrator after a given date for compliance shall constitute a violation of the article. 
Sec. 14-110. - Duties of occupants of business buildings. 
The occupants in charge of any business buildings or property on which a business building is located in the city shall at all times comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Store all garbage in a ratproof metal container or other type approved by the administrator, pending removal of such garbage; 
(2)  Keep business buildings and property on which a business building is located free of trash, debris, rubbish, salvage or similar materials which provide nesting places and harborage for rats; and 
(3)  Maintain such buildings and/or property on which a business building is located in a rat-free condition by pursuing a program of rat control. 
Sec. 14-111. - Duties of owners and occupants of dwellings. 
Owners and occupants of dwellings in the city shall at all times comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Every owner of a dwelling containing two dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public area of the dwelling and the property on which the dwelling is located. 
(2)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain in a condition not conducive to rat infestation those parts of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and property thereof that he occupies and controls. 
(3)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store and dispose of all his rubbish in a clean, sanitary and safe manner. 
(4)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store and dispose of all his garbage, refuse, and any other organic waste which might provide food for insects and/or rodents in a clean, sanitary and safe manner. All garbage cans and refuse containers shall be ratproofed, insectproofed, watertight, structurally strong to withstand handling stress, easily filled, emptied and cleaned; shall be provided with tightfitting covers or similar closures; and shall be maintained at all times in a clean sanitary condition. Plastic bags may be used as garbage and refuse container liners, but shall not be used without the container for on-site storage of garbage or refuse. Other types of containers meeting the requirements of this article may be specifically approved by the administrator. 
(5)  Bulk storage containers which are used for the storage of garbage, refuse, and/or other putrescible waste shall be placed on concrete platforms which are constructed to minimize spillage onto the adjacent areas. 
(6)  The total capacity of all provided garbage and/or refuse cans and bulk storage containers shall be sufficient to meet the needs of the occupants of the dwelling. 
(7)  Every owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall supply facilities or refuse containers for the sanitary and safe storage and/or disposal of rubbish and garbage. In the case of single- or two-family dwellings, it shall be the responsibility of each occupant to furnish such facilities or refuse containers. 
(8)  Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of rats on the property, and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(9)  No occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall accumulate rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other materials in such a manner that may provide a rat harborage in or about any dwelling or dwelling unit. Stored materials, if any, must be stacked neatly at least 18 inches above the ground. 
(10)  No owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other materials in such a manner that may provide a rat harborage in or about the shared or public areas of a dwelling or its property. Materials stored by the owner shall be stacked neatly at least 18 inches above the ground. 
(11)  No owner or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store, place, or allow to accumulate any materials which may serve as food for rats in a site accessible to rats. 
(12)  Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied fixtures and facilities therein in a clean, sanitary, and operable condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
Sec. 14-112. - Ratproofing—Maintenance. 
(a)  The occupants of all ratproofed buildings are required to maintain the property in a ratproofed condition and to repair all breaks that may occur in the ratproofing, unless such breaks develop as the result of natural deterioration of the building. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company, plumber, or other person to remove the ratproofing from any building for any purpose and fail to restore same in satisfactory condition or to make any new openings that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats. 
Sec. 14-113. - Same—Performance of ratproofing. 
The owner of any business building in complying with the provisions hereof relative to ratproofing, and the occupant of any business building in pursuing a program of rat control, may do the work himself or may engage a contractor to do the work, or may have the work performed by the employment of such labor and the purchase of material as may be necessary. 
Sec. 14-114. - Same—Inspections. 
The administrator is hereby authorized to make inspection of all buildings and property in the city for the purpose of determining the conditions as to ratproofing and rat infestation where there is reasonable cause for the administrator to believe that rat, rodent, or vermin infestation or harborage exists. All owners and occupants of buildings and property shall permit such inspection when requested by the administrator. 
Secs. 14-115—14-141. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - UNFIT DWELLINGS OR BUILDINGS 

Sec. 14-142. - Dwellings and building defects deemed unfit for human habitation. 
Any dwelling or building which has any or all of the following defects shall be deemed unfit for human habitation: 
(1)  Any dwelling or building whose walls or vertical members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumbline suspended from the top edge of such member shall fall outside of a distance from the edge equal to one-third of the thickness of such members. 
(2)  Any dwelling or building which has support member or members which have deteriorated to such an extent as to be unable to safely support the applied loads or which have 40 percent damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting, enclosed, or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Any dwelling or building which has improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(4)  Any dwelling or building which has been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of the occupants. 
(5)  Any dwelling or building which has parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure persons or property. 
(6)  Any dwelling or building which does not have an unobstructed means of egress leading to an open space at ground level, whether such unobstructed egress is at ground level or via steps to ground level. 
(7)  Any dwelling or building which has wiring that is dangerous due to lack of insulation, improper fuses, inadequate grounding, lack of capacity of wires or other dangerous condition. 
(8)  Any dwelling or building which does not have an installed kitchen sink in each dwelling unit properly connected to the hot and cold water supply pipes and the sewer system, and which connection is actively providing a potable water supply. 
(9)  Any dwelling or building which does not have an installed tub or shower and lavatory properly connected to hot and cold water supply pipes and sewer system, and which connection is actively providing a potable water supply. 
(10)  Any dwelling or building which does not have a flush-type water closet located in a room affording privacy and properly connected to the water supply pipes and sewer system, and which connection is actively receiving a water supply so as to allow a toilet to be flushed. 
(11)  Any dwelling or building which does not have installed and operational (i.e., electricity running through the lines) electric lighting facilities installed and functioning in accordance with the minimum requirements of the National Electrical Code as adopted by the county. 
Sec. 14-143. - Renting an unfit dwelling or building. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or any party in interest of a dwelling or of a building to rent or offer for rent any dwelling or building or rooming unit which is unfit for human habitation for any reason set out in this division, due to the dilapidation, leaking water lines, leaking gas lines, electrical defects increasing hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions rendering such dwelling or building or rooming unit unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous. Any person shall have 72 hours or three business days (in the case of office closure) after execution of said lease to rescind it by providing said notice in writing to the landlord that the dwelling or building has been discovered to be unfit as described in this division. 
Sec. 14-144. - Persons occupying dwellings or buildings. 
The number of persons occupying any dwelling unit, notwithstanding the definition of the term "dwelling unit" set forth in this article, shall be limited by the following additional requirements: The total of all habitable rooms in a dwelling or building shall be such as to provide at least 390 square feet of total building square footage (as determined and maintained in the records of the county) per each adult occupant thereof. Any floorspace under a ceiling less than five feet high shall not be counted. 
Sec. 14-145. - Roominghouses. 
No person shall operate a roominghouse or shall let to another for occupancy any room, unless such roominghouse or room complies with the following requirements: 
(1)  Each roominghouse and room shall be in compliance with the minimum standards set forth in section 14-142(1) through (7) and (11). 
(2)  Each roominghouse shall be equipped with at least one flush water-closet, one lavatory, an installed tub or shower for each five persons or fraction thereof within the roominghouse, including members of the family if they are to share the use of the facilities. All such facilities shall be properly connected to the water supply and sewer system as required by section 14-142. 
(3)  Each flush water-closet, lavatory, tub, or shower required in this section, shall be located within the roominghouse, in a room which: 
a.  Affords privacy. 
b.  Is accessible by a common hall without going outside the roominghouse. 
c.  Is accessible by a common hall without going through sleeping quarters of others. 
d.  Is not more than one story removed from the room of an occupant intended to share the facilities. 
Secs. 14-146—14-173. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 14-174. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  Deposit—In public places. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any road, sidewalk, or other public place within the city, except in litter receptacles or in official city transfer stations. 
(b)  Same—On private property. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of the private property may maintain private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be reasonably prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements onto any road, sidewalk, or other public place or onto any other private property. 
(c)  Same—In parks. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city, except in litter receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be reasonably prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements onto any part of the park or onto any street or other public place. Where litter receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away and properly disposed of elsewhere, as provided in this division. 
(d)  Same—In water. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay, or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
(e)  Throwing from vehicles. No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any road, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property within the city. 
(f)  Litter from vehicle. No person shall drive or move any vehicle within the city, unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to reasonably prevent any load, contents, or litter from being blown or deposited upon any road or other public place or private property. Any person owning or operating a vehicle from which any litter has fallen or escaped, which would constitute an obstruction or damage to a vehicle or otherwise endanger travel upon such public road, shall immediately cause such public road to be cleaned of all such litter or other objects and shall pay any cost thereof. 
(g)  Litter from construction sites. 
(1)  No individual or person in charge of a construction site in the city shall cause or allow any litter from the site to be deposited by the elements or otherwise upon any adjacent public or private property. During such time as the construction site is not actually being used, all litter shall be stored or deposited in containers or receptacles in such a manner as to prevent the litter from being deposited upon adjacent property by the elements or otherwise. 
(2)  No person in charge of any construction site in the city shall cause or allow any mud, dirt, sticky substance, road surfacing materials, or other litter from said construction site to be deposited by any vehicles, the wheels or tires of any vehicles, the elements, or otherwise upon any road, alley, or other public place; provided however, if a construction site and adjacent public roads and sidewalks are maintained under a cleanup program approved by the city, then this subsection shall not apply. 
(h)  Sweeping into gutters. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, stormwater drain, street, or other public place within the city, an accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying any real property within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of or adjacent to said property free of litter. 
(i)  Dropping litter or handbills from aircraft. No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill, or any other object. 
(j)  Handbills; prohibited placement. 
(1)  Depositing in public. No person shall throw, deposit, or post any handbill in or upon any sidewalk, road, or other public place within the city; provided, however, this section shall not prohibit the posting of commercial or noncommercial bills on posting boards designated for such purposes; and provided further, this section shall not apply to political signs or handbills as permitted. 
(2)  Placing on vehicles. No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle without the permission of the owner of such vehicle; provided, however, that it is not unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute a handbill without charge to the receiver thereof. 
(3)  Deposit on vacant property. No person shall throw, deposit, post, or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private property which is temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(4)  Distribution on posted property. No person shall throw, deposit, post, or distribute any handbill upon any private property if requested by the owner or person in control of such property to refrain from doing so if there is placed on the property in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner, that the occupants of the property do not desire to have any such handbills left upon such property, in case of inhabited private property; unless requested by anyone upon such property not to do so, such person may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private property, in such a manner as to prevent such handbill from being flown or drifted about such property or sidewalks, roads or other public places; and except that mailboxes may not be used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations; provided further that this division shall not be construed to permit solicitation. 
Sec. 14-175. - Property owner's duty to keep property litter-free. 
The owner, occupant, or person in control of any private property or public place shall at all times maintain the property free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit: 
(1)  The storage of litter in private litter receptacles for collection of disposal; 
(2)  The maintenance of compost piles contained within a physical structure; and 
(3)  The temporary storage of building, construction, landscaping, and similar materials, except as prohibited expressly by this division. 
Sec. 14-176. - Placement in litter receptacles. 
Persons placing litter in litter receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to reasonably prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any road, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
Sec. 14-177. - Placement in dumpsters and drop boxes; dumpster standards. 
(a)  Persons placing litter in dumpsters or drop boxes shall do so in such a manner as to prevent the litter from being carried or deposited by the elements onto any road, sidewalk, or other public property or onto any other private property. 
(b)  No person shall deposit litter in any dumpster or drop box designated for the sole use by a business or multifamily residence, unless that person or individual is licensed to do so by that business or multifamily residence. 
(c)  All dumpsters are to be equipped with a lid to secure the contents and to prevent the entrance of dogs or other animals. 
(d)  Lids shall remain closed at all times, unless other means of protection are provided to prevent the contents from being scattered by animals or the elements. 
Sec. 14-178. - Newspapers. 
Hand-delivered newspapers shall be placed only on private property. 
Sec. 14-179. - Responsibility to procure and place receptacles. 
Any person owning or operating any property, on which litter receptacles are required by this division, shall procure, place, and maintain such receptacles on the property at his own expense, in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
Sec. 14-180. - Authorized litter receptacles—Minimum standards. 
Litter receptacles procured and placed in public places as required by this division shall meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  General specifications. 
a.  The body of each litter receptacle shall be constructed of a minimum of 24-gauge galvanized steel or other material of equivalent strength that will, with normal wear and tear, reasonably resist corrosion and acts of vandalism. 
b.  All outside edges of each litter receptacle shall be rounded. 
c.  Openings in covered litter receptacles shall be readily identifiable and readily accessible for the deposit of litter. 
d.  Construction and general configuration of litter receptacles shall be in conformance with all pertinent laws, ordinances, resolutions, or regulations pertaining to fire, safety, public health or welfare. 
(2)  Color and marking. No commercial advertisement shall be placed on any litter receptacle. However, the person owning any receptacle may place a single line on the receptacles identifying the ownership, and a single credit line designating any donor of the litter receptacle other than the owner may also be placed on the receptacle, provided that the lettering does not exceed four inches in height. 
(3)  Maintenance. Compliance with the minimum standards set forth in this section shall include the proper upkeep, maintenance repair, or replacement of litter receptacles sufficient to permit such receptacles to serve the functions for which they were designed and to prevent the appearance of such receptacles from becoming unsightly. 
(4)  Animal-proofing receptacles. All litter receptacles are to be braced or supported in such a manner that dogs or other animals cannot enter or tip or tilt the same or empty any of the contents thereof, and each such receptacle shall have overlapping close-fitting lids designed in such a way as to remain closed when not in actual use. 
Sec. 14-181. - Same—Placement required. 
(a)  Litter receptacles meeting the standards established by this division shall be placed in the following public and private places in the city. 
(1)  Parks; 
(2)  Campgrounds; 
(3)  Trailer park facilities for transient habitation; 
(4)  Drive-in restaurants; 
(5)  Gasoline service stations; 
(6)  Shopping centers; 
(7)  Grocery store parking lots; 
(8)  Outdoor parking lots, other than those specifically designated in this section, having a capacity of more than 50 automobiles; 
(9)  Fairgrounds; 
(10)  School grounds; 
(11)  Racetracks; 
(12)  Sporting event sites; 
(13)  Sites for carnivals, festivals, circuses, shows or events of any kind to which the public is invited. 
(b)  Litter receptacles need only be placed in the places designated in subsection (a) of this section during times that such places are open to the public. 
(c)  Placement of litter receptacles shall be in conformance with laws, ordinances, resolutions, and regulations pertaining to fire, safety, public health, or welfare. 
Sec. 14-182. - Same—Number required. 
The minimum number of receptacles meeting the standards established by this division and required in public places listed are as follows: 
(1)  Parks, campgrounds and trailer park facilities for transient habitation: one receptacle at each public restroom facility, and one receptacle at each established trailhead giving access by foot, motorcycle, bicycle, or similar trail for excursion or exploration out or away from the central activity area. This requirement does not apply to private walking or riding trails in a subdivision or elsewhere that are not open to the general public. 
(2)  Gasoline service stations: one receptacle per gasoline pump island. 
(3)  Drive-in restaurants, tavern parking lots, shopping center, grocery store parking lots and outdoor parking lots having a capacity of 25 automobiles: one receptacle for the first 25 spaces, plus one additional receptacle for each additional 100 parking spaces. 
(4)  School grounds: one receptacle at each school ground bus loading zone. 
(5)  Sporting event sites: one litter receptacle at each entrance to the sporting event. Sporting event sites with seating capacity of more than 100 spectators: one litter receptacle at each seating area, plus an additional receptacle in each seating area for each additional 500 seats. 
(6)  Fairgrounds and sites for carnivals, festivals, circuses, shows, or events of any kind to which the public is invited: one receptacle at the entrance of each ride, and one receptacle at each end of walkthrough exhibit buildings. 
Sec. 14-183. - Litter receptacles; prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall damage, deface, abuse or misuse any litter receptacle now owned by such person, to interfere with its proper function, or to detract from its proper appearance. 
(b)  No person shall deposit leaves, clippings, pruning or gardening refuse in any litter receptacle not owned by such person. 
(c)  No person shall deposit household garbage in any litter receptacle that is not owned by that person. This subsection shall not be construed to mean that wastes of food consumed on the property at any public place may not be deposited in litter receptacles on that property. 
Sec. 14-184. - Presumption of responsibility. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this division, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this division. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (a) of this section, a person is presumed to be responsible for illegally depositing litter by the discovery of one or more pieces of litter within such illegally deposited litter, which are identifiable to such person by means of a name, address or other mark of identification contained on such items. 
Secs. 14-185—14-206. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - STANDARDS FOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 14-207. - Unregistered and unlicensed motor vehicles. 
No person shall park or permit any other person to park any motor vehicle, except a motor vehicle parked within a carport or enclosed building, on any property in a residential district, if the vehicle: 
(1)  Is unregistered; 
(2)  Has expired registration; or 
(3)  Does not have a lawful license plate or lawful temporary tag, which plate or tag is currently registered to that vehicle displayed thereon. 
Notwithstanding the above, up to three collector cars may be stored outside if under fitted car covers of neutral color and in good condition, with no rips or holes. Such collector cars must not be parked within 20 feet of the front or rear property line or within ten feet of the side property lines. 
Sec. 14-208. - Inoperable vehicles. 
(a)  No owner or occupant of any property shall park any inoperable vehicle or permit any other person to park any inoperable vehicle on the owner's or occupant's property for more than 14 days, unless the inoperable vehicle is parked within a carport or enclosed structure. This section does not apply to property for which the zoning code permits the storage of junk vehicles outside an enclosed building in connection with some commercial enterprise. 
(b)  No person shall park any inoperable vehicle upon any public or private road or other public property. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, up to three collector cars may be stored outside on the owner's or occupant's property, if concealed under fitted car covers of neutral color and in good condition, with no rips or holes. Such collector cars must not be parked within 20 feet of the front or rear property line or within ten feet of the side property lines. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to an inoperable vehicle that is used for instruction at an educational institution licensed under state school laws. 
Sec. 14-209. - Abandonment prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to abandon any motor vehicle as provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. Any motor vehicle abandoned within the city shall be disposed of by the proper authorities, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 14-210. - Junk vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain and/or keep any junk vehicle on any property adjoining or abutting any public or private road, street or other public or private property within the unincorporated portions of the city, and visible from such public or private road, street, way, or other public or private property, unless the junk vehicle is parked within a carport or enclosed structure. This section does not apply to property for which the zoning code permits the storage of junk vehicles outside an enclosed building in connection with some commercial enterprise. 
(b)  No person shall park a junk vehicle upon any private or public road or other public property. 
Sec. 14-211. - Major overhaul. 
(a)  No person shall perform a major overhaul of any vehicle or permit any other person to perform a major overhaul of any vehicle on property in a residential zone, unless: 
(1)  The person performing the overhaul is the occupant of the property; 
(2)  The person performing the overhaul is the owner of the vehicle; and 
(3)  The work is done inside a garage or enclosed structure, or if the major overhaul of such a vehicle on property in a residential zone must be completed outside of a garage or enclosed structure, it must be completed within 30 days. 
(b)  No person shall perform a major overhaul of any vehicle or permit any other person to perform a major overhaul of any vehicle on any property in a business, commercial, or industrial district unless the overhaul is performed at an approved licensed and properly zoned establishment. 
Sec. 14-212. - Recreational vehicles and school buses. 
(a)  In residential districts, recreational vehicles and school buses may be parked or stored in an enclosed garage or carport. It shall be unlawful to park recreational vehicles and school buses in the front yard of any residential district, unless such recreational vehicle and/or school bus is parked more than 20 feet from the road right-of-way; and provided that no more than a total of two recreational vehicles or two school buses, or a combination of one recreational vehicle and one school bus may be parked in the front yard. 
(b)  Additionally, in residential districts, recreational vehicles and school buses may be parked to the rear and sides of a dwelling. 
(c)  No such permitted recreational vehicle shall have attachments such as stairs, steps, handrails, porches, decks and the like. 
(d)  In residential districts, no more than a total of two recreational vehicles or two school buses, or a combination of one recreational vehicle and one school bus may be parked on a vacant and/or unimproved lot, and in such case, any such permitted vehicle may only be parked if a minimum of 20 feet from the road right-of-way. 
Sec. 14-213. - Storage of medium-duty trucks and equipment. 
(a)  On any residentially zoned property, no more than one each of the following may be stored other than in an approved enclosed garage or carport: 
(1)  A medium-duty truck; 
(2)  A medium-duty trailer; and/or 
(3)  A medium-duty piece of equipment. 
Such medium-duty items must remain more than 20 feet from the public road right-of-way. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to farm equipment reasonably needed and exclusively used for agricultural operations on the property on which it is stored. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to medium-duty trucks and equipment that are being used in construction of structures or dwellings so long as such medium-duty trucks and equipment are not stored on the property for more than 15 days. 
Sec. 14-214. - Commercial, industrial or heavy vehicles and equipment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park, or cause to be parked, any commercial, industrial, or heavy vehicles or equipment on residentially zoned property. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any vehicle that is temporarily parked or left standing clearly for the purpose of loading or unloading, provided the vision of traffic is not obstructed. For the purposes of this subsection, a reasonable amount of time shall be allowed for loading and unloading, the amount of which is to be determined according to the nature and extent of the loading and unloading operation. 
(c)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any vehicle or equipment that is reasonably needed and exclusively used for an approved agricultural purpose on the parcel on which it is stored, provided that such vehicles and equipment are not within 20 feet of a public road right-of-way. 
(d)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to a single roll-off bin or a single dumpster when used in conjunction with the construction, remodeling or demolition of a structure. Such use, however, must be temporary and closely correspond to the construction, remodeling or demolition schedule. Such use shall be expressly for the collection of construction debris, and at no time shall sanitary waste be dumped into said container. 
(e)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to school buses, provided that the parking of school buses is done in accordance with section 14-212. 
Sec. 14-215. - Mobile and manufactured houses. 
Mobile homes, manufactured homes, rail cars, tractor trailers, and the like shall not be utilized as an accessory storage structure, regardless of the zoning district on which it is located. 
Secs. 14-216—14-238. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE PROPERTY 

Sec. 14-239. - Application and interest. 
This division is intended to provide additional enforcement authority to the city in accordance with the abatement of nuisance provisions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. The remedies provided in this division are in addition to those remedies available to the city for violations under section 14-50. It is intended that violations of this division shall be addressed according to section 14-50 as a general matter, and that only those properties that fail to come into compliance and which constitute a nuisance as is defined by state law and under the terms of this division will require resorting to the enforcement remedies provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 9.1, 11-4-2008) 
Sec. 14-240. - Purpose and authority. 
(a)  The city intends that this division shall comport with, and be susceptible to enforcement under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. Pursuant thereto, it is found and declared that there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and are inimical to the welfare and are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this city, and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. It is further found and declared that where there is in existence a condition or use of property which renders adjacent property unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent property unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. 
(b)  Such dwellings, buildings, and property may be deemed unfit due to the following reasons: 
(1)  Dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(3)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
(4)  Properties that have an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, and/or other unsanitary or unsafe conditions which create a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity; 
(5)  Other conditions resulting in a violation of this division which renders such dwellings, buildings, or property unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous, or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city; or 
(6)  Vacant, dilapidated dwellings or buildings in which drug crimes are being committed. 
Sec. 14-241. - Complaint relating to unfit dwellings or structures. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the administrator by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling or building is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the administrator shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
(b)  If the administrator's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property: 
(1)  Is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Is vacant and being used in connection with commission of drug crimes; or 
(3)  Constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as the result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
the administrator may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause a summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(c)  The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the actions sought by the administrator to abate the nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the court at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days, nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 9.3, 11-4-2008) 
Sec. 14-242. - Service of complaints. 
Complaints issued by the administrator pursuant to this division shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the administrator shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in the city once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(3)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the city at the time of filing the complaint in the municipal court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(4)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 9.4, 11-4-2008) 
Sec. 14-243. - Order of the court. 
(a)  If, after notice and hearing as provided in section 14-242, the court determines that the dwelling or building under consideration is unfit for human habitation, or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use; or is vacant, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall issue an order that states in writing its findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing, an order as follows: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation, and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. 
(b)  The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in the Real Estate Appraiser Classification and Regulation Act (O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq.), qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alternation, or improvement of the structure shall be the costs necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations enforced in the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2008-O-004, § 9.5, 11-4-2008) 
Sec. 14-244. - Failure to comply with order of the court. 
If the owner fails to comply with an order of the court to repair, alter, improve, remove, close, or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the administrator may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The administrator shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the dwelling, building, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this dwelling, building, or structure is prohibited and unlawful." 
Sec. 14-245. - Salvage of reusable materials. 
If the administrator has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any money shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid, according to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a)(6). The administrator and city council are relieved of any and all liability resulting from, or occasioned by, the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials consistent with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a)(6). 
Sec. 14-246. - Lien on property. 
(a)  The cost of repairing, altering, improving, removing, closing or demolishing the dwelling, building or structure incurred by the administrator in accordance with exercising his authority as described in this division, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Said lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required in this division. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(b)  Upon final determination of costs, fees and expenses incurred in accordance with this section, the administrator shall transmit to the city treasurer a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the administrator shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition or closure. It shall be the duty of city treasurer to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including, specifically, O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq.); provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure, shall not apply. The city treasurer shall remit the amount collected to the city council. 
(c)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the city treasurer of the final determination of costs. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this section. 
(d)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this division shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this section, together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the city and the city treasurer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(e)  This section is intended to adopt and be consistent with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(b). 
Sec. 14-247. - Waiver of lien. 
The city may waive and release any lien imposed on property if the owner of such property enters into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
Sec. 14-248. - Appellate review. 
Review of the municipal court's order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building or structure shall be by direct appeal to the city superior court, according to O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
Sec. 14-249. - Summary proceedings. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise when, upon a majority vote of the city council, the city determines that a nuisance exists and the repair, alteration, improvement, removal, closing or demolition will not exceed $1,000.00. 
Chapter 16 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Littering. 
(a)  Litter is garbage, refuse, waste paper, rubbish, and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  No person shall deposit any litter within the city, except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(c)  No person, while the operator of or passenger in a vehicle, shall deposit litter upon any public place or private premises. 
(d)  No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city, unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents, or litter from being blown or deposited upon any public place or private premises. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any public place or private premises, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter of any kind, which could or may cause hazardous conditions. 
(Code 1986, § 9-1-8) 
State Law reference— Littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43. 
Sec. 16-2. - Swimming pools; nuisances and hazards prohibited. 
(a)  The term "swimming pool" is hereby defined in this section as a receptacle for water or an artificial pool of water having a depth of any point of more than two feet, intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and including all appurtenant equipment. Such swimming pools may be either private or public. 
(b)  No swimming pool shall be so operated or maintained as to create a nuisance, hazard, eyesore, or otherwise to result in a substantial adverse affect on the neighboring properties, or to be in any other way detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
Secs. 16-3—16-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS 

Sec. 16-23. - Posting signs on poles without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display: 
(1)  In or upon any bridge; 
(2)  Upon any telegraph, telephone, or electric company's pole; or 
(3)  Upon any public property or the private property of any person; 
any bills, signs or advertisements without the consent in writing of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 9-1-5) 
Secs. 16-24—16-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 16-50. - Weapons; discharge in city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm, including pistol, rifle, and shotgun, or to shoot an airgun, including BB gun and pellet gun, within the city, except by law enforcement officers in the line of duty, and the military when on drill or parade, or at a funeral in honor of the dead; provided, however, it shall not be unlawful for any person to shoot a BB gun upon private property, if that person shall have first obtained the express permission of the owner of that property to do so. 
(Code 1986, § 9-1-6) 
Secs. 16-51—16-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-74. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby a reasonable person would be placed in fear of safety for life or limb; 
(2)  Place the property of another in serious danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Use fighting words directed toward another who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; 
(4)  Violently interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; or 
(5)  Congregate with others to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear the way when ordered by lawful authority to do so. 
(Code 1986, § 9-1-1) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 16-75. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be on the streets of the city or in any public place in an intoxicated condition. 
(Code 1986, § 9-1-2) 
State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 16-76. - Public consumption of alcohol. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any malt beverages, wine, or distilled spirits in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way or place in the city, or within any public building therein. 
(Code 1986, § 9-1-3) 
Sec. 16-77. - Noise; creating unnecessary noise. 
(a)  The creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise within the limits of the city is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare, is prohibited. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises and noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, while not in motion except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or, if in motion, only as a danger signal; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound or the sounding of that device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Musical instruments. The playing of any radio, phonograph, or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity, except this section shall not apply to schools of music between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  Voices. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Noisy vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in any manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding or rattling, or other noise. 
(5)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon the request of proper city authority. 
(6)  Exhausts. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any stationary steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle, or motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Construction work. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building in any residential district or section, the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on week days except in cases of urgent necessity, and then only with a permit from the city, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 60 days while the emergency continues. 
(8)  On streets of institutions requiring quiet. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while the same are in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof. 
(9)  Loudspeakers on vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes. 
(c)  None of the foregoing terms or prohibitions shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged upon necessary public business; 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets, or highways, by or on behalf of the city, county, or state during the night season, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform that work during the day; nor shall the same apply to work performed by public utility companies under like conditions and circumstances, or when there is urgent necessity therefor; and 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(d)  The prohibitions shall not be applicable to any parade, celebration, or performance for which a written permit has been obtained prior thereto from the city clerk. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to use, maintain or operate loudspeakers, sound trucks, amplifiers, or other mechanical or electrical devices for increasing the volume of sound, upon the streets, sidewalks, parks, or other public places of the city; provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the United States of America, the state, the county, nor the city, nor to public agencies. 
(Code 1986, § 9-1-4) 
Sec. 16-78. - Domestic affray. 
(a)  A domestic affray is the fighting of two or more persons on private property: 
(1)  To the disturbance of the public tranquility; or 
(2)  In the presence of minors. 
(b)  A person who commits the offense of domestic affray shall be guilty of an offense. 
Secs. 16-79—16-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOITERING, SOLICITING, AND PANHANDLING 

Sec. 16-100. - Violations. 
(a)  Upon the first violation of any of the provisions of this division, a warning citation shall be issued. 
(b)  Upon the second violation of any of the provisions of this division, a citation shall be issued and the individual will go before the municipal court. 
(c)  For sentencing purposes, the first citation before the municipal court shall be deemed the first offense; however, consideration may be given by the court to the previous warning citation. 
Sec. 16-101. - Loitering. 
(a)  A person may not loiter, loaf, wander, stand, or remain idle, either alone or in consort, with others in a public place in a manner so as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians; 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk, or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any public street, public highway, public sidewalk, or any other public place or building, all of which prevents free and uninterrupted ingress, egress, and regress. 
(b)  No person shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt or impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic after having been directed to clear such public way or place by any authorized law enforcement official. 
(c)  A person shall not sit, lie, or sleep in or upon any public highway, alley, sidewalk, or crosswalk or other place open for pedestrian travel, except when necessitated by temporary physical disability of such person. 
Sec. 16-102. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a minor, as defined herein, to loiter in any public place between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, subject to the definitions and exceptions contained in this section. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall be construed as follows: 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Loiter means to stand idly about or linger aimlessly. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, driveways, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartments, malls, parking lots, office buildings, playgrounds, vacant lots, and transportation facilities. 
Youth means any person under the age of 18 years and is synonymous with the terms "juvenile" or "minor" for the purposes of this section. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to minors under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Individuals emancipated pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 19-7-1 et seq., or similar statutes of another state; 
(2)  Individuals accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other adult having legal care or custody of said minor; 
(3)  Upon a specific, legitimate errand at the direction of a parent or guardian having the care or custody of a minor, while such minor is actually and directly carrying out such errand; 
(4)  Going directly to or coming directly from a place of public amusement, school function, or place of employment, with the knowledge and consent of the minor's parent or guardian; 
(5)  Individuals present in a public place because of an emergency, as defined herein, while actually dealing with or responding to such emergency. 
Sec. 16-103. - Panhandling. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
Aggressive panhandling means and includes: 
(1)  Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person or his vehicle in the course of the solicitation without the person's consent; 
(2)  Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is intended to, or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm, or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(3)  Continuing to solicit within five feet of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the solicitation is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(4)  Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued, pursuant to ordinance, shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(5)  Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or words intended to or reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(6)  Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(7)  Aggressive panhandling shall constitute an aggravated misdemeanor. 
Public area means an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including but not limited to alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, play grounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets that are open to the general public. 
Solicit or panhandle means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value, including employment, business, or contributions or to request the sale of goods or services. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication. 
(b)  Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to aggressively panhandle or solicit funds for the sole benefit of the solicitor within any public area or: 
(1)  In any public transportation vehicle, or public transportation station or stop; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check cashing business or within 15 feet of any automated teller machine during the hours of operation of such bank, automated teller machine, or check cashing business without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facilities; provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(3)  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; or 
(4)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, whether in exchange for services or for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle. 
Unauthorized solicitation shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Applicability. This section regulates the time, place, and manner of solicitations and shall not apply to any persons exercising their clearly established constitutional right to picket, protest, or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. This section does not apply to solicitations by permitted charitable organizations as provided for in section 16-104. 
Sec. 16-104. - Charitable solicitations. 
(a)  Permit required. Any person soliciting funds on the roads and highways shall have a permit issued by the city council. 
(b)  Eligibility. Permits shall only be issued to those persons or organizations which are charitable organizations registered in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5, or charitable organizations exempt from such registration in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9. 
(c)  Application. Applicants for charitable solicitation permits shall make application to the city and shall provide the following information at the time of their application: 
(1)  Safety plans detailing safety measures to be utilized during solicitation; 
(2)  The site of any proposed solicitation and traffic plans which indicate that their proposed solicitation will not hinder the free and orderly flow of traffic on the roads and highways in the city; 
(3)  List of names, dates of birth, next of kin, emergency contact numbers, and address of each individual who will participate in the proposed solicitation; 
(4)  Insurance information on the individuals and the organization which will participate in the solicitation; 
(5)  A statement under oath that the organization is a charitable organization and that all proceeds raised will be used for the benefit of citizens to include those of the city; and 
(6)  The dates and times proposed for the solicitation. 
(d)  Issuance. Permits shall only be issued by the city if it finds that the applicant is qualified and that the proposed solicitation shall not: 
(1)  Pose a risk to the health and safety of the citizens of the city; 
(2)  Pose a risk to the health and safety of the people participating in the solicitation; and 
(3)  Hinder the free flow of traffic on the roads and highways of the city. 
(e)  No one under the age of 18 years without adult supervision shall solicit funds in any way from the right-of-way or driving surface of any road or highway in the city. 
(f)  Solicitation permits must be available for inspection at the site of the solicitation upon the request of any law enforcement officer. 
(g)  All persons participating in the solicitation of funds shall wear orange safety vests at all times while located in the roads and rights-of-way of the city. 
(h)  Permits are valid for seven calendar days. 
(i)  Variances to time limits for charitable solicitation permits shall only be granted by a majority vote of the city council after a showing by the applicant of the necessity of a variance. 
Sec. 16-105. - Urban camping. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
Camp means residing in or using a public street, sidewalk, or park for private primary living accommodations, such as: 
(1)  Erecting tents or other temporary structures or objects providing shelter; 
(2)  Sleeping in a single place for any prolonged period of time; 
(3)  Regularly cooking or preparing meals; or 
(4)  Other similar activities. 
Public park includes all public parks, public playgrounds, public plazas, attractions, and monuments. 
Public street includes all public streets and highways, public sidewalks, public benches, public parking lots, and medians. 
Storing personal property means leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for any substantial prolonged length of time. The term shall not include parking a bicycle or other mode of transportation. 
(b)  Public parks. It shall be unlawful to camp or to store personal property in any park, as defined in section (a) of this section, owned by the city, unless specifically authorized. 
(c)  Public streets. It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, to store personal property, to sit or to lie down on any public street, as defined in section (a) of this section. 
(d)  Other public property; blocking ingress and egress. It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, to store personal property, to sit or to lie down on any public property so as to interfere with ingress or egress from buildings. 
(e)  Warning. No person may be arrested for violating this section until he has received an oral or written warning to cease the unlawful conduct. If the violator fails to comply with the warning issued, he is subject to arrest. 
(f)  Exceptions. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons in wheelchairs sitting on sidewalks; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing sidewalk cafes; 
(5)  Persons lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals, concerts, fireworks, or other special events; 
(6)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
(7)  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; 
(9)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line awaiting entry to any building, including shelters, or awaiting social services, such as provision of meals; or 
(10)  Children sleeping while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
Chapter 18 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF FACILITIES 

Sec. 18-19. - Denial of permits for violations. 
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be denied any park permit or other permission to utilize the facilities of any park or recreational facility in the city for a period of 60 days following any conviction for a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-18-1987(1), § 7) 
Sec. 18-20. - Hours of operation; overnight camping. 
(a)  No overnight camping shall be permitted in any park or recreational facility in the city. 
(b)  The hours of operation for all parks and recreational facilities in the city shall be from sunrise until 11:00 p.m. 
Sec. 18-21. - Motor vehicles. 
No person shall operate any motorized vehicle, including motorcycles, mopeds or any other similar vehicle, in any part of or upon any road in any park or recreational facility in the city, except upon roads within such park or recreational facility and in designated parking areas. No motorized vehicle described in this section shall be parked or left standing at any place in any park or recreational facility in the city, except in areas designated for such purpose. 
Sec. 18-22. - Open fires. 
No open fires, except in picnic grills, shall be permitted at any time or at any place in any park or recreational facility in the city. 
Sec. 18-23. - Firearms and explosives. 
No person shall discharge any firearm or explosive, including firecrackers or fireworks, except with the express written permission of the city, in any park or recreational facility in the city. 
Chapter 20 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Storage and accumulation. 
(a)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter. 
Garbage means all household or domestic waste, including waste from the preparation and cooking of food, vegetable, fruit, and meat scraps, ashes, cans and bottles, paper floor sweepings, cardboard, and other such material to be disposed of from residences, churches, schools, office buildings, and small business establishments and similar places. 
Incineration refers to the process of converting any combustible material into an inert, noncombustible ash or residue by burning. 
Industrial refuse is hereby defined as to mean waste material from industrial processes, automobile bodies or other motor vehicle bodies, manufacturing, textile or otherwise, canneries, slaughterhouses, packing plants, poultry processing plants, or similar industries, and large quantities of condemned foods. 
Private contractor means any person, other than a municipality, who collects, removes, salvages, scavenges, and/or disposes of refuse from one or more public or private premises, other than his own, whether or not under written contract, and whether or not for compensation. 
Refuse means garbage, rubbish, and/or industrial refuse. 
Refuse receptacle means any can, compartment, bin, or other container used to keep, collect, or store refuse pending its removal for disposal. 
Rubbish means tree branches, twigs, grass and shrub clippings, weeds, leaves, and/or street sweepings. 
Sanitary landfill means the orderly deposition of refuse so as to prevent any stench and/or nuisance. 
(b)  Refuse storage. 
(1)  At no time shall refuse and/or refuse receptacles be placed in such a manner as to obstruct gutters, drains, walkways, streets, or other passageways. 
(2)  All persons, firms, individuals, corporations or associations of individuals are hereby prohibited from dumping or discarding trash, refuse, waste, rubbish, garbage, discarded articles of all kinds, including but not limited to abandoned motor vehicles, refrigerators, stoves, furniture, cans, bottles, boxes, sacks, wastepaper, and all types of articles not suitable for human use, on private or public property in the corporate limits of the city, including streets, alleys, sidewalks, highways, parks, and recreational areas. 
(3)  No dumping or disposal of refuse shall be made in any stream, creek, lake, swamp, or other body of water. 
(4)  No industrial refuse shall be burned. 
(c)  Unauthorized accumulation of solid waste. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of solid waste within a reasonable time as may be fixed by written notice from the city shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(d)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner thereof shall: 
(1)  Interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing solid waste pending collection; 
(2)  Remove or take any of the contents thereof; or 
(3)  Remove any container from the location where the container has been placed by the owner thereof. 
(Code 1986, §§ 4-2-1—4-2-4, Ord. of 6-10-1975) 
State Law reference— Littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43. 
Secs. 20-2—20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An Ord. of June 17, 2013, added to the solid waste regulations of the city with provisions numbered as §§ 21-1—21-11, 21-13—21-20, 21-22—21-27, 21-29—21-34. In order to group similar subject matter together, the editor has added the provisions of the Ord. of June 17, 2013 to chapter 20 as herein set out. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment dwelling, rooming house, business, and industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a one-family or two-family dwelling unit or condominium. 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into stable, odor-free humus. 
Construction/demolition waste means waste building material and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations of pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. The term "construction/demolition waste" includes, but is not limited to, asbestos, asbestos containing waste, wood, brick, metal, concrete, wallboard, paper cardboard, inert waste, landfill material, and other nonputrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final disposition of solid waste occurs and includes but is not limited to landfill and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. 
Dispose means to get rid of, deal conclusively with or transfer to the control of another. 
Garbage means food waste, including the waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Industrial waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations that is not a hazardous waste regulated under the state Hazardous Waste Management Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 12-8-60 through 12-8-83). The term "industrial waste" includes, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: 
(1)  Electric power generation; 
(2)  Fertilizers and agriculture chemicals; 
(3)  Food-related products and byproducts; 
(4)  Inorganic chemicals; 
(5)  Iron and steel products; 
(6)  Leather and leather products; 
(7)  Nonferrous metal and foundry products; 
(8)  Organic chemicals, plastics and resins; 
(9)  Pulp and paper; 
(10)  Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; 
(11)  Textiles; 
(12)  Transportation equipment; and 
(13)  Water treatment. 
The term "industrial waste" does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
Landfill means a method of disposing of solid waste, and other than putrescible waste or hazardous wastes, on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Municipal solid waste means all types of solid waste including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks from hotels, motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds and day use, recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include construction and demolition waste and solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Open dump means a disposal facility of which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, to burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment. 
Owner means any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or managing any premises in the city's jurisdiction. 
Person means the state or any other state agency or institution thereof and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association or other entity in this or any other state. The term "person" also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in this state or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments and agencies of the federal government. 
Plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation standard of at least 1.5 mills and not exceeding a 30-gallon capacity, with securing twist ties. 
Putrescible waste means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible waste include but are not necessarily limited to kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wasted, and garbage. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing materials from solid wastes for future use. 
Recovered materials means those materials which have known uses, reuses or recycling potential such as the following: 
(1)  Newspaper; 
(2)  Glass, cardboard, aluminum cans, metal cans, and plastics; 
(3)  Those items that can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and 
(4)  Those items that have been diverted or removed from the solid wastestream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recycling means any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Refuse means garbage, rubbish or commercial solid waste. 
Rubbish means discarded wastepaper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, cans, glass crockery, dunnage and/or similar materials. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where putrescible solid wastes are disposed of by means of placing an earth cover thereon and which is approved by the state department of natural resources for such purpose. 
Service provider means a person granted an authorization to provide service by the city that, under written agreements for compensation by those receiving services, does the work of collecting and transporting solid waste from industry, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions and similar locations. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse, sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations and community activates, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 USC 1342; or sources, special nuclear or by product material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 USC 2011 et seq. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal of solid waste or any combination of such activities. 
Solid waste handling facility means any facility, the primary of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal of solid waste or any combination of such activities. 
Wastestream means the total flow of solid waste from commercial establishments, institutions and the like to its ultimate disposal site or facility. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree plantings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-22. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person or any employee or agent of any firm or entity violating section of this article may be fined as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(b)  Any service provider who is found to have violated any of the sections of this article by a court of law shall be subject to the same penalty and may also be restrained from operating as a service provider, and a civil action may be filed by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-23. - Applicability. 
(a)  No person shall engage in solid waste handling in a manner which will: 
(1)  Be conducive to insect and rodent infestation or the harboring and feeding of wild dogs or other animals; 
(2)  Impair the air quality; 
(3)  Impair the quality of the groundwater or surface water; 
(4)  Impair the quality of the environment; or 
(5)  Likely create other hazards to the public health, safely or well-being as may be determined by the city manager. 
(b)  This article applies to all persons engaged in solid waste handling, as well as all persons proposing to engage in solid waste handling. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-24. - Compliance with law. 
No individual, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in solid waste handling except in such manner as to conform to and comply with this article and all applicable state and federal legislation, rules, regulations and orders. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-25. - Exemptions. 
The regulations of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any person disposing of household solid waste originating from his primary residence onto land or facilities, owned by him, when disposal of such waste does not thereby adversely affect the public health; or 
(2)  Any other entity not collecting and disposing of municipal solid waste, commercial solid waste, construction/demolition waste, or industrial waste for a fee, but who is a holder of a valid solid waste handling permit from the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources pursuant to rules of the state department of natural resources environmental protection division as provided in Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. §§ 391-3-4-.02 and 391-3-4-.06 for disposal or on-site burial. Such disposal shall be governed by state environmental protection regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-26. - Composting permitted. 
Composting is expressly allowed or permitted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-27. - Disposal of dead animals. 
Dead animals shall be disposed of pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-28. - Responsibility of owner and occupant. 
The owner of occupant of any premises, office, business establishment, institution, industry or similar facility shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all solid waste and shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all recovered materials accumulated at the premises, office, business establishment, institution or similar facility to a solid waste handing recycling facility operating in compliance with the state environmental protection division rules and regulations unless arrangements have been made for such services with a collector operating in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-29. - Hazardous accumulations. 
No owner or occupant shall allow the accumulation on premises under his control or on or about his commercial establishment of solid waste where such solid waste creates or may create a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens or is unsightly or emits foul or obnoxious odors which constitute either a public or private nuisance. Such conduct shall constitute a violation of this article. Each day the solid waste remains on the premises may constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-30. - Yard trimmings. 
No person may dispose of yard trimmings in the city or dispose of yard trimmings generated in the city unless such disposal is carried out in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with municipal solid waste. 
(2)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of in municipal solid waste disposal facilities that have liners and leachate collection systems or that require vertical expansion. 
(3)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored for collection in a manner that facilities collection, composting or other lawful handling. 
(4)  Upon collection, yard trimmings shall be sorted and stock piled until their ultimate disposal by chipping, mulching or other beneficial use. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-31. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be reported initially to the city manager, which office is charged with administration of all sections in this article. The city manager shall designate and publicize a special telephone number to be called to report violations of this article. 
(b)  The sections of this article regarding applications for and termination of authorization to provide services shall be enforced by the city through the city manager. 
(c)  The sections of this article regarding collection and removal of solid waste shall be enforced by local law enforcement. 
(d)  The sections of this article regarding the disposal or burial on site of solid waste shall be enforced by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-32—20-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 20-51. - License required. 
No individual, partnership, corporation or other entity shall collect and dispose of municipal solid waste for a fee without obtaining a business license to provide service from the city. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-52. - Application. 
Nonexclusive authorization to provide services for commercial solid waste collection and disposal shall be granted upon application to the city manager provided the authorization to provide services shall meet at least the minimum requirements set out in this article. The right to provide service authorized in the collection and disposal of solid waste shall be granted for a period of no more than four calendar years from January 1 to December 31. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-53. - Revocation or rescission. 
The city manager reserves the discretionary authority to revoke or rescind any authorization granted to a solid waste service provider to provide service in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-54. - Permit required. 
Prior to engaging in solid waste handling in the city, as service provider must have obtained a solid waste handling permit from the director of environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources or any successor agency authorized to issue permits pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-24. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-55. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The city manager may grant exceptions to this division provided service providers make written application showing the following: 
(1)  The method proposed utilizes a new experimental, cost effective or innovative technology concept or theory of solid waste storage, collection, transportation or disposal; 
(2)  The method proposed has been certified by the county board of health not to create a health hazard to the public; 
(3)  The method proposed is to be utilized by at least ten customers; and 
(b)  Any exception granted by the city manager shall be for a one-year term and shall be nonrenewable. At the end of six months of operation of the excepted method, the service provider shall submit data to the city manager sufficient to enable a determination of success of the method. If found to be acceptable to the city, this division may be amended to allow such method without exception. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-56. - Insurance. 
(a)  At the time of submission of a signed authorized service agreement and prior to engaging in solid waste handling in the city and annually thereafter, each service provider shall provide to the city manager proof of insurance as follows: 
(1)  Comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of $500,000.00. 
(2)  Vehicle liability as follows: 
a.  A limit of $500,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
b.  Comprehensive covering all owned, non owned, and hired vehicles. 
c.  All insurance contracts must specify vehicles for solid waste collection. 
(3)  Umbrella liability insurance coverage at least as broad primary coverage in an amount of $1,000,000.00. 
(b)  All comprehensive general liability, vehicle liability, and umbrella liability policies shall show the city as an additional insured and shall provide for 30 days' notice of cancellation to the city council. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-57. - Indemnification. 
The solid waste service provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless City of Waleska and the city and their officers, boards, commissions, employees and agents against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments from third parties for damages which may be the result of willful, negligent or tortuous conduct or operations arising out of the business of collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste, whether or not the action or mission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-58. - Vehicles. 
(a)  All vehicles and containers used for solid waste collection operations shall comply with the requirements of Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. § 391-3-4-.06, a portion of Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. Ch. 391-3-4 (solid waste management) of the rules of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, and must be compactor-type trucks, covered or enclosed vehicles. 
(b)  Vehicles and containers shall meet all requirements of the state department of transportation for highway safety and local ordinances governing weight and size for the streets which must be traveled for pickup. All vehicles shall be subject to unannounced inspection by city officials for compliance with environmental and highway safety standards. 
(c)  All vehicles shall have, in letters at least six inches high and conspicuously placed in three places on the vehicle, the name and telephone number of the service provider. 
(d)  Service providers shall provide an adequate number of vehicles for regular collection services. Nothing in this division shall prohibit service providers from sharing backup vehicles with other service providers, provided that such sharing is adequately covered by insurance. 
(e)  Vehicles used exclusively for collecting and transporting recovered materials shall be exempt from this entire article, except that an adequate cover shall be used to prevent litter from escaping during movement. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-59. - Disposal assurance. 
(a)  As a precondition of the authorization to provide solid waste services and/or authorization renewal, all applicants shall obtain a letter of solid waste disposal assurance governing the next ten years from the landfill owner or operator where its solid waste is delivered. The letter of solid waste disposal must be on the letterhead of the company owning the landfill and signed by the chief executive operating officer or other appropriate official of the company. The letter must contain the following information: 
(1)  The telephone number and title of the company official signing the assurance letter; 
(2)  Address of the landfill; 
(3)  Remaining permitted capacity of the landfill in cubic yards; 
(4)  Estimated life of permitted capacity remaining at current and projected rates of waste disposal in tons or cubic yards; 
(5)  A statement that sufficient landfill capacity exists to accommodate the applicant requesting the letter over the expected remaining life of the landfill based on remaining landfill capacity and the amount of waste received at the landfill; and 
(6)  A statement that appropriate arrangements are in place such that the landfill will reserve a portion of its capacity on behalf of the applicant over the remaining life of the landfill. 
(b)  If the landfill operator currently lacks capacity for the next ten years, the landfill operator shall provide a statement containing the following, if applicable: 
(1)  Expected future additions or expansions of the landfill; 
(2)  Additional capacity in cubic yards from such expected expansion; 
(3)  When such future additions or expansions will be begun or completed; 
(4)  Where such additions or expansions would take place; and 
(5)  A statement that sufficient capacity will exist in the future addition or expansion of the landfill to accommodate the applicant over the designated time period. 
Otherwise, the landfill operator should indicate that no plans exist to continue landfill operations after the closing of the current landfill. In addition to initial letter requirements for obtaining an authorization to provide service, all letters of solid waste disposal assurance must be filed annually with the city manager by July 30 as a precondition for obtaining or continuing an authorization to provide service in the city. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-60. - Regulatory fees. 
(a)  A franchise fee of ten percent of the service provider's monthly gross revenue from commercial collections within the city shall be charged. Such fees shall be due and payable to the office of the city clerk quarterly. 
(b)  A regulatory fee shall be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 as set and approved by mayor and council. 
(c)  A surcharge fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges is hereby imposed upon the operator of any private landfill or other private disposal facility presently located within the city in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39(d). 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-61. - Commercial services. 
Applicants for commercial authorization to provide solid waste services are subject to the requirements for a solid waste handling permit in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-62. - General conditions of commercial collection. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises, office, business establishment, institution or industry or similar commercial establishment, other than those located in the downtown area, shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all solid waste accumulated at such premises, establishment or facility to a solid waste handling facility operating in compliance with state regulation and must arrange for service with an approved service provider. 
(b)  The holder of a valid solid waste handling permit from the state department of natural resources shall be exempt from such contracting, but shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
(c)  No business license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the owner or occupant of such premises provides the city business license office with the name of the service provider which provides collection for the business, or an exception has been granted by the city manager. 
(d)  Yard trimmings from commercial premises or collected or disposed under commercial accounts shall be managed as provided in section 20-30. Yard trimmings must be bundled or placed in a suitable container for collection. Yard trimmings may not be placed in plastic bags. 
(e)  The city reserves the right at all times to direct and control the time, place and manner of commercial solid waste handling. Nothing in this article is intended to abridge the city's right to ownership and control of the wastestream. 
(f)  Each service provider shall be responsible for all billing and invoicing to and collecting of service fees from its customers. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-63. - Recycling requirements. 
(a)  Each solid waste service provider shall by written agreement with the city arrange for recovered materials to be properly disposed of at an approved recycling facility. 
(b)  If recovered materials are not properly disposed of at an approved recycling facility, the business license of the service provider shall be suspended until the city manager is satisfied with proof of compliance according to this section. Lacking compliance, the city shall be permitted to initiate termination of the authorization to provide services as set forth in section 20-64. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-64. - Termination of authorization to provide services. 
(a)  Authorization to provide solid waste services may be terminated by mutual agreement of the city and service provider at any time. Service providers may terminate authorization to provide services by giving 60 days' notice to the city manager and furnishing proof to the city manager that all advance payments have been used by providing a service or have been refunded. 
(b)  The city manager shall notify any service provider of its violations of this article. Upon notification of the alleged violation, a service provider shall have seven calendar days to comply with any directive of the city manager to correct any such violation. If the service provider shall fail to comply within seven days of notification or shall have received notices of unresolved violations in any one quarter in excess of 25 or 0.25 percent, whichever is fewer, for service providers with fewer than 10,001 customers; 
At the discretion of the city manager, a hearing shall be held before the mayor and city council with the service provider being notified in writing of the time and place of the hearing and the violations of this article which have not been corrected. The service provider will be given the opportunity to appear by representative or counsel to answer any such charge. Should the mayor and city council determine that any of the sections of this article have been violated by the service provider, the mayor and city council shall have, in its discretion, the absolute right to suspend or revoke the authorization to provide service or provide for probation for the service provider. 
(c)  Authorization to provide services is nontransferable. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Secs. 20-65—20-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER AND ILLEGAL DUMPING 

Sec. 20-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicated a different meaning: 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-82. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to all public private property within the city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(d)  Unlawful dumping and littering prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this city or any waters in this city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-83. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-84. - Illegal dumping. 
(a)  No solid waste may be disposed of by any person in an open dump, nor may any person cause, suffer, allow or permit open dumping on his property as defined by the rules of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. § 391-3-4-04. 
(b)  A person shall be presumed to have violated this section if, upon written notification by the city manager that litter or solid waste has been dumped on that person's property, not otherwise subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-51 through 16-7-54. The person fails to provide the chief of police within 15 days of notification with written assurance that the accumulation of litter or solid waste will be properly disposed of within 30 days from the original date of notification. 
(c)  No person who first informs the city manager in writing that illegal dumping has occurred on a particular parcel of that person's property shall be deemed to have violated this section if such person provides written assurance that all accumulated litter or solid waste will be properly disposed of by a collection service provider who meets the requirements of this article within 45 days of the date of such written notification and subsequently provides proof of such disposal. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-85. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any articles including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,200.00; 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (c) (1) of this section, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove: 
a.  From any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  Any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter; 
Pickup and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
(4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Sec. 20-86. - Enforcement of this article. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Secs. 20-87—20-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SANITATION UTILITY AND ENTERPRISE FUND 

Sec. 20-111. - Establishment of a sanitation utility and enterprise fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a sanitation utility within the city which shall be responsible for providing sanitation management services. 
(b)  There is hereby established a sanitation utility enterprise fund in the city budgeting and accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the Waleska Sanitation Utility, including, but not limited to, residential sanitation service fees and revenues. 
(c)  The city may pledge all or any portion of proceeds of any nature derived from the operation of the sanitation utility after all expenses of the service have been satisfied, to offset the expenses in the general fund. 
(d)  An annual audit of the sanitation enterprise fund will be conducted to ensure that funds are properly accounted for and spent. 
(Ord. of 6-17-2013) 
Chapter 22 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to own, operate and maintain streets, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; street obstructions, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Address numbers. 
The provisions of chapter 50, article III of the Code of Ordinances, Cherokee County, Georgia, as now or hereafter amended, are hereby adopted by reference. 
Sec. 22-2. - Road drainage code. 
The provisions of chapter 50, article V, of the Code of Ordinances, Cherokee County, Georgia, as now or hereafter amended, are hereby adopted by reference. 
Sec. 22-3. - No smoking policy within city facilities. 
There shall be no smoking of tobacco products in city buildings, facilities, vehicles and lease space and equipment, except in those areas as designated by city council. In addition, smoking is prohibited within 100 feet of any flammable substance and outdoor working including fueling stations, three-wall garages and storage areas. However, in other outdoor spaces where fuel and other flammable substances are contained in approved containers, smoking may be permitted. Smoking will be permitted in outside work areas which are not within 100 feet of any flammable or combustible substance. 
Sec. 22-4. - Streets and sidewalks not to be damaged. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drag or run, or cause to be dragged or run, any harrow or other implement, engine, machine, or tool upon any asphalt, bithulitic, warrenite, or other type of permanently paved street or sidewalk of the city which shall be liable in any way to injure or cut the surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the same manner. 
(Code 1986, § 4-1-7) 
Sec. 22-5. - Posting advertising on city property. 
No person shall post or display any signs, circulars, advertising or other printed or graphics matter on any public property in the city without first having obtained permission in writing from the city to do so. 
(Code 1986, § 4-1-8) 
Secs. 22-6—22-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-29. - Street repair. 
When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public place of the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making that excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening. Any person neglecting, refusing, or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof; and where any neglect, refusal or failure is continued, after notice from the city clerk, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1986, § 4-1-4) 
Sec. 22-30. - Sidewalk construction. 
No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any individual of any brick, wood, or other material without a written permit from the city. 
(Code 1986, § 4-1-6) 
Sec. 22-31. - Leaving unprotected. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who obtains a permit under this article to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk, or public place of the city without placing and maintaining proper guardrails and signal lights or other warnings at, in, or around the work, sufficient to warn the public of any excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of the work. 
(Code 1986, § 4-1-5) 
Secs. 22-32—22-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 22-51. - Permit to dig in streets. 
No person shall make any excavations or openings or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel, or hole in, along, across, or under any street, sidewalk, or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles, or for any other purposes, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the city clerk. A permit shall not be required where the work is performed under a contract with the city, but in the event that work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the city clerk and the police department at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(Code 1986, § 4-1-1) 
Sec. 22-52. - Application for permit. 
All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or sidewalk, as set forth in section 22-51, shall make written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. 
(Code 1986, § 4-1-2) 
Sec. 22-53. - City indemnified. 
Any person obtaining a permit as provided for in sections 22-51 and 22-52 agrees, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations. 
(Code 1986, § 4-1-3) 
Secs. 22-54—22-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREETLIGHTING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-80. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Lot means any single tract or land which falls within any of the zoning classifications, as defined by the zoning chapter; provided, however, that in areas zoned for purposes other than single-family residential, different criteria may be adopted by the city for the payment of energy costs and retirement of construction costs. 
Lot owner means only that individual or corporation registered with the city water system as a customer shall be considered as a owner although the customer may not be vested with exclusive title. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § C) 
Sec. 22-81. - Exceptions to terms of article. 
The city may grant exceptions to the literal terms of this article where special conditions or hardships exist. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § M) 
Sec. 22-82. - Federal, state laws to prevail in conflicts. 
If any provision of this article is in conflict with any state or federal law, or with any rule, regulation or order of any state or federal agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter of this article, it is hereby deemed to be the intention of the city that the state or federal law or rule, regulation or order, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be of full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § N) 
Sec. 22-83. - Contract with public utilities. 
The city may contract with the public utilities for the purpose of carrying out the terms of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § K) 
Sec. 22-84. - Streetlight conformance by subdivision developer: acceptance of public ways. 
(a)  The owner, developer, or other person developing a subdivision is required to provide streetlight services and shall be required to conform to all of the standards herein provided for and, in addition thereto, shall be required to obtain a permit from the city prior to commencing any construction of any streetlight facilities. 
(b)  The owner, developer, or other person developing a shopping center, industrial park, office park, or like development shall install streetlights along public rights-of-way adjoining that property in conformance with the standards herein provided for; and, in addition thereto, shall be required to obtain a permit from the city prior to commencing any construction of any streetlight facilities. 
(c)  A streetlight permit fee may be required by the city. 
(d)  The city shall not accept any facilities proposed to be dedicated until such time as the provisions hereof have been complied with. Water service will not be provided until such time as the streetlight facilities are approved and accepted by the city. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § F) 
Sec. 22-85. - Lighting in areas other than single-family residential. 
Streetlighting in districts other than single-family residential shall be permitted only: 
(1)  With the approval of the city subject to the safety, economic, and other factors involved; and 
(2)  Upon compliance with the standards herein provided for. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § G) 
Sec. 22-86. - Installation and operation standards adopted; exception. 
In order to ensure adequate illumination of public rights-of-way and promote safety and security, The American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illumination Society, as approved by the American National Standards Institute (1983), as may be amended, is hereby adopted as the standard for the installation and operation of lighting in the service area of the city water system with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Lighting fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with these standards. The minimum average horizontal footcandle illumination level by roadway classification shall be: 

 
The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third of the average horizontal footcandle required illumination level, except that on local or residential streets it may be not less than one-sixth of this average. 
(2)  Any party requesting permission to install or operate lighting fixtures within public rights-of-way shall furnish plans and specifications to the city for approval showing that the proposed lighting meets the standards, and no lighting shall be installed or operated without this approval. Should the city disapprove the request to install or operate lighting fixtures within any public rights-of-way, the written disapproval will be sent in writing to the party requesting approval. The written communication shall include the specific reasons for disapproval. 
(3)  Roadway or streetlighting luminaries or fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way as security lights or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public streets, shall be oriented in such a manner to ensure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and the vertical light distribution, at the initial light source, is perpendicular to the street, so as to protect the users of the street from the objectionable glare. The approval of the city shall be obtained before installation of these lights. 
(4)  Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or outside of public rights-of-way for whatever purpose shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § H) 
Sec. 22-87. - Procedures to be followed by subdivision developers. 
Streetlights shall be required to be provided by the developers of all new subdivisions, except, however, subdivisions containing only lots which are five acres or larger are exempt. The developer shall: 
(1)  Submit a final streetlight layout prepared by the utility company which will provide the lighting service showing exact location of streetlights within the subdivision. This drawing must be approved by the city prior to obtaining any building permit within that subdivision. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the utility company which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities and by the city. The fixtures shall be mounted a minimum of 25 feet above the ground, and shall have appropriate arm length to place the light over the street. No arm shall be less than 2½ feet long. One light shall be located at each street intersection within the subdivision. 
(2)  Pay all costs for standards/poles, fixtures, and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation. 
(3)  Submit proof of payment for complete installation to the city. 
(4)  Submit a copy of an executed agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § O) 
Sec. 22-88. - Subdivisions with underground electric. 
In subdivisions utilizing underground cable for electrical service, the developers shall be required to accomplish the same items listed in section 22-87. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § P) 
Sec. 22-89. - Permitting. 
Review and approval of plans may be delegated by the city in whole or in part to the city engineer or any other designee of the city, and a fee may be charged for the same. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § Q) 
Secs. 22-90—22-106. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 22-107. - Petition for creation of district. 
(a)  Any lot owner within the service area of the city water system may present a request for the creation of a streetlight district to the city. Upon receipt of the request, the city council shall determine the appropriate boundaries for a streetlighting district which will serve the lot owner presenting the request and neighboring lot owners. The petitioner shall then prepare a plat showing the proposed streetlighting district, and a petition for the creation of the proposed streetlighting district shall then be circulated by petitioner among the lot owners in the proposed district to sign showing whether it is their preference that the proposed district be created. Once a petition has been returned to the city, there shall be no changes in the preferences recorded thereon, and the petition shall clearly state the same. If 75 percent of the lot owners in the proposed district sign the petition for the creation of a streetlighting district, the city shall determine whether or not to create the proposed streetlighting district. Safety and economic factors shall be the prime consideration in making such determination; however, creation of the same is strictly within the discretion of the city. 
(b)  The petition for creation of the proposed streetlighting district must be returned to the city within 90 days after it is obtained from the city; provided, however, that the city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time for the return of the petition an additional 30 days for a total of 120 days, when a request for such extension is made before expiration of the original 90 days. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § I) 
Sec. 22-108. - Creation of districts under special conditions. 
In areas where special conditions as to safety, security, land topography, economic, and other factors may be involved, the city may create special streetlighting districts and provide for special streetlighting under such terms and conditions as may be determined by the city, any other provisions of this article to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § J) 
Sec. 22-109. - Lighting cost declared a service. 
The city council does hereby declare that the cost and service for creation of streetlight districts or streetlighting hereafter created shall be a service and not a tax, as authorized by article IX, section IV, paragraph II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § A) 
Sec. 22-110. - Charges. 
All charges shall be set by the city council and are subject to change. In all cases, the rates for a streetlight district shall be sufficient to cover the expenses and costs associated with the lights for that district. The charges shall be levied on a per-lot basis. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § L) 
Sec. 22-111. - Responsibility for cost; retirement of existing contracts. 
(a)  The cost of providing and maintaining streetlight service in streetlight districts, and in streetlight districts hereafter created, shall be borne by the residents, lot owners, and property owners located within the boundaries of a particular subdivision. The charge therefor shall be determined by the city council and shall be posted and open for public inspection in the offices of city hall. The charge in the proposed streetlighting district to be created by petition shall be included on the petition circulated through the proposed district and may include an initial prorated charge in connection with the installation of the streetlights. In the event of excessive vandalism to streetlights within a district which results in the city being billed for repairs, the city may prorate those repair bills and add a pro rata share to those bills for the charge. 
(b)  In those districts now in existence, or which may hereafter be created in which there is construction cost, the same shall be retired as per agreement or contract, with the public utility or other person to whom the indebtedness is owed, and shall be billed accordingly per lot. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § B) 
Sec. 22-112. - Payment date: delinquencies. 
The due date for the payment of the service and the sums herein provided for shall be the same date of each month as water bills due to the city water system and subject to the same penalties for late payment and for failure to pay. Any service provided by the city water system may be discontinued for late payment or nonpayment. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § D) 
Sec. 22-113. - Responsibility for collections. 
The billing, accounting, collecting, and receiving of the monies herein provided for is hereby declared to be the responsibility of the city water system. 
(Ord. of 5-16-2005, § E) 
Secs. 22-114—22-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES, ASSEMBLIES AND OTHER USES OF PUBLIC PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-140. - Definitions. 
The following words where used in this article, unless the context requires otherwise, shall be deemed to have the following meanings: 
Administrator. The city clerk shall be the administrator for the receipt and processing of applications for a permit for a private organization or group of private persons to hold a parade, assembly, demonstration, road closing, or other use of public property for private purposes. The city clerk may be assisted by other employees of the clerk's office. 
Private organization or group of private persons means any firm, partnership, corporation, association, or group of individuals more than three in number, or their representatives, acting as a unit. 
Private purpose means any purpose not commanded or directed by statute, ordinance, or other regulation to be performed by the state, county, city or other governmental entity. 
(Code 1986, § 7-4-1; Ord. of 5-5-1986) 
Sec. 22-141. - Defense to prosecution. 
It shall be a defense to any prosecution under this article for failing to obtain a permit before engaging in any activity, described in this article, that a permit has in fact been issued in the manner provided by law. It shall be presumed that no permit has been issued unless at his trial, the accused produces in court a valid permit or a certified copy thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 7-4-8; Ord. of 5-5-1986) 
Sec. 22-142. - Subsequent amendments; other fees. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city to assess, levy and collect any permit fees prescribed. The payment of any permit fee herein provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the assessment, levy, or collection of additional permit fees upon the same person. 
(Code 1986, § 7-4-9; Ord. of 5-5-1986) 
Sec. 22-143. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any private organization or group of private persons, whether residents of this city or elsewhere, to engage in any activity within the city limits for which this article requires a permit, without first obtaining a permit to do so, under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any individual or any other person, whether the same be a corporation, partnership, or any other form of association, who engages in any activity for which this article requires a permit, without a permit having first been obtained under the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 7-4-7; Ord. of 5-5-1986) 
Sec. 22-144. - Administration of article. 
The administrator shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the application for and issuance of permits under this article. 
(Code 1986, § 7-4-4; Ord. of 5-5-1986) 
Sec. 22-145. - Duties of administrator. 
The administrator, or an authorized representative, shall have, among others, the following duties: 
(1)  To prepare and provide the necessary forms for the application for a permit and for the submission of any required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(2)  To review the application for completeness, collect whatever fee may be required, and, where appropriate, receive the approval in writing of the department of transportation, state highway patrol, and the sheriff, or any other necessary public officer for the requested activity. 
(3)  To submit the completed application and associated documents or other information to the council for action on the application. 
(4)  Upon approval of the application by the council, to issue to the private organization or group of private persons a permit within a reasonable time of such approval. 
(Code 1986, § 7-4-5; Ord. of 5-5-1986) 
Secs. 22-146—22-173. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 22-174. - Required. 
Every private organization or group of private persons who wish to use public property for private purposes in holding a parade, assembly, demonstration, road closing, or other activity within this city is hereby required to have a permit from the city for the privilege of engaging in any such activity within the corporate limits, unless city permitting is prohibited under state law or the activity is exempted by this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 7-4-2; Ord. of 5-5-1986) 
Sec. 22-175. - Application; fee. 
(a)  Every private organization or group of private persons required to procure a permit, under the provisions of this Code, shall submit an application for the permit to the administrator. The application shall conform to the requirements of this section in addition to any other provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the city and submitted not less than ten days before the date the parade, assembly, demonstration, road closing, or other activity is proposed by the applicant. 
(1)  Each application shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and home address of the applicant, if an individual or home office address, if a corporation or partnership; 
b.  Time and place where the proposed activity is to be carried on, including routes of passage of parades or other processions; 
c.  Kind and class of activity to be carried on; 
d.  Names and home addresses of the partners, if a partnership; 
e.  Names and home addresses of the officers and directors, if a corporation; 
f.  Any additional information which the administrator may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this article which may include a complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer, or director of the applicant for violations of any and all laws and ordinances of the city, state, or federal government other than minor traffic violations. 
(3)  Each application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant, if an individual or by a partner, if a partnership, or by an officer, if a corporation. 
(4)  All information furnished or secured under the authority of this article: 
a.  Shall be kept in strict confidence by the city; 
b.  Shall not be subject to public inspection; and 
c.  Shall be utilized solely by the officers of the city responsible for administering the provisions of this article. 
(5)  False statements on any application for a license shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the permit or denial of the application. 
(6)  Any application, permit, and registration fees as fixed from time to time by the council required under this Code shall accompany the application. 
(Code 1986, § 7-4-3; Ord. of 5-5-1986) 
Sec. 22-176. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)  If any provision of this article provides for the review of an application for a permit by a city officer designated therein, the administrator shall forward a copy of the application to that officer. The officer charged with the duty of reviewing the application shall make a recommendation thereon, favorable or otherwise, and shall return the recommendation to the administrator after receiving a copy of the application. 
(b)  Upon the receipt of the recommendation of the reviewing officer as hereinabove provided or, upon the receipt of the application if no reviewing officer is designated, the administrator shall forward the recommendation and application to the council for consideration and action. 
(c)  Unless some significant interference with the rights of nonparticipating citizens exists, or the orderly flow of traffic would be obstructed unreasonably, or the public safety is endangered, or there is other unreasonable interference with the public welfare, peace, safety, health, good order, and convenience of the general public, the permit shall be granted. 
(d)  Upon the express approval of the council, the administrator shall issue a permit to the applicant therefor. The permit shall state the nature of the activity authorized and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the administrator. 
(Code 1986, § 7-4-6; Ord. of 5-5-1986) 
Sec. 22-177. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FESTIVALS 

Sec. 22-178. - Purpose. 
The following are general rules for conducting or regulating festivals in the City of Waleska, Georgia. 
(Ord.of 5-16-2013(2) § 1) 
Sec. 22-179. - Definitions. 
Words and terms used in this article are defined as follows: 
Alcoholic beverage. Means and includes, but is not limited to, malt beverages and wine as defined in this section. 
Controlled zone. A zone within the festival area in which special regulations may apply as recommended in each case by the city clerk and authorized by the mayor and council including wristband identification of persons authorized to purchase and hold in possession alcoholic beverages in a public park or street. 
Festival. A program of cultural and/or entertainment events open to the general public and taking place either fully or in part on public streets, thoroughfares, parks, squares, or other public property in connection with a community festival. To be regulated by this article, each such festival must be designated as a festival by the Mayor and Council. 
Festival area. The area specifically designated and defined by the Mayor and Council as the location of festival events and activities. 
(Ord.of 5-16-2013(2) § 1) 
Sec. 22-180. - Designation of a community festival. 
On the recommendation of the city clerk, the mayor and council may designate and name certain community festival days and during such festival days authorize cultural and entertainment events and initiate the regulatory provisions of this article within the festival area. 
(Ord.of 5-16-2013(2) § 1) 
Sec. 22-181. - Designation of a festival area. 
The Mayor and Council shall designate the festival area in the resolution that designates the event as a festival and have the right to add any regulations per the specific festival. 
(Ord.of 5-16-2013(2) § 1) 
Sec. 22-182. - Designation and management of controlled zone. 
(1)  Upon recommendation of the city clerk, the mayor and council may designate one or more controlled zones within the festival area, and may authorize the city clerk to implement regulations and controls which will be specific for each designated controlled zone. Such regulations and controls may include but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  Fencing and gating. Fencing designated controlled zone(s) and establishing entrance gates for controlling and limiting access to each controlled zone. 
(b)  Identification, entrance criteria. Requiring wristbands or other means of identifying persons who have met entrance criteria. Entrance criteria may include but are not limited to prohibiting persons from entering with weapons, alcoholic beverages, pets, skates, bicycles, and other items which may be dangerous, disruptive, or inconvenient in crowded conditions, and prohibiting entry by persons appearing to be intoxicated. 
(c)  Identification, consumption of alcoholic beverages. Requiring wristbands or other means of identifying persons who have displayed proof of attaining the age of 21 years, and who are authorized to purchase or hold in possession alcoholic beverages within the controlled zone, both within and outside of licensed alcoholic beverage establishments. A fee as set by the mayor and council may be charged for such wristband. The transfer of wristband from one person to another person is prohibited and if a violation occurs, the wristband will be forfeited. Displaying such a wristband does not relieve alcoholic beverage establishments of responsibility for determining if a person has attained the age of 21 years before dispensing alcohol to that person. 
(d)  Containers, cups. Any establishment serving alcoholic beverages where the individuals purchasing said beverages will be walking around in the containment area shall only serve the alcoholic beverage in a disposable cup. Disposable cups must be composed of a material that is not glass, ceramic, aluminum, or other hard substance. Plastic or Styrofoam cups are allowed. The city also reserves the right to determine additional regulations in regards to the containers/cups when approving the festival. 
(e)  Transport of alcoholic beverages into or out of a designated controlled zone. The transport of alcoholic beverages for personal consumption either into or out of any designated controlled zone is prohibited. 
(f)  Designation of festival manager and/or city within controlled zone. The mayor and council may designate a festival manager and/or the City of Waleska to manage the festival activities to organize and manage festival activities within a controlled zone. Furthermore, the designated festival manager and/or the city will be responsible for approving or not approving the vendors/establishments that seek participation in the festival. 
(2)  Insurance. Any organization authorized to organize and manage festival activities within a controlled zone shall take out and keep in force for all activities associated with such event a special events liability policy. Such policy shall provide the following: 
(a)  Minimum coverage limits: The city clerk will recommend to the mayor and council an adequate minimum coverage limit depending on the scope of festival. 
(b)  Named as additional insured: The mayor and council of the City of Waleska, a Georgia municipal corporation, its elected officials, officers, employees and agents. In some cases other local, state, and federal governments or private individuals or corporations may be required to be named as an additional insured if the property is leased, is under lease, or private property is being used to conduct the festival. 
(c)  Certificate of insurance: A certificate of insurance shall be issued to the additional insured at least five days prior to the beginning of the event. Such certificate shall be on a standard form and will provide for notification of the additional insured within ten days of termination of coverage. 
(d)  Coverage shall include claims for damages because of bodily injury and for dramshop liability. 
(Ord.of 5-16-2013(2) § 1) 
Sec. 22-183. - Restricting hours of alcohol sales. 
Hours of alcohol sales will be set forth in the resolution establishing the festival. 
(Ord.of 5-16-2013(2) § 1) 
Sec. 22-184. - Qualified vendors. 
All qualified vendors must have a City of Waleska pouring license or have completed the application process for a temporary City of Waleska pouring license and a State of Georgia alcohol license prior to the event date. Temporary permits are issued to qualified vendors in accordance with regulations set by the mayor and council 
(Ord.of 5-16-2013(2) § 1) 
Sec. 22-185. - Permit. 
Permit applications shall be obtained from the City of Waleska before requesting approval to organize and/or conduct a festival. 
(Ord.of 5-16-2013(2) § 1) 
Sec. 22-186. - No waiver. 
Nothing contained herein shall waive the sovereign immunity of the City of Waleska as currently existing or as may hereafter amended. Further, this ordinance shall not constitute a waiver or modification of state law, city ordinances or federal law. 
(Ord.of 5-16-2013(2) § 1) 
Chapter 24 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Obstruction of view and use by trees and shrubs; notice. 
(a)  No person owning, occupying, or in anywise controlling property in this city shall permit any tree, bush, or shrub on the property to project over any street or sidewalk of this city so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on the street or sidewalk or of other persons or vehicles approaching from cross or intersecting streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent, or person controlling property in the city to fail to remove any tree, bush, or other obstruction from the streets or sidewalks of this city after ten days' notice by the city to do so. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1-5) 
Sec. 24-2. - Free flow of traffic; obstruction prohibited. 
All persons are prohibited from engaging in driving procedures which obstruct the free flow of traffic in, around, over and through the streets, alleyways, and other public ways of the city. Any person is prohibited from stopping his vehicle (except at a stop signal or stop sign, or to honor another driver's right-of-way, or in an emergency situation) in a manner as to obstruct the free and orderly flow of traffic by the maneuver, or to engage in unduly slow driving procedures so as to obstruct the free flow of traffic or to needlessly circle the block or dawdle or make unnecessarily rapid accelerations and decelerations or to in any other manner constitute a traffic nuisance or hazard. 
(Code 1986, § 8-2-1) 
Sec. 24-3. - Motorized carts on public sidewalks prohibited. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Motorized means any vehicle gasoline powered. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate any motorized vehicle, motorized equipment, motorized scooters, motorized skateboards, motorized cycles, or any other similar vehicle on any public sidewalk. 
Sec. 24-4. - All-terrain vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings as set out herein: 
All-terrain vehicle (ATV) means a self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for operation over natural terrain and steered by wheels, to specifically include, but not be limited to, off-road motorcycles, three-wheelers, four-wheelers, and all other such vehicles with one or more wheels. The term "all-terrain vehicle (ATV)" is not intended to include bicycles or street legal vehicles operating on public road rights-of-way. 
ATV trail means the property designated and posted for lawful, authorized use by ATVs. 
Operate means to ride in or on and control the operation of an ATV. 
Operator means every person who operates an ATV. 
Owner means a person, other than a person with a security interest, having a right of use regarding, property interest in or title to an ATV and entitled to the use and possession of the vehicle. 
Person includes an individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity whether incorporated or not. 
Public road right-of-way means the entire right-of-way of a public road, street or highway, including the traveled portions, banks, ditches, shoulders, and medians of a roadway that is not privately owned. 
(b)  Unlawful operation. Unless otherwise noted, it is unlawful for any person to operate an ATV: 
(1)  In a careless, reckless or negligent manner or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, or cause injury or damage to any person or property. 
(2)  So as to tow any person or thing on a public road right-of-way. 
(3)  In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual and unreasonable noise so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities. Such sound that is plainly audible at a distance of 200 feet from the origin of sound shall be presumed to be a violation of this provision. Additionally, it shall be presumed to be a violation of this provision if an individual rides an ATV continuously past, around, or near an inhabited dwelling place so as to disturb or unduly annoy the inhabitants. 
(4)  On private property without the express permission to do so by the owner and occupant of the property. 
(5)  On public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, recreational areas, golf courses, cemeteries, or any other public places, except on posted ATV trail locations, unless the operator has the express permission of the proper public authority. 
(6)  On any portion of any public road right-of-way. 
(c)  Age restrictions. No person shall operate an ATV in violation of the age requirements established by state law. 
(d)  Organized events. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of ATVs in organized events, provided the event organization and property owner do not object to such use. 
(e)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Motorboats; 
(2)  Any military, fire or law enforcement vehicle; 
(3)  Any vehicles used exclusively on airports; 
(4)  Any farm machinery, farm tractors, and other self-propelled equipment for harvesting and transporting forest products, for clearing land for planting, for utility services and maintenance, for earth moving, and for like activities; and 
(5)  Self-propelled lawnmowers, snow blowers, garden or lawn tractors, or golf carts, while such vehicles are being used exclusively for their designed purposes and used in a location consistent with its designed purpose. However, golf carts when used as a means of logistical transport are not included within this exception. 
(f)  Additional requirements. This subsection shall apply to the operation of ATVs that are otherwise operating in compliance with the ordinance from which this section derives: 
(1)  No ATV shall enter any intersection without yielding the right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection or so close to the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(2)  The operator of an ATV shall make every effort to be visible to oncoming traffic from any direction. 
(g)  Citations. Any person violating the terms of this section shall be subject to issuance of a citation. 
Sec. 24-5. - Engine brakes and compression brakes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate or cause to be used or operate within the city limits of Waleska any engine brake, compression brake or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to fire protection equipment or other emergency vehicles. 
(c)  Penalties for violation. Any person found to be in violation of any of the terms and provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(d)  Validity. If any term or provision of this section shall be held to be unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable, the remainder thereof shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2016) 
Secs. 24-6—24-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq. 

Sec. 24-27. - Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. 
Whenever a space is marked off on any highway for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding that space. 
(Code 1986, § 8-3-1) 
Sec. 24-28. - Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle in any of the places on the streets and alleys of the city specifically designated by posted signs indicating the prohibited parking. 
(Code 1986, § 8-3-2) 
Sec. 24-29. - Parking prohibited certain days and hours in certain locations. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle in any of the places on the days and between the hours indicated and specified by posted signs indicating the prohibited parking. 
(Code 1986, § 8-3-3) 
Sec. 24-30. - Parking time limited in certain locations, certain days and hours. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any of the places on the streets and alleys of the city, at any time on the days and between the hours indicated and specified by posted signs limiting parking time in certain locations on certain days and hours. 
(Code 1986, § 8-3-4) 
Sec. 24-31. - Special purpose parking zones established; parking otherwise prohibited. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any locations on the streets and alleys of the city established and designated as special purpose parking zones indicated and specified by posted signs approved by the council. 
(Code 1986, § 8-3-5) 
Sec. 24-32. - Parking regulations upon city property. 
(a)  Parking. It shall be unlawful to park upon any city property inclusive of any and all parking lots and other areas designated by city council as no parking or reserved for specific uses. Any person and/or vehicle illegally parked in said spaces as so designated shall have said vehicle subject to being towed to a lot designated by the city council. 
(b)  Signage. Authorized agents of the city shall erect appropriate signage prohibiting parking and/or informing the public of the person removing and storing any such vehicle and information as to where the vehicle or trespassing personal property can be recovered. 
Chapter 26 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - On-site sewage management systems. 
The provisions of chapter 46, article VI of the Code of Ordinances, Cherokee County, Georgia, as now or hereafter amended, are hereby adopted by reference. 
Sec. 26-2. - Illicit discharges and illegal connections. 
Cherokee County Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance, being chapter 46, article VII of the Code of Ordinances, Cherokee County, Georgia, as now or hereafter amended, is hereby adopted by reference. 
Secs. 26-3—26-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 26-23. - Established. 
There is hereby established a water system for the city to provide potable and sanitary water to the city's citizens and environs. 
(Code 1986, § 5-1-1) 
Sec. 26-24. - Administration. 
The water system shall be administered by the city council. 
(Code 1986, § 5-1-2) 
Sec. 26-25. - Appoint a manager and a maintenance person. 
The city council may at any time name and appoint a manager and a maintenance person, or one person to perform both jobs, to oversee and look after the operation and distribution of water to the customers of the city, and he shall perform such duties as are required of him by the city council. The manager shall possess a valid state water certification and shall obtain a state license as a water distribution system operator within 18 months of employment. Any person hired as a maintenance person shall obtain a state water certification within 18 months of employment, and shall attend necessary workshops and schools in order to maintain the knowledge and skills necessary for the position. 
(Code 1986, § 5-1-5) 
Secs. 26-26—26-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-54. - Subscriber application. 
All initial subscribers who wish to be furnished water by this water system must sign a written application and file a deposit, as hereinafter stated. By signing the application, all applicants shall agree to accept the requirements and conditions of this article and all future and additional rules and regulations adopted by the water system after receiving a written copy of those future and additional rules and regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 5-1-21) 
Sec. 26-55. - Deposit; tap-in fee. 
(a)  Each applicant shall deposit a sum as fixed from time to time by the council to guarantee payment of the water bill. The water deposit shall be refunded to each subscriber having made any such deposit upon receipt by the water system of written request to terminate services to that subscriber and after the water system has determined that no charges or fees are due from the terminating subscriber. 
(b)  Each applicant for service shall pay a tap-in fee as established from time to time by the council which shall include tie-in to the service main of the water system, the water meter and placement of the meter upon the property of the subscriber as near as possible to the juncture of the road right-of-way and property owner's property line. 
(Code 1986, § 5-1-22) 
Sec. 26-56. - Charges and billing. 
All charges and billing to subscribers of the water system shall be in accordance with the rate schedule as adopted from time to time by the council. Any water used over 1,999 gallons shall be rounded to the nearest 1,000 and billed as an additional 1,000 gallons. The rate structure is established in such manner to ensure that all expenses of the water system may be met. 
(Code 1986, § 5-1-23) 
Sec. 26-57. - Responsibility and liability of water system. 
The water system shall be responsible and liable for the following: 
(1)  Installation and maintenance of main supply lines. The city water system shall install main supply lines and shall be responsible for the supervision and maintenance of these main supply lines, master meters at junction with service main of the City of Canton and the county, pumping stations along the main supply line and all reservoirs or tanks on the main supply line. 
(2)  Right to refuse service when capacity will not permit. The city water system shall have the right to refuse to accept applications of new subscribers when the city council determines and declares that the subscribers that have been accepted and are being served are consuming the capacity that the system is able to provide. 
(3)  Responsibility for damages to property other than its own. The city water system shall not be responsible for repairs and damage to any property other than its own pumps, storage tanks and water mains. All installations or repairs to water lines from tap-in to subscriber's water meter, and repairs to subscriber's meter shall be the expense of subscriber and each subscriber shall be responsible for all installations and repairs and maintenance of his own line from said meter. 
(Code 1986, § 5-1-24) 
Sec. 26-58. - Responsibility of subscribers. 
(a)  Installation and maintenance of service lines. The individual subscriber who shall make application and deposit as required shall be responsible for the installation of any and all service lines from the individual subscriber's water meter, installed by the city water system, to outlets on property owned or being used by that subscriber, and each applicant shall be responsible for repairs or replacements of any meter installed by the city water system on property owned or used by that subscriber. 
(b)  Water meter placement. Each subscriber for services of the water system shall file with his application a written release signed by the owner of the property on which a water meter is desired to be placed for the placement of the meter and a hold-harmless clause from damages for the installation of the meter. The subscriber shall provide a suitable place for the location of the water meter at a place on the property owned or being used by the subscriber near the right-of-way boundary of the property to be easily maintained and read by an employee or agent of the city water system. 
(c)  Easement on subscriber's land. Any subscriber that shall make application for service with the city water system shall give an easement to the city water system for placement of water system property upon the property of the subscriber in providing service lines to the subscriber. 
(d)  Damage to the water system. The subscriber shall be responsible to repair and replace any property of the city water system located on his property when same shall be damaged or destroyed and any other water system property that his actions may cause to be damaged or destroyed. 
(e)  Specified uses of water. Any subscriber, in consideration of the rights of other subscribers of the water system, shall be permitted to use any amount of water necessary to provide the normal and usual needs of himself and his family and to provide water for his chicken houses and livestock. However, when those requirements of water shall be or become excessive, special permission of the water system must be obtained before any excessive use unit or system can be tied in to the system. 
(f)  Each dwelling unit to be served by separate connection and meter. The city shall have the right to inspect meters and service lines except as provided in section 26-60, where more than one premises is found on a single meter, the city may require that separate connections be made within ten days' notice to do so. Should any property owner fail to make the required connections within the time provided by the city to do so, service to those premises shall be discontinued until such connections are completed. 
(g)  No person shall make an unauthorized connection to the city water system or meddle or tamper with a meter or service line in such a manner that will interfere with or prevent the correct operation of the meter. Any person violating this subsection shall be liable for the full cost of repair or replacement of the meter and lines, and shall, in addition, be punished on conviction as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1986, § 5-1-25) 
Sec. 26-59. - Extensions. 
(a)  Approval. No extension of city water lines shall be made without prior approval of the board of commissioners of the city water system. 
(b)  Who pays for extension. Any group of people that shall require or desire the services of the city water system and shall require an extension of the present service mains and shall be outside of or beyond the boundary and terminal points of those mains as they are now proposed and platted may contract for the extension of mains with the water system; provided the water system shall not be subscribed to its capacity. Any such group requesting an extension shall pay the costs of extending the water main in any manner they shall determine among themselves, but the amount shall be paid in one lump sum prior to the installation, or one-third upon beginning of extension installation, one-third when half the extension has been completed and the balance immediately upon completion of the installation. All extensions of water mains shall become the property of the water system after installation, inspection and approval by the city or its designee. 
(c)  Limitations on extensions. In consideration of the contracts of existing subscribers of the water system, the water system will not contract for the extension of any of its lines as long as its regular subscribers on the original line as originally constructed consume or are expected to consume the capacity volume of water the water system is efficiently able to furnish. No extension shall increase the consumption of water to all subscribers, including all extensions, more than the capacity the water system is able to furnish. 
(d)  Extensions longer than 1,000 feet. Whenever a property owner wishes to have the city extend a water line which will be more than 1,000 feet in length, the following steps should be taken: 
(1)  The property owner should obtain an estimate of the cost of extending the water line from a licensed, qualified contractor. The estimates should include the costs of installing a two-inch, four-inch, six-inch and eight-inch line. 
(2)  The property owner should talk with neighboring property owners, if appropriate, to determine whether anyone else wants to share in the cost of the line. 
(3)  The property owner or owners shall estimate how many potential customers there may be for the extended line in the near future. 
(4)  The property owner or owners shall have the city's water line consultant (presently Stanley Townsend) determine the water pressure in the line. 
(5)  The property owner or owners shall provide to the city in writing the number of current customers and estimated number of future customers on the line, as well as the current water pressure on the line, with a request that the city consider allowing the extension of the line at the expense of the property owners. 
(6)  If the city wishes to consider extending the line, the city shall have the city engineer assess the request pursuant to paragraph 3 of the city's "Minimum Water Main Size" provisions and submit a written report with a recommendation regarding the extension, including the present and future effect an extension would have on the water pressure in the area of the line and on the city's water system in general. 
(7)  The city shall then consider the request in view of the foregoing information and the engineer's report. Should the engineer recommend that a certain minimum size line would serve the potential new customers but that a larger line should be considered as a benefit or future benefit for the city's system, the city may elect to pay the difference between the two. 
(8)  In no event shall the city approve a water line extension that would not be financially feasible for the city or that could result in unacceptable water pressure for any customers of the city's water system. 
(9)  Should the city elect to proceed with the line as requested, the work to be completed by a contractor approved by the city, the property owner or owners shall submit payment to the city for the installation of the line in one lump sum prior to initiation of the work. After the work is completed and inspected to the satisfaction of the city, the water line shall become the property of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5-1-26; Policy of 2009) 
Sec. 26-60. - Multiple water services through a single meter. 
(a)  No customer shall supply water service to more than one dwelling or premises from a single-service line and meter without first obtaining the written permission of the city. 
(b)  Where the city allows more than one dwelling or premises to be served through a single-service line and meter, the amount of water used by all the dwellings and premises served through a single-service line and meter shall be allocated to each separate dwelling or premises served. The water charge for each such dwelling or premises thus served shall be computed just as if each such dwelling or premises had received through a separately metered service the amount of water so allocated to it, such computation to be made at the city's applicable water rates scheduled, including provisions as to minimum bills. The separate charges for each dwelling or premises served through a single-service line and meter shall then be added together and the sum thereof shall be billed to the customer in whose name the service is supplied. 
(Code 1986, § 5-1-39) 
Sec. 26-61. - Moving; terminating service. 
(a)  Notice of change. When a subscriber shall move from any property for which he has signed a contract with the water system for service, he shall immediately give written notice that he is moving, before moving, to the water system and state the date the water system shall discontinue service, pay all charges and pick up the refund of deposit if he is entitled to refund. 
(b)  Responsibility for payment of water already consumed; and not paid for. Any subscriber shall be responsible to pay for all water he has consumed through the last reading of his water meter after written notice to the water system that he is moving. He shall not be able to receive a refund of his deposit until any unpaid bills for consumption of water have been paid. 
(c)  Charges for change. Any subscriber terminating his contract and any new subscriber moving into the property being vacated shall each pay a fee as fixed from time to time by the council to close out the account of the moving subscriber and to open the account of the new subscriber. Any subscriber who shall transfer from one piece of property served by the water system to another piece of property served by the water system shall pay only a transfer fee in lieu of one fee to stop one contract and a second fee to open a new contract. 
(Code 1986, § 5-1-27) 
Sec. 26-62. - Payment due and penalty. 
(a)  Payment date due. Every subscriber shall be required to pay all bills for services by the 15th of each month. If any subscriber shall not pay all bills due by the 24th of each month, the water system shall be authorized to cut off the water at subscriber's water meter; provided no service shall be discontinued for nonpayment until the water system has provided the consumer with a reminder notice. 
(b)  Penalties for late payments and for non-payments. When any subscriber shall be late in paying any bill for services after the 15th day of each month, he will pay an additional late charge as fixed from time to time by the council. Any subscriber that has not paid all bills due by the 24th of each month, subscriber shall pay a non-payment fee as fixed from time to time by the council. 
(Code 1986, § 5-1-28; Ord. of 11-7-2016, § 1) 
Chapter 28 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - References to city and county officials. 
This chapter is enforced by the county. As this does not preclude involvement of city staff in enforcement activities, references in this chapter to county officials, departments, and agencies shall not be interpreted so as to exclude enforcement by city officials, departments, and agencies and such references shall be deemed to include the appropriate city officials, departments and agencies. A reference to a city officer, department, or agency shall be deemed to include a reference to a county officer, department, or agency acting as an agent of the city. 
Secs. 28-2—28-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PURPOSE 

Sec. 28-21. - Purpose. 
(a)  The zoning regulations and districts herein established have been developed in accordance with the comprehensive plan (master plan) and are designed: 
(1)  To lessen congestion in the streets; 
(2)  To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; 
(3)  To promote health and the general welfare; 
(4)  To provide adequate light and air; 
(5)  To prevent overcrowding of the land; 
(6)  To avoid undue concentration of populations; 
(7)  To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; 
(8)  To protect the tax base. 
The regulations have also been made with reasonable consideration for particular uses; with a view to promote desirable living conditions, sustaining the stability of neighborhoods, protecting property against blight and depreciation, promoting aesthetics, securing economy in governmental expenditures, and preservation of revenue, conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and structures. 
(b)  The requirements set forth in this chapter are minimum permissible standards. It is expected that developers, property owners, the municipal planning commission, and the city council will normally strive for quality development which will exceed these minimum requirements. 
(c)  Changes in zoning and land use classifications will be made only if they bear a substantial relation to the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare. Changes will be granted where the existing classification or zoning results in little or no gain or benefit to the public while inflicting serious injury or loss on the landowner. 
Secs. 28-22—28-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SHORT TITLE 

Sec. 28-46. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known, referred to and cited as the "1992 Zoning Ordinance of the City of Waleska, Georgia." 
Secs. 28-47—28-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RULES AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 28-66. - Rules. 
In the construction of this chapter, the rules contained in this article shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
(1)  Terms used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(2)  Terms used in the singular number include the plural number and words used in the plural include the singular. 
(3)  The term "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(4)  The term "may" is permissive. 
(5)  The term "building" includes the term "structure" and every kind regardless of similarity to building. 
(6)  The term "erected" includes the term "constructed," "moved," "located," or "relocated." 
(7)  The term "lot" includes the term "plot" or "parcel." 
(8)  The term "map" or "zoning map" means the Zoning Map. 
(9)  The term "person" includes the terms "individual," "firms," "partnerships," "corporations," "associations," "governmental bodies," and all other legal entities. 
(10)  The term "used" or "occupied" includes the term "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
(11)  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
(12)  All measured quantities shall be to the nearest integral unit of measure, and if a fraction is one-half or greater, the next highest integral unit shall be used. 
(13)  Where requirements are set based on number of days, days are computed based on the calendar, except that when the final date falls on a weekend or holiday, the day due shall continue until the next regular working day. 
Sec. 28-67. - Use of definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words or terms are defined as indicated in this article. These definitions and all other provisions of this chapter are subject to the rules of interpretation as listed in section 28-68. Any words or terms not herein defined shall be as defined elsewhere in this chapter or, if not defined elsewhere in the ordinance, as defined in Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language, Second College Edition, the said definition to be read in context with the purposes and provision of the part of the ordinance it is being used to define. 
Sec. 28-68. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure detached from a principal building on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or occupied. See Figure 1. Accessory Structure. 
Accessory structure or accessory use means a use of land or of a building, or portion thereof, customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with such principal use. 

Alley means a service way providing a secondary means of public access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alternative tower structure means manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of towers or antennas. 
Animal hospital means a building used for the treatment, housing or boarding of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits, and birds or fowl by a veterinarian. 
Animal husbandry means the production of animals (livestock) and/or the byproduct thereof. The term does not include dogs and cats. 
Animal quarters means any structures which surround or are used to shelter, care for, house, feed, exercise, train, exhibit, display, or show any animals, other than fenced pasture land for grazing. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
Berm means a mound of earth, or the act of pushing earth into a mound. See Figure 2. Buffer. 
Billboard. See Sign, billboard. 
Boardinghouse means a dwelling other than a hotel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals, are provided for three or more persons. 
Buffer means a portion of lot set aside for open space and/or screening purpose, to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other nuisances, to block physical passage to dangerous areas; or to reduce air pollution, dust, dirt, and litter. A buffer may contain a barrier, such as a berm, wall or fence, where such additional screening is necessary to achieve the desired level of buffering between various activities. See Figure 2, Buffer. 

Building means any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Building height means the vertical distance measured from the threshold of the front door entrance to the highest point of roof surface of a flat roof; the deck line of a mansard floor; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridges of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. 
Building line means a line parallel to the street line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard required for the zoning district in which the lot is located. (See Setback line ). 
Cattery means any place that regularly breeds, boards, trains, buys, sells, or trades any cat. A cattery is also a kennel. 
Clinic means a building or a portion of a building where patients are not lodged overnight, but are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians or dentists practicing together. 
Cluster development means a form of development for residential subdivisions that permits a reduction in lot area requirements, provided there is no increase in the number of lots that would normally be permitted under conventional zoning and subdivision requirements, and the resultant land area is devoted to open space. 
Condominium means a multiple dwelling in which each dwelling unit is owned or financed by the occupant, but in which halls, entrance ways and underlying lands are owned jointly. 
Cultural facility means a structure or portion of a structure used as an art gallery, museum, historical display, legitimate theater, library, and other uses similar in character to those listed. 
Day care facility means a structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of persons away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "day care" shall include but not be limited to the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "prekindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," and "preschool." 
Density means the number of dwelling units per acre of land. The term "gross density" refers to the number of units per acre of the total land to be developed. The term "net density" refers to the number of units per acre of land devoted to residential use. 
District means a section of the city for which the zoning regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards and the intensity of use are uniform. 
Double frontage corner lot. See Lot, corner, double frontage. 
Duplex. See Dwelling, duplex. 
Dwelling means a building which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family, duplex, and multifamily residential buildings, roominghouses and boardinghouses, fraternities, sororities, dormitories, manufactured homes, and industrialized home, but not including hotels and motels. Except as otherwise provided in the regulations, only one dwelling shall be allowed on each lot of land located in a district which allows residences. 
Dwelling, attached, means a one-family dwelling attached to two or more one-family dwellings by common vertical walls. 
Dwelling, detached, means a dwelling which is not attached to any other dwellings by common vertical walls. 
Dwelling, duplex, means a structure on a single lot containing two dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof of an unpierced ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units. See Figure 3. Dwelling Types. 

Dwelling, multifamily, means a dwelling containing more than two dwelling units. See Figure 4. 
Dwelling, quadruplex, means four attached dwellings in one structure in which each unit has two open space exposures and shares one or two walls with adjoining unit or units. See Figure 4. Dwelling Types. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a building containing one dwelling unit. See Figure 3. 
Dwelling, townhouse means a one-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more common fire resistant walls. See Figure 4. 
Dwelling, triples, means a dwelling containing three dwelling units, each of which has direct access to the outside or to a common hall. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms designed for the occupancy, cooking, and sleeping of one or more persons living as a family. 
Dwelling, zero-lot-line, means a development of single-family detached residences in which one interior side yard may be lawfully reduced to zero on any lot for the purpose of creating larger, more usable, and more easily maintained yard spaces, particularly on smaller lots. See Figure 3. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
Family means an individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship, or a group of not more than four unrelated persons, occupying a single dwelling unit; provided, however, that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a separate family or families. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group. 
Family day care home means a customary home occupation which provides, for no more than six persons who are not residents of the premises, care and supervision by a State of Georgia registered resident adult for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. 
Farming means the business of cultivating land, or employing it for the purposes of husbandry; the fertilization of the soil as well as caring for and harvesting the crops. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Fence means an artificially constructed barrier of any materials or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of lands. A privacy fence is one that is solid and of a height designed to effectively limit visibility. 
Floor area, gross, means the sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings but not including interior parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height less than six feet. 
Floor area ratio means the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided by the lot area. See Figure 5. Floor Area Ratio. 

Frontage means the side of a lot abutting on a street; the front lot line. See Figure 9. 
Fur farm means any place that regularly breeds and raises rabbits, mink, foxes, or other fur or hide-bearing animals for the harvesting of their skins. 
Garage, general service, means a building or portion thereof, other than a private, storage or parking garage, designed, or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling, or storing of motor-driven vehicles, but not including the storage of wrecked or junked vehicles. 
Garage, parking, A building or portion thereof designed or used primarily for the parking and storage of motor-driven vehicles. 
Garage, private, means an accessory building designed or used for the storage of motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the buildings to which it is accessory. 
Gross floor area. See Floor area, gross. 
Group day care home means an occupied dwelling in which the owner-occupant is licensed by the State of Georgia to provide care and supervision for more than six, but less than 19, persons who are not residents of the dwelling. Such care shall be provided for less than 24 hours a day on a regular basis for compensation. 
Group home means a residence composed of nonrelated individuals with one or more surrogate parents that function as a singular housekeeping unit. All group homes shall be approved and licensed by the State of Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
Health club means a facility designed for the major purpose of physical fitness or weight reducing which includes, but is not limited to, such equipment as weight-resistance machines, whirlpools, saunas, showers, and lockers. The term "health club" shall not include municipal or privately owned recreation buildings. 
Home occupation means an occupation customarily carried on within a dwelling unit for gain or support involving the sale of only those articles, products, or services produced on the premises, conducted entirely within the dwelling with equipment customarily used for household purposes and involving no display of articles or products. A customary home occupation includes the accommodation of not more than two boarders or roomers. 
Husbandry means the raising and breeding animals (livestock) and/or the byproduct thereof. 
Industrialized home means a factory fabricated, transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated, at a building site, on a permanent foundation into a structure to be used for residential purposes. A modular home or industrialized home shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet the approval of the state building administrative board (SBAB) to meet the same requirements as an on-site-built home. The term "industrialized home" includes the term "modular home." 
Junk vehicles means any automobile, vehicle, trailer of any type, or any parts thereof, which is in an inoperative or junk condition by reason of its having been wrecked, dismantled, abandoned, discarded, or which does not have a valid license plate where required and it is incapable of movement by its own power, or it remains in place for a period of more than seven days. Excluded are: 
(1)  Those within a carport or driveway; 
(2)  Those used for instruction at an institution licensed under state school laws; or 
(3)  Those remaining for a reasonable period for insurance investigation. 
Junkyard means a property used for indoor or outdoor storage, keeping or abandonment, whether or not for sale or resale, of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged housewrecking and structural steel materials and equipment or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
Kennel means any place which regularly breeds, boards, trains, buys, sells, or trades any dog. A kennel is a commercial activity. Structures housing more than eight dogs over eight months of age are presumed to be kennels. 
Kindergarten means any premises or portion thereof used for educational work or parental care of children of less than the age required for enrollment in the public school system. 
Livestock does not include a Vietnamese pot-bellied pig. Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs are allowed in all residential districts, not to exceed one per residence. 
Lot means a developed or undeveloped tract of land in one ownership legally transferable as a single unit of land. See Figure 6. Lot. 

Lot area means the net area of any lot that shall be the area bounded by the lot lines, the right-of-way line of any street adjoining the lot, and the centerline of the right-of-way of any private access road adjoining the lot. 
Lot area requirement. For the purpose of determining the lot area per dwelling unit, the total lot area shall be measured with the exclusion of land in the public or private streets rights-of-way and land dedicated for park or school purposes. 
Lot, corner, means a lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees, or adjoining a curve street at the end of a block. 
Lot, corner, double frontage, means a corner lot which has frontage on three or more streets. 
Lot coverage means the area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building and accessory buildings. 
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured within the lot boundaries. 
Lot, double frontage. See Lot, through. 
Lot line means a line record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space. 
Lot line, front, means the lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way. 
Lot line, rear, means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line that is a minimum of ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. 
Lot line, side, means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
Lot of record means a lot which exists as shown or described on a plat or deed in the records of the local registry of deeds. 
Lot, through, means a lot which fronts upon two parallel streets, or which fronts upon two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at the established front building line. 
Lot width (cul-de-sac). For a lot having the majority of its frontage on a cul-de-sac, the lot width shall be the horizontal distance between the side lines of the lot, measured at the minimum required front yard (building setback) line or at a line parallel to said setback line which is no more than twice the minimum front yard setback distance from the street. 
Manufactured home means a dwelling defined in the state code as a manufactured home, subject to the standards and regulations of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, adopted June 15, 1976, as amended. 
Mobile home means a dwelling defined in the Georgia code as a mobile home, otherwise known as a "pre-HUD home" and constructed prior to June 15, 1976. Requirements for manufactured homes apply to mobile homes except where otherwise provided. 
Modular home. See Industrialized home. 
Multifamily dwelling. See Dwelling, multifamily. 
Nuisance means an interference with the enjoyment and use of property. 
Nursery school. See Kindergarten. 
Nursing home means an extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide fulltime convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness, or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. 
Office, business, includes offices for general business, insurance, real estate, etc. 
Office, professional, includes offices for professionals, such as, accountants, architects, attorneys, chiropractors, dentists, doctors, engineers, etc. 
Open space means an uncovered area open to the sky on the same lot with a building. 
Parking lot means an off-street, ground-level area, usually surfaced and improved, for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. See Garage, parking. 
Pet (household pet) means any animal owned or kept for pleasure rather than sale, which is an animal of a species customarily bred and raised to live in the habitat of humans and is dependent upon them for food and shelter; except livestock and wild animals shall not be deemed pets. 
Planning commission means the municipal planning commission. 
Premises means a lot, parcel, tract, or plot of land, together with all buildings and structures existing thereon. 
Principal use. The primary or predominant purpose for which a lot is occupied and/or used. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being quickly decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include, but are not necessarily limited to, kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, and garbage. 
Quadruplex. See Dwelling, quadruplex. 
Recreational facilities, indoor, means any commercial or noncommercial indoor facility such as a bowling alley, shooting gallery, videogame center, etc. 
Recreational facilities, outdoor, means any commercial or noncommercial outdoor facility such as a miniature golf course, golf or baseball driving range, tennis court, swimming pool, drive-in theater, etc. 
Riding stable and academy means an establishment where horses are kept for riding or driving or are stabled for compensation or incidental to the operation of any club, association, ranch, or similar establishment. 
Roof means the outside top covering of a building. See Figure 7, Roof. 

Roominghouse. See Boardinghouse. 
Salvage yard. See Junkyard. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where putrescible wastes are disposed of using sanitary landfilling techniques. 
Sanitary landfilling means an engineered method of disposing of putrescible wastes on land by spreading them in thin layers, compacting them to the smallest practical volume, placing an earth cover thereon, and such other measures as are necessary to protect human health and the environment. 
Schools, private, parochial, and other elementary, means any places for teaching children grades one to seven, inclusive, which are not a part of the State of Georgia public school system, but which teach the subjects commonly taught in the common elementary schools of the state. 
Schools, public means any places for teaching children grades one to 12 inclusive and no other, and a part of the public school system as defined by the law of the State of Georgia. 
Screening means a method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms, or densely planted vegetation. 
Setback. See Yard. 
Setback line means that line that is the required minimum distance from the street right-of-way line or any other lot line that establishes the area within which the principal structure must be erected or placed. See Figure 9. 
Shopping center means a group of commercial establishments planned, constructed, and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements. 
Sign means any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, events, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. 
Sign, animated, means any sign or part of a sign which changes its physical position by any movement or rotation or which gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation. 
Sign, area, means the entire face of a sign including all advertising surfaces and any framing, trim, or molding, but not including the supporting structure. 
Sign, banner, means any sign intended to be hung either with or without frames, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind. National flags, flags of political subdivisions, and symbolic flags of any institution or business shall not be considered banners for the purpose of this chapter. 
Sign, bench, means a sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat. 
Sign, billboard, means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. 
Sign, bulletin board, means a sign which identifies an institution or organization on the premises of which it is located and which contains the name of the institution or organization, the names of individuals connected with it, and general announcements of events or activities occurring at the institution or similar messages. 
Sign, canopy, means a sign affixed to, imposed upon, or painted on any rooflike structure either permanently or temporarily extended over a sidewalk or walkway, which can be mounted flush or suspended. A flush canopy sign is one that is mounted in such a manner that a continuous plane with the canopy is formed. A hanging canopy sign is one suspended from beneath the canopy. See Figure 8. Signs. 
Sign, double-faced (back-to-back), means a sign with two parallel, or nearly parallel faces, back-to-back, and located not more than 24 inches from each other. 
Sign, face, means the area or display surface used for the message. 
Sign, flashing, means any directly or indirectly illuminated sign which exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever. 
Sign, free standing. See Sign, pole. 
Sign, ground, means a permanently affixed sign which extends no more than four feet above grade, and is wholly independent of a building for support. See Figure 8. 
Sign, illuminated, means a sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting either by lights on or in the sign or directed towards the sign. 
Sign, illuminated indirect, means a sign illuminated by an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
Sign, marquee, means any sign attached to and made part of a marquee. The term "marquee" is defined as a permanent rooflike structure projecting beyond a building wall at an entrance to a building or extending along and projecting beyond the building's wall and generally designed and constructed to provide protection against the weather. 
Sign, mobile, means any sign which is mounted on wheels and for the purpose of transportation to a site where an advertising message may be conveyed. 
Sign, off-premises (off-site), means a sign which is not located upon the premises of the business or entity indicated or advertised by said sign. Off-premises sign can be an outdoor advertising display, a temporary political sign or a temporary real estate directional sign. 
Sign, on-premises (on-site), means a sign, other than a special sign or temporary sign which identifies, advertises, or promotes a product, service, person, place, activity, event, idea, or any other thing located or obtainable on or at the lot where this sign is located. 
Sign, permanent, means any sign attached securely to a building, roof, wall, or a canopy or the ground by means of concrete, bolts, metal braces or treated wood or cedar, and continuing in the same state or without essential change to the sign structure. 
Sign, pole, means a sign that is mounted on a free standing pole or other support so the bottom edge of the sign face is eight feet or more above grade. See Figure 8. 
Sign, portable, means a sign that can be moved from place to place that is not permanently affixed to a building, structure, or the ground, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Signs with wheels removed; 
(2)  Signs with chassis or support constructed without wheels; 
(3)  Signs designed to be transported by trailer or wheels; 
(4)  A- or T-frame signs; 
(5)  Menu-, sandwich- or sidewalk-type signs; 
(6)  Searchlight stands; and 
(7)  Umbrellas, hot air, gas-filled balloons used for advertising. 
Sign, projecting, means a sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support and which projects more than 12 inches from such building. See Figure 8. 
Sign, roof, means a sign that is attached, or mounted permanently on the roof of a building or which is wholly dependent upon a building for support and which may or may not project above the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable, or hip roof, the decline of a building with a mansard roof, or projects above the building with a flat roof. See Figure 8. 
Sign, stacked, means a structure of two vertically adjacent signs with their faces orientated in the same direction. 
Sign, temporary, means a sign or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plywood, or other light, impermanent material and designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of time. 
Sign, temporary window, means a sign that is applied or attached temporarily to the exterior or interior of a window for the primary benefit of the passing public used to announce a special event or products for sale. 
Sign, trailer. See Sign, mobile. 
Sign, V-shape, means a structure of two signs in the shape of the letter "V" when viewed from above having their faces oriented in opposite directions at an angle not greater than 90 degrees. 
Sign, wall, means a sign fastened to the wall or outer surface of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall or outer surface becomes the supporting structure for or forms the background surface of the sign and which does not project more than 12 inches from such building structure. See Figure 8. 
Sign, warning, means signs limited to messages of warning, danger or caution. 
Sign, wind, banners, mean wind-actuated devices, balloons, or other gas-filled figures. 
Sign, window, means a sign that is applied or attached permanently to the exterior or interior of a window or located in such manner within a building that it can be seen from the exterior of the structure through a window. See Figure 8. 

Significant groundwater recharge area means any area as designated on Hydrologic Atlas, No. 18, Maps of the Most Significant Groundwater Recharge Areas of Georgia; 1988, as published by the Georgia Geologic Survey, Environmental Protection Division, Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Single-family dwelling. See Dwelling, single-family. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except water-carried body waste, but shall include garbage, rubbish, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludge, animal manures, industrial wastes, abandoned automobiles, dredging wastes, construction wastes, hazardous wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semi-solid state not otherwise defined in these regulations. 
Stockyard means a place where transient cattle, sheep, swine, or horses are kept temporarily for slaughter, market, or sleeping. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something on the ground. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and similar telecommunications towers or antennas. 
Tower and tower structure height means the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or tower structure including antennas. 
Triplex. See Dwelling, triplex. 
Use. General category of use such as commercial, industrial, and residential. 
Wild animal means any living member of the animal kingdom, including those born or raised in captivity; but excluding human beings, livestock, dogs and cats, rodents, hybrid animals that are part wild, captive-bred species of common cage birds and aquarium-kept fish, amphibians and reptiles. 
Yard means an open space on a lot situated between the principal building or use on the lot and a lot line and unoccupied by any structure, except as otherwise provided herein. See Figure 9. Yard. 

Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. On corner lots, the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
Yard, rear, means an open space on the same lot with a principal building or use, unoccupied except by an accessory building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building or use projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, located between the building or use and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Zero-lot-line. See Dwelling, zero-lot-line. 
Zoning means the power of the city to provide within its territorial boundaries for the: 
(1)  Zoning and districting of property for various uses and the prohibition of other or different uses within such zones or districts; and 
(2)  Regulation of development and the improvement of real estate within such zones or districts in accordance with the uses of property for which said zones or districts were established. 
Secs. 28-69—28-94. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 28-95. - Interpretation. 
(a)  In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, and welfare, including those purposes, intents, objectives, or similar language as set out in various articles of this chapter. 
(b)  Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this zoning chapter upon the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this Code or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation of any land, the regulations which are more restrictive (or which impose higher standards or requirements) shall govern. 
Sec. 28-96. - Scope of regulations. 
Except as otherwise provided in article XII, pertaining to nonconforming uses: 
(1)  All buildings erected hereafter; 
(2)  All uses of land or buildings established hereafter; 
(3)  All structural alteration or relocation of existing buildings occurring hereafter; and 
(4)  All enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter; 
shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter which are applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings, uses or land shall be located. 
Sec. 28-97. - Building permits. 
Building permits are required for all structures erected, converted, enlarged, restructured, moved or structurally altered, and the provisions for said building permit shall be separately set out in the building code. However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and provided that construction is begun within one year of such effective date and diligently pursued to completion, said building or structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit has been issued, and further may upon completion be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally designated subject thereafter to the provisions of section 28-394, pertaining to permit procedures. 
Sec. 28-98. - Access to public street. 
(a)  Every principal structure hereafter erected shall be on a zoning lot or parcel of land which adjoins a public street or an exclusive permanent easement of access to a public street; such exclusive easement to each individual lot to be at least 20 feet wide, unless a lesser width was duly established and recorded prior to the effective date of this chapter, or where such lot or parcel is a part of a neighborhood plan as outlined in section 28-194. 
(b)  No exclusive permanent easement of access will be allowed to intersect another permanent easement of access, unless at the point of intersection the total width of exclusive permanent easement is equal to 20 feet multiplied by the number of lots or parcels served. The total width is required from the point of intersection to a public street. 
(c)  However, a 60-foot-wide access easement to a public street will be permitted to serve a minor subdivision, as defined by the Development Rules and Regulations of Cherokee County. Any subdivision of land of five or more lots or parcels of land shall require full compliance with the street standards and specifications as outlined in the Cherokee County Development Regulations. 
Sec. 28-99. - Construction of accessory buildings. 
(a)  Requirements. No accessory building or use shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. The preceding requirements shall not apply to accessory use and structures in the TND district. 
(1)  Accessory structure. A structure detached from a principal building on the same lot and incidental and subordinate to the principal building. 
(2)  Barn. Building traditionally used for storing hay, grain, etc., and often for housing livestock. 
(3)  Lot coverage. The cumulative square foot measurement of the principal building footprint, any accessory buildings' footprints, and accessory uses such as pools along with the concrete decking and tennis courts, as well as patios of impervious material. 
(b)  Location on lot. 
(1)  Where an accessory building is structurally attached to a main building it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations of the ordinance applicable to the main building. 
(2)  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by breezeway, passageway, or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
(3)  On a corner lot, no accessory building or use shall be located closer to any street right-of-way line than the principal building setback. 
(4)  Accessory uses and structures shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the principal use or structure. No garage or other accessory building or use shall be allowed within a front yard area or be located closer to ten feet to a side or rear lot line. A two-foot overhang for eaves or gutters will be permitted within this ten-foot setback. 
(c)  Number and size. No accessory use, or structure, or combination of, shall exceed the number or total lot coverage area shown in the attached chart. Wells, pumphouses, and wellhouses of less than 35 square feet, gazebos and other decorative structures of less than 120 square feet, farm outbuildings, and barns shall not be included in determining the allowable number or size. No accessory structure may exceed the footprint of the principal structure. 
(d)  Height. No accessory building or portion thereof located in the required side or rear yard shall exceed 25 feet in height or the height of the primary structure, whichever is lower. 
(e)  Structure limitations. Accessory structures shall not be used as dwelling units or for lodging purposes, except as otherwise provided herein (see section 28-100). 
(f)  Incidental uses. The following accessory uses and structures and similar uses and structures which are incidental to a residential use or uses are permitted in their respective residential districts: 
(1)  A children's playhouse; private greenhouse. 
(2)  A swimming pool for private use. Pools shall be fenced with a sturdy material of chainlink or of material and colors compatible with the main dwelling; that prevents entry; that is continuous around the pool except for gate openings; that is a minimum of five feet in height; that has latches out of reach of children or at least five feet off the ground; and locked to exclude all persons, unless a responsible person is at the pool. 
(3)  A garage, shed or building for domestic storage. 
(4)  Signs, other than advertising signs, as permitted and regulated in each district incorporated in this chapter. 
(5)  Public utility communication, electric, gas, water and sewer lines, their supports, and incidental equipment. 
(6)  Carports. 
(7)  A satellite disk or dish, subject to the same restrictions and requirements as sheds and storage buildings. 
(8)  Domestic pets such as dogs and cats of an appropriate type and number kept inside or outside a structure but not violating health standards, constituting inhumane treatment or constituting a nuisance to neighbors. Farm animals, including horses, are not domestic pets for purposes of this provision. 
(9)  No fence or freestanding wall, other than a retaining wall, shall be more than eight feet in height or be constructed in a public right-of-way or future street right-of-way as defined by the major thoroughfare plan. If a fence is adjacent to a public road right-of-way and within the required setback in a residential district, such fence shall not exceed six feet in height respectively and shall further meet the requirements set forth in this section. If a fence is placed on the property line, then it becomes an adjoining fence with that property owner. We recommend that fences be placed a minimum of six inches off the property line onto your property. 
(10)  Guesthouses. Guesthouses are accessory structures which are allowed in residential districts. Only one guesthouse shall be constructed concurrently with or after the construction of the principal structure. Any living area included in a detached garage or swimming pool cabana is a guesthouse. Mini-warehouse facilities may establish one resident-manager of the facility. 
Accessory Structure Standards 

 
This chart would exclude a home or pool or tennis court accessory structures only. 
Sec. 28-100. - Guesthouses. 
Guesthouses are accessory structures which are allowed in the residential districts. Only one guest house is allowed per parcel or lot, and said guest house shall be constructed concurrently with or after the construction of the principal structure. Any living area included in a detached garage or swimming pool cabana is a guesthouse. A freestanding guesthouse shall not exceed 900 square feet of heated and finished floor area. When a guesthouse is combined with a detached garage or cabana, said total structure shall not exceed 1,200 square feet with a maximum of 900 square feet of heated and finished living space contained in the guesthouse portion of said structure. Mini-warehouse facilities may establish one resident-manager unit per facility. Said unit may only be occupied by the resident-manager of the facility. 
Sec. 28-101. - Obstructions. 
In all zoning districts, no fence, wall, structure, shrubbery, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet, except utility poles, light or street sign standards or tree trunks, shall be permitted within 25 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets, roads, highways, or railroads, so long as the same also complies with state law. 
Sec. 28-102. - Approval required for building permit. 
For all business developments fronting on a state, interstate highway, and county road, no building permit shall be issued until the approval of the state department of transportation or the county engineer has been obtained by the applicant on entrances and exits, curb radii, drainage and other matters that are the appropriate concern of the department. 
Sec. 28-103. - Conformity to chapter regulations. 
No building or structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or altered, except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter. 
(1)  Public buildings and use. Buildings erected and owned by any government or other public agency shall be permitted in any zoning district. 
(2)  Street setback requirement. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected closer than 75 feet from the right-of-way of any existing two-lane arterial; or 65 feet from the right-of-way of any existing two-lane collector street; or 50 feet from the right-of-way of any existing four-lane interstate or arterial. 
Sec. 28-104. - Street classifications. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all the streets, roads, and highways are classified as local streets, major or minor collector streets, arterial, and interstates. The classification of each street is shown on the Cherokee Road Classification Map which is on file in the office of the county planning and zoning department. 
Sec. 28-105. - Road requirements for business property. 
Except as provided in this article, the site plan of each business property shall include a minimum 20-foot width roadway which shall connect to adjoining business property. The road is not required to be paved unless and until the adjoining property is developed. The zoning administrator is authorized to grant an exception to this requirement upon presentation of an engineering feasibility study presented to and satisfactory to the county engineer that due to location, isolation, uniqueness of land, or topography, a connecting access is not feasible or is not warranted. Such an exception shall be made a part of the public record with the findings of the administrator set out and the engineering study attached. 
Sec. 28-106. - Incorporated regulations; controlling provisions. 
The Cherokee County Development Standards, also known as regulations, and as may be amended; the Cherokee County Soil Sedimentation and Control Ordinance, and as may be amended; and the Cherokee County Floodplain Regulation Ordinance, and as may be amended, are incorporated herein and are made a part of this chapter for all purposes, including but not limited to interpretation, enforcement, and penalties. As between two conflicting provisions, this chapter shall control. 
Secs. 28-107—28-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 28-126. - Division of districts. 
In order to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the following districts: 

 
Sec. 28-127. - Zoning district map adopted by reference. 
The boundaries of zoning district are shown on the map designated as the zoning district map. The zoning district map and all notations, references, and other information shown thereon are a part of this chapter and have the same force and effect as if the zoning district map and all the notations, references, and other information shown thereon were fully set forth and described herein, which zoning district map is properly attested and is on file with the city clerk or county clerk or otherwise safeguarded by the city or county. Where the zoning district map is not available upon adoption of this chapter, or has not been fully amended to reflect the new zoning designations, the current zoning pursuant to the 1995 ordinance, as amended, shall remain in effect and the zoning regulations for the nearest equivalent of that zoning to the districts set out herein shall apply. Interpretations of the zoning designations shall be by the zoning board of appeals. 
Zoning Equivalent to 1995 Ordinance Provisions 

 
Sec. 28-128. - District boundaries. 
All streets, alleys, and railroad rights-of-way; if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets and railroad rights-of-way. Where the centerline of a street, alley or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline. In all other cases, the district boundary lines shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning district map. Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary line of any use district as shown on the zoning map incorporated herein, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where district boundary lines are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)  Whereas a lot held in one ownership and of record, at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, is divided by a district boundary line, said lot shall remain presently zoned and unaffected by said division. 
Secs. 28-129—28-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DISTRICT USES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 28-154. - Purpose. 
(a)  Estate residential district (R-80). The purpose of this district is to permit residential development in those areas that are expected to become more nearly urban in character. The areas involved are generally in transition from agricultural to residential development and are considered appropriate for low density residential development. 
(b)  Single-family residential districts (R-40, R-30). The purpose of these residential districts is to enable residential development of a low density urban character. The regulations are designed to permit and encourage residential development in areas where urbanization is taking place. 
(c)  Office/institutional district (OI). The purpose of this district is to provide a location for office, institutional, medical, and educational development. Limited related retail business and service activities may be permitted but not involved with storage and processing. 
(d)  Neighborhood commercial district (NC). The purpose of this district is to provide for limited retail activities, commercial sales, personal services, and professional offices to serve the general need of a residential neighborhood. Development of commercial uses is regulated for compatibility with the surrounding residential areas. Districts are located to create commercial centers or clusters and to discourage commercial strip development. 
(e)  General commercial—Limited use district (GC-LU). The purpose of this district is to provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a wide variety of commercial sales and service activities which generally serve a wide area. The permitted uses are generally located along the major thoroughfares. Activities with limited storage may be permitted. Districts are located to create centers or concentrations of commercial activities and to discourage commercial strip development. 
Table 28-154. Minimum District Development Standard 

 
Existing two-lane arterial and collector roads required a 65-foot setback limit (See section 28-103(2)). 
Existing four-lane interstate and arterial roads require a 50-foot setback limit (See section 28-103(2)). 
Sec. 28-155. - Development requirements. 
The requirements regarding lot size, building size, and building placement on the lot for each zone district shall be met as indicated in section 28-156, application of standards, Table 28-154. minimum district development standards and additional requirements listed in section 28-157. 
Table 28-155. Permitted Uses 

 
Note: X = permitted use 
(Ord.of 4-2-2012(3); Ord. of 7-17-2017, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 28-156. - Lot requirements. 
(a)  Lots of record. Any lot of record which is legal at the time of the adoption or amendment to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, that has an area or width that is less than required by this chapter, may be used, subject to the following exceptions and modifications: 
(1)  Individual lot not meeting minimum lot size requirements. Except as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, in any zoning district in which one-family dwellings are permitted, any lot of record existing at the time of adoption or amendment to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which has an area, width, or depth less than that required by this chapter may be used as a building site for a one-family dwelling. 
(2)  In the case of such a lot, when it is not possible to provide the required side yards and at the same time build a minimum width one-family dwelling, the zoning board of appeals is hereby authorized to grant a variance reducing the side yard requirements for such lot the minimum amount necessary for a reasonable dwelling, but in no case shall each of the side yards be less than five feet in width. 
(b)  Lot area. No lot shall be reduced in size so that lot width or depth, size of yards, lot area per family or any other requirement of this chapter is not maintained. This limitation shall not apply: 
(1)  When a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
(2)  To dormitories, fraternities, sororities and other similar living quarters which are accessory to a permitted use and which have no cooking facilities in individual rooms or apartments. 
(3)  To rental units in a hotel, motel, motor lodge, tourist home or to rooms in a roominghouse or boardinghouse. 
(c)  Corner lots. The minimum yard requirements for corner lots with multiple road frontage shall not be less than the minimum front yard requirements for such lots as specified for each district. Such yards shall be classified as required front yards. 
(d)  Through lots. On lots having frontage on two streets, but not located on a corner, the minimum front yard shall be provided on each street in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Double frontage corner lot. On lots having frontage on more than two streets, the minimum front yard shall be provided in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter on at least two of the street frontages. The minimum front yard on the other frontage or frontages may be reduced along the other streets in accordance with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  Density. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered to: 
(1)  House a greater number of families per acre or occupy a smaller lot area per family than are herein required. 
(2)  Have narrower or smaller front, rear or side yards than are herein required. 
(g)  Yards and other spaces. 
(1)  No part of a yard or the off-street parking or loading spaces that are required in connection with any building or use for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this chapter shall be included as part of the yard or off-street parking or loading spaces required for another building, except as specifically provided herein. 
(2)  Whenever a lot abuts upon a public alley, one-half of the alley width may be considered as a portion of the required yard. 
(3)  Where these regulations refer to side streets, the zoning administrator shall be guided by the pattern of development in the vicinity of the lot in question in determining which of two streets is the side street. 
(4)  Every part of a required yard (except rear yards) shall be open to the sky, except as authorized by this article, and excepting ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, window air conditioning units, chimneys, cornices and ornamental features which may project to a distance not to exceed 24 inches into a required yard. 
(h)  Front yards. 
(1)  Where an official line has been established for the future widening or opening of a street or major thoroughfare upon which a lot abuts, the depth of a front or side yard shall be measured from such official line to the nearest line of the building. 
(2)  Platforms or paved terraces, not covered by a roof or canopy and which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend or project into the front or side yard not more than six feet. Unenclosed porches shall be considered part of the main structure. 
(3)  Within the same block and zoning district, when 25 percent or more of the existing buildings which are located within 200 feet of each side of a lot have less than the minimum required setback, the setback of such lot should not exceed the average of the existing setbacks. 
(i)  Side yards. 
(1)  For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a group of business or commercial building separated by common or party walls shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
(2)  The minimum width of side yards for schools, libraries, churches, community houses and other public and semipublic buildings in residential districts shall be 25 feet, except where a side yard is adjacent to a business or commercial district, in which case the width of that yard shall be required in Table 28-154 for the district in which the building is located. 
(j)  Rear yards. Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, outside stairways, balconies opening up on fire towers and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues, may project into the required rear yard for a distance of not more than five feet, but only where the same are so placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation. 
Sec. 28-157. - District development; permitted uses. 
(a)  Office/institutional (OI). Distributive functions such as loading, unloading, storage, packaging, and unpackaging shall be limited to ten percent of the total building area and five percent of the total lot area. 
(b)  Neighborhood commercial (NC). No outdoor storage is permitted. 
Sec. 28-158. - Site plans. 
(a)  Site plan requirements; exceptions. The features provided for in this section shall be included in site plan requirements for all developments within all zoning districts, except for R-80, R-40, and R-30. 
(b)  Site development plan. The site development plan shall be submitted at the time of construction plan submittal; if not submitted, the land disturbance permit shall not be permitted to proceed. Prior to issuance of the LDP, a site development plan shall be submitted addressing all issues described in subsection (b)(1) through (15) of this section. All plans shall be submitted for approval by noon on Friday, and a plan review will take place during the work day with city officials and the developer the following Friday. Any changes requested by the city shall be reviewed on or before the second Friday before the original submission. 
(1)  Location map. A general location map at a scale of one inch equals 500 feet indicating existing zoning on the site, adjoining roads and the adjacent areas are required. 
(2)  Survey boundaries. Surveyed boundaries of the entire tract and their relationship to adjoining properties, public rights-of-way, and easements. 
(3)  Building locations. Location of all proposed buildings, their shape, size, and setback in appropriate scale. 
(4)  Right-of-way. Location and right-of-way of streets, roads, alleys, railroads, public crosswalks, with lengths and widths, road names, or designations. 
(5)  Buffers. Proposed buffers and landscaping. 
(6)  Topography. Existing topographic conditions with contour intervals of five feet or less; areas that have slopes greater than 15 percent shall be identified. 
(7)  Floodplain. Location of streams, lakes, swamps, and if applicable, the boundary and elevation of the 100-year floodplain as determined by the past history of flooding or the best available data. 
(8)  Drainage. Size and location of all drainage mechanisms and the applicable drainage area within the tract or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjacent to the tract; grades and invert elevations of sewers shall be shown; all elevations shall refer to mean sea level datum where public water and/or public sewers are to be installed. Layouts of all utility and drainage easements. 
(9)  Soil erosion plan. A soil erosion plan showing the mitigation techniques that will be employed during construction. 
(10)  Common open spaces. Location of parks or common open spaces, tree areas to be retained or added and other open spaces. Designation of all land to be reserved or dedicated for public use or used as recreation areas. 
(11)  Recreation facilities. Proposed bikeways, jogging trails, pedestrian ways, or other recreational facilities if provided within the residential district. 
(12)  Sketches. Representative architectural sketches or renderings of typical proposed structures, signs, landscaping, screening, and/or fencing. 
(13)  Off-street parking and loading. Show the access point to the public street system, off-street parking and loading plan. 
(14)  Development report. A report setting forth the proposed development schedule, indicating the sequence of development of the various sections thereof, and the approximate time period required for completion of each phase. 
(15)  Technical data. Statistical or technical data as necessary to accurately describe the proposed development including, but not limited to, the following shall be included in the development report: 
a.  Total land area. 
b.  Amount of land to be used for recreational or open space purpose. 
c.  Total number of dwelling units and gross density by type of land use. 
d.  Amount of space to be occupied by streets and parking areas. 
e.  Amount of any submerged land within the project boundary. 
f.  The total ground coverage and floor area of all buildings. 
g.  A breakdown of the number of kinds of proposed buildings, including squared footage, and the number and range of lot sizes and proposed setback and yard dimensions for typical lots and/or building types. 
h.  Deed record names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 
(c)  Plan format. Plan format refers to section 28-495, pertaining to site plan format. 
(d)  General site development and design regulations for commercial districts. 
(1)  Purpose and intent. Careful attention to attractive and citizen-friendly community design is in the economic interests of the city, its citizens, and business owners. Attractive and integrated community design features tend to improve the city's image, raise overall property values, attract new businesses, and improve the quality of life. Investment in design features tends to result in a positive return on investment for property owners, private industry, and government. For example, the money spent on landscaped roadway medians, sidewalks, and street trees is likely to be amply returned in the form of increased tax revenue resulting from the overall increase in property values that accompanies attractive and desirable urban and suburban areas. 
a.  Much of the existing commercial development, particularly development along the city's principal highways, is in need of aesthetic and functional enhancement. Existing conditions that are inconsistent with the objectives of quality community design include: chainlink fencing enclosures of autos and trailers without adequate screening; various building materials and/or equipment stored in front yards in view of the traveling public; continuous, uncurbed, highway access; old, dilapidated, and/or unattractive awnings and facade treatments; excessive signage in the form of fluttering ribbons, portable signs, sandwich signs, and welcome flags; a lack of front yard landscaping; storage/maintenance bay doors and loading areas facing the highway; dumpsters placed in front/side yards in unobstructed view from highways; and a general lack of interparcel access (i.e., connections between adjacent developments). 
b.  It is the intent of the city to require new commercial developments, install appropriate improvements and comply with general design regulations intended to improve aesthetic appearance and function. It is also the intent of the city to require substantial progress toward compliance with these improvement requirements and general design regulations in cases where existing businesses are expanded. 
c.  These design regulations are intended to merge traffic engineering, civil engineering, urban design, landscape architecture, and land use planning principles into a set of regulations for commercial developments and properties. The regulations are the minimum necessary to: preserve the carrying capacity of major arteries; reduce the number of vehicular turning movements to and from the major artery, thereby reducing the potential for automobile and pedestrian traffic accidents; encourage and promote the most suitable uses of land; ensure the adequate grading and draining of developments; promote an environment which reduces the visual clutter and other distracting characteristics resulting from various aspects typical of urban and suburban commercial strip development; prohibit the needless, wasteful and purposeless aesthetic degradation of the county's highway and major street corridors; and promote a more healthy environment. 
(2)  Applicability. This subsection (d) of this section shall apply to all properties located within commercial (GC-LU, NC, and OI) zoning districts. New development shall be required to conform to these regulations. A substantial improvement of an existing development shall be required to conform to these regulations or, in cases where physically impossible, make substantial progress toward meeting the regulations contained within this chapter. The term "substantial improvement" shall be defined as increasing the floorspace dedicated to commercial/industrial operations by more than 50 percent, the addition of a new or increase of an open storage area by more than 30 percent of the existing area. 
(3)  Site requirements. The following requirements are applicable to the development of all commercial and industrial sites or properties: 
a.  Utilities. All utilities, including but not limited to electric and telephone lines, serving uses on site should be installed underground where appropriate and permissible. 
b.  Grading and site development. Buildings and parking lots shall be appropriately drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets. Grading plans for new development shall be submitted to the county engineer for review and approval, and all grading activities shall comply with approved plans. Stormwater management plans shall be submitted to the county engineer for review and approval. All disturbed or graded ground areas of a building site not used for buildings or open storage areas shall be appropriately stabilized and grassed or covered with plants or landscaping materials. 
c.  Screening of outside storage yards. All areas devoted to the outside storage of vehicles, merchandise, and/or equipment not intended for display for public rent, lease, or sale shall be screened from view from the right-of-way of the highway or major street along the entire property frontage, except in areas where access crossings have been approved. Screening may be accomplished by a vegetative buffer either planted or undisturbed or a combination of both, by a building that meets architectural standards of this chapter, by use of landscape material, either planted or existing, by an earthen berm, by a 70 percent opaque, wooden fence or wall, or combination of these screening methods. The use of low-lying landscaping that does not screen the display areas from view from the public right-of-way shall not be deemed to comply with this requirement. 
d.  Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting installed shall be of such height, location and intensity so that direct illumination of the right-of-way of the highway or major street is avoided. The installation of shields or hoods on such lighting facilities may be required to comply with this standard. All lighting shall comply with article XXII. 
e.  Landscaping. Every building site and commercial use area shall be landscaped. A minimum ten-foot-wide landscape strip shall be installed and maintained along the entire property fronting the highway or major street, except in cases where access areas are approved. A minimum six-foot-wide landscape strip shall be required along all side and rear lot or lease lines, except in cases where shared driveways or access areas are approved. The area surrounding the road entrances to the site or area, the front landscape strip, required parking lot landscaping, and all other required landscape and/or open spaces, shall be designed, installed, and maintained according to plans prepared by a professional landscape architect, architect, surveyor, engineer, or land planner submitted to and approved by the city. Landscaping shall be completed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, unless appropriate provisions are made to guarantee the installation of landscaping after such certificate is issued, such as approval by the county of a bond for landscaping. 
f.  Location of parking areas. Parking areas shall be set back at least ten feet from public rights-of-way. Parking areas are encouraged but not required to be located in side and rear yards where such parking areas can be partially or wholly screened by buildings from the public right-of-way. The ten-foot strip between the public road and the edge of the parking area shall be landscaped with evergreen vegetation capable of reaching a height of three feet and/or able to withstand pruning to a height of three feet. The purpose of the vegetation is to reduce the visual impact of the parked vehicles by screening from public view the parking area. 
g.  Open display of vehicles, equipment, and merchandise. In commercial zoning districts where permitted, the outside storage or display of vehicles, equipment, and merchandise to be rented, leased, or sold shall be visible along no more than 50 percent of the frontage of the property abutting the highway or major street, excluding approved driveway entrances and exits. Screening may be accomplished by: 
1.  A natural and/or planted vegetative buffer; 
2.  A building that meets architectural standards of this chapter; 
3.  Use of landscape material, either planted or existing; 
4.  An earthen berm; 
5.  A 70 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or wall, or combination of these screening methods. 
The use of low-lying landscaping that does not screen the display areas from view from the public right-of-way shall not be deemed to comply with this requirement. 
h.  Plans. Site development as-built drawings, containing a boundary survey, location, elevation, height, and square footage of buildings, parking areas, utilities, walls, and stormwater facilities, pertinent site development data, and any other requirements of the planning director or county engineer shall be submitted to and approved by the department prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or completion. 
i.  Commercial building requirements. The following requirements are applicable to all commercial buildings: 
1.  Screening of dumpsters. All garbage dumpsters and other similar areas devoted to the storage of waste materials shall be screened on three sides of said dumpster or area with a minimum six-foot-high solid wooden fence, or a wall constructed of materials substantially similar in appearance to the building on site that complies with the architectural requirements of these regulations. In addition, said dumpster areas shall be gated on the fourth side, and the gate shall be architecturally finished. 
2.  Building materials. Building exteriors not screened (50 percent opaque) from view from the right-of-way shall have an architectural treatment of brick, stone, split face blocks, painted/stained wood, architectural metal, vinyl, stucco, or imitations of the same or other architectural treatments approved by the planning director. Prohibited building materials are: 
(i)  *Industrial or agricultural metal sheeting. 
(ii)  *Standard painted or unpainted concrete block. 
(iii)  Any awnings shall be maintained in good order, and any dilapidated awnings or canopies shall be removed. 
*These finishes are allowed on the side or rear of buildings if a minimum of 50 percent opaque from thoroughfare row. 
3.  Building and utility appurtenances. All water towers, cooling towers, storage tanks, and other structures or equipment incidental to the primary use of a building or site shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building or effectively screened from view from the public rights-of-way. All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from the view from the public right-of-way and adjacent streets by material compatible with the building architecture, by the use of a parapet wall, or by specially designed rooftop penthouse enclosures. Ground-mounted equipment such as power transformers and air-conditioning units shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way by fencing or landscaping, or painted to match the primary building. 
4.  Signage. All freestanding signs in commercial districts shall be of monument style, have a base of masonry construction, or if the sign consists of columns instead of a base, said columns shall be constructed of materials to match or compliment the principal structure or structures located on the site. All such signs shall be considered freestanding for purposes of allowable sign area and height requirements according to article X of this chapter and shall be constructed in compliance with same. 
5.  Rooflines on commercial buildings. 
(i)  All buildings in commercial building districts shall have a pitched roof with a minimum pitch of 4.5 inches vertical elevation per one foot of horizontal distance, except as provided herein. 
(ii)  Commercial buildings without a pitched roof shall have a detailed parapet and cornice in keeping with the overall architectural style of the building. 
(iii)  Exposed roofing (defined as having a pitch greater than 1:12) shall be finished in architectural metal or synthetic panels, or dimensional shingles. 
6.  Building arrangement and architectural consistency. When commercial buildings are developed as a planned center, all buildings located within the center shall be constructed such that the architectural styles, building materials and roof materials are similar. Additionally, color schemes for the outside of the buildings should be similar such that the center or park presents a consistent style of architecture and architectural treatments. 
j.  Access requirements. The following development requirements are applicable to all commercial sites or properties: 
1.  Curb cuts and access specifications. 
(i)  All entrances or exits of any street or driveway, public or private, from or to any state highway shall be approved by the state department of transportation and the county engineer, prior to the construction of such entrances or exits and prior to the issuance of any development permit for any improvement to be served by such entrances or exits. 
(ii)  No curb cut or access driveway shall be permitted to be located closer than 100 feet to the nearest existing or proposed right-of-way of an intersecting roadway or closer than 40 feet to a side property line, unless the adjacent property owner is in agreement with the encroachment of the driveway and approval is obtained from the county engineer. Curb cuts or access driveways shall be no narrower than 24 feet from back of curb to back of curb. Strict adherence to these requirements may not be practical in all instances as determined by the county engineer. The county engineer may limit the maximum width of a curb cut and/or the number of curb cuts to a parcel as necessary when it is deemed to be of benefit to the safety and welfare of the public. 
(iii)  In cases of a substantial improvement of an existing development on a site that does not meet these curb cut and access specifications, the applicant may be required by the county engineer to prepare an access plan as part of plans for the substantial improvement that either meets these requirements or moves substantially toward compliance with these regulations. Approval by the state department of transportation and the county engineer shall be required, as applicable. 
(iv)  Additional rights-of-way shall be dedicated to the public as required by the most current functional classification of county roads as designated by the county engineer, and as reasonable at the discretion of the county engineer. Roadway entrances and improvements, including necessary deceleration lanes and right/left turn lanes, shall be designed, installed, and maintained as approved by the state department of transportation, as applicable, or the county engineer, in accordance with state or county requirements, as applicable and as may be amended from time to time. 
(v)  The following factors may be considered during the review and approval of a specific location of an entrance: 
i.  The location of existing or planned median breaks; 
ii.  Separation requirements between the entrance and major intersections; 
iii.  Separation requirements between other entrances; 
iv.  The need to provide shared access with other sites; 
v.  The need to align with previously approved or constructed access points on the opposite side of the street; and 
vi.  The minimum number of entrances needed to move traffic onto and off the site safely and efficiently. 
2.  Interparcel connections. New commercial development containing, or that is intended to contain, more than one building or use on site shall provide connections so that automobile trips between and among such buildings or uses can be accomplished without using the adjacent highways or major streets. Joint or shared drives are encouraged. Where possible and practical, new developments and substantial improvements to existing developments shall provide for pedestrian and automobile access connections between adjacent properties under different ownership when the uses of the properties are of such compatibility that patrons may frequent both buildings or uses in the same vehicle trip. 
3.  Location of loading and unloading areas. All areas and facilities devoted to the loading and unloading of goods and merchandise shall be located to the side or rear of the building and lot. Loading and unloading areas shall not front the right-of-way of the adjacent highway or major street. Overhead doors for loading bays shall not face the adjacent highway or major street. In cases where this regulation is not practical for new development or in cases where an existing building to be substantially improved does not meet the requirements in this section, the property shall be screened from view from the adjacent highway or major street along the entire property frontage, except in cases where access areas are approved. Buildings that are permitted to have overhead doors facing the public right-of-way shall incorporate design features so that the aesthetic impact of the overhead doors is softened through architectural detailing, or staggering with recesses and projections or additional landscape buffers. 
(4)  Commercial architectural standards. 
a.  Facades. Major commercial buildings (over 5,000 square-foot footprint) must have primarily naturally-colored brick or natural stone facades, with stucco, cast stone and hardi-plank used only as accent materials. Smaller commercial buildings may use hardi-plank or stucco as the primary facade material, if they are built in a residential architectural style compatible with such materials. This requirement applies to all sides of buildings, except where one or more sides are 80 percent visually from view from any point off the property. Buildings of exceptional architectural value, as determined by the planning director, may use other materials consistent and compatible with exceptional-quality design. 
b.  Rooflines. All commercial rooflines must include detailed cornices, and/or detailed parapets. 
c.  Parking lots adjoin public roads. Where parking lots adjoin public roads, they must have low (two to three feet) shrubbery and/or a landscaped berm to partially shield the parked cars from view. 
d.  Inter- and intra-parcel access. Except where determined by county or city staff to be impractical, commercial parking areas must provide inter-parcel access to adjacent commercial properties. Parcels over five acres with access on two or more public roads must provide intra-parcel streets to connect between their entrances on different roads. These connecting streets cannot just be lanes in a parking area; they must be separated from parking areas by curbs. 
e.  Freestanding outdoor lighting. Freestanding outdoor lighting shall consist of decorative poles and fixtures not more than 30 feet tall. 
f.  Parcels developed without annexing. Parcels inside the city's growth boundary that are developed or redeveloped without annexing shall substantially conform to the city's streetscapes requirements and guidelines. 
(5)  Location of large retail stores. 
a.  To promote public safety, mitigate, and accommodate traffic congestion, individual retail stores with building areas greater than 80,000 square feet must be located as follows: 
1.  With at least one primary access point on a multi-lane road. 
2.  At least one-half mile away from schools. 
b.  For the purpose, the following definitions and clarifications shall apply: 
Multi-lane road means a public road with at least four through-lanes, excluding turning and acceleration/deceleration lanes, with a length of at least one mile from the store's point of public road access and/or leading to other multi-lane roads combining for at least one mile in length. 
School means a public school serving any or all of grades kindergarten through 12. Distance from a school shall be measured as the shortest straight line from any point on a school property to the closest point of the actual store building. 
Single individual store means the building areas of adjacent stores shall be aggregated and considered a single individual store if they are under common management and/or have common customer check-out processes. 
Sec. 28-159. - Permitted uses. 
No principal building, structure, or land use shall be permitted except in the zoning districts indicated and for the purposes permitted in the Table 28-155, permitted use. Each use is mutually exclusive and does not encompass other uses listed in the table. A principal use listed in that table in any district denoted by the letter "X" is permitted by right if additional requirements have been met as provided in section 28-160, additional requirements, other requirements of state law, this chapter, and all other applicable regulations. A use denoted by the letter "S" is an allowed use. A principal building, structure, or use not indicated in any district by an "X" shall not be permitted in that district. 
Sec. 28-160. - Additional requirements. 
The following are additional requirements for the indicated use: 
(1)  Animal care facilities such as veterinary clinic, animal hospitals, kennels, catteries, pet shops, and dog grooming shops. All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least 200 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. Such structures shall be sound-proofed to avoid creating a nuisance to adjoining landowners. Animals shall not be maintained in outside areas. The maintaining of a kennel occurs when the number of dogs or cats being boarded or housed at any structure exceeds eight over the age of eight months. 
(2)  Farmers' markets. Any structure for such sales shall be located no closer than 35 feet to any property line. 
(3)  Farm equipment sales. Outdoor storage shall be at least 50 feet from the street right-of-way line. 
(4)  Commercial greenhouses or plant nurseries. No structure shall be located closer than 100 feet to any adjoining residential property. 
(5)  Horticulture, which includes the growing of fruits, trees, nuts, vegetables, and plants. No structure used in such processing shall be located closer than 100 feet to any property line. 
(6)  Livestock and poultry (personal pleasure). The raising and keeping of livestock (personal pleasure) shall be allowed on tracts of two acres or more, limited to one animal per acre. The keeping and maintaining of livestock shall be for noncommercial purposes. Livestock shall be kept within appropriate fencing. Barns or accessory structures associated with said livestock shall be set back at least 200 feet from any property line. 
(7)  Agricultural produce stands. Permitted for products grown on-site. 
(8)  Temporary or portable sawmills. 
a.  Except in district GC-LU, such mill shall only be permitted on a lot containing not less than five acres. 
b.  A temporary use permit is required for a period not to exceed six months. 
c.  Such mill may only process timber removed from the property on which it is located. 
d.  No machine operation is located closer than 200 feet to any property line. If the adjoining district is zoned for residential use, such use shall be set back no less than 500 feet to a residential structure on adjoining property. 
e.  Noise-emitting operations are prohibited before dawn and after dusk, on Sundays and national and state holidays. 
(9)  Noncommercial raising and keeping of wild animals. The owner or custodian of such wild animals must have received an appropriate permit and must meet all the requirements of the state; and further provided no animal quarters are located closer than 200 feet to any property line. The definition of kennel shall apply to wild animals housed or maintained outside. 
(10)  Automobile repair and body shops. Such use shall not be permitted within 300 feet of any property used for a school, park, playground, or hospital. Any services shall be conducted in a wholly enclosed building. 
(11)  Automobile, truck, vehicle sales, service and repair. All vehicles shall be setback at least ten feet from the street right-of-way. 
(12)  Boat sales. All vehicles shall be set back at least 30 feet from the future street right-of-way line. 
(13)  Building material sales. 
a.  Such uses shall not be located within a required front yard. 
b.  Outdoor lumberyards or storage areas shall be screened with a six-foot-high fence. 
(14)  Laboratory research facilities. 
a.  The gross floor area shall not exceed 20,000 square feet. 
b.  Such facilities are not objectionable by reason of emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors, radiation, and create fire or explosion hazards. 
c.  There shall be no outdoor storage of goods. 
(15)  Dry cleaning establishments, including dry cleaning pick-up and delivery stations. The total floor area shall not exceed 2,500 square feet. 
(16)  Business offices. Permitted in district GC-LU as a principal use. 
(17)  Standards for telecommunication towers and antennas. 
a.  Applicability. 
1.  Public property. Towers or antennas located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city or county shall be exempt from the requirements of this section, provided a license or lease authorizing such tower or antenna has been approved by the city or county. 
2.  Amateur radio; receive-only antennas. This subsection (17) shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator or is exclusively for receive-only antennas. 
3.  Preexisting towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this regulation is derived shall not be required to meet the requirements of this regulation, other than the requirements of subsection (25)b5, 6 of this section. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this regulation as preexisting towers or preexisting antennas. 
b.  General guidelines and requirements. 
1.  Purpose and goals. The purpose of this regulation is to establish general guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this regulation are to: 
(i)  Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
(ii)  Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites; 
(iii)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
(iv)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas; and 
(v)  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
2.  Principal or accessory use. Towers and antennas may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire parcel of land shall control, even though the tower or antenna may be located on leased parcels within said parcel of land. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
3.  Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna or tower shall provide to the planning and zoning department an inventory of its existing towers that are either within the city or within one-quarter mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The planning and zoning department may share such information with other applicants applying for approval under this section or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the county, provided, however that the planning and zoning department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such site areas are available or suitable. 
4.  Aesthetics; lighting. The guidelines set forth in this subsection shall govern the location of all towers, and the installation of all antennas governed by this section; provided, however, that the city council may waive these requirements if it determines that the goals of this section are better served thereby. 
(i)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(ii)  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
(iii)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(iv)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the city council may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
5.  Federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the antennas and towers governed by this section shall bring such antennas and towers into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the antenna or tower at the owners' expense. Any such removal by the city council shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17. 
6.  Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the city council concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days, the city council may remove such tower at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the city council shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17. 
c.  Permitted uses. 
1.  General. The uses listed in this section c. are deemed to be permitted uses. Nevertheless, all such uses shall comply with subsection (25)b4 through 6 of this section. 
2.  Specific permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted: 
(i)  Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna; in CC, NC, HC, O1, OD, HI, and LI zoning districts; provided, however, that such tower or antenna shall be setback from any property line a distance equal to the height of the tower or antenna. 
(ii)  Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna; in AG, R-80, R40, R-30, R-20, R-15, RM-10, and RM-16 zoning districts; provided, however, that all such towers or antennas shall be alternative tower structures and all towers and antennas shall be set back from any property line a distance equal to the height of the tower or antenna. 
(iii)  Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower (such as a building, light pole, water tower or other freestanding nonresidential structure) that is 50 feet in height or greater, so long as said additional antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing structure. 
(iv)  Installing an antenna on any tower of existing height, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing tower; provided, however, that such a specific use shall not include the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna. 
3.  Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city council that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted by a certified engineer to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna shall consist of the following: 
(i)  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
(ii)  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
(iii)  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
(iv)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
(v)  The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure for sharing are in excess of the cost of new tower development. 
(vi)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
4.  Setbacks and separation. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which local government approval is required; provided, however, that the city council may reduce the standard setbacks and separation requirements if the goals of this section would be better served thereby. 
(i)  Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any on-site property line. 
(ii)  Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
(iii)  In zoning districts other than industrial or commercial zoning districts, towers over 90 feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter of a mile from any existing tower that is over 90 feet in height. 
5.  Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
6.  Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers; provided, however, that the city council may waive such requirements if the goals of this section would be better served thereby. 
(i)  Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that provides a solid visual screen from adjacent residential property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least five feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. 
(ii)  In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirements may be reduced or waived. 
(iii)  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer. 
d.  Removal of abandoned towers or antennas. Any tower or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such tower or antenna shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city council notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed within said 90 days, the city council may, in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17, remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(18)  General merchandise repair. 
a.  Such service shall be conducted in a wholly enclosed building. 
b.  The minimum lot size shall be one acre. 
c.  No outdoor storage of materials, equipment or items being repaired is permitted. 
d.  The parking area shall have a minimum setback of 50 feet from any adjoining property line. 
e.  Such repair service shall not generate any noise, odors, or fumes which can be detected beyond the walls of the building in which housed. 
(19)  Towing service with storage areas. 
a.  The towing storage areas shall not exceed 3,000 square feet within a GC-LU district. 
b.  The towing storage area shall be enclosed with a solid fence not projecting into the required front yard, not less than eight feet high and in no case less than such height as will effectively screen all storage and operations from view. 
c.  The yard shall not be located on any interstate highway, arterial, or major collector street. 
d.  Sales of auto parts shall not be permitted on the site. 
(20)  Development of a cemetery, mausoleum, including a mortuary or funeral home. 
a.  Such development may front only on a collector or major street or state highway, and the entrance and exits to it shall be only from the street on which it fronts. 
b.  Such development shall be bordered by a ten-foot-wide buffer strip along all of its exterior property lines not bordering the frontage street and not extending into the required front yard. 
c.  The minimum lot size for a mortuary or funeral home is two acres. The minimum lot size for a cemetery or mausoleum is ten acres. 
(21)  Churches and other places of religious worship. When located in a residential district: 
a.  They must be located on a street with 250 feet of road frontage. 
b.  The buildings are located not less than 50 feet from any street and not less than 30 feet from any side or rear property line. 
c.  If adjacent to residential zoned property, a buffer of at least 50 feet wide shall be provided along the property lines adjacent to said zoning; provided, however, that this buffer may be reduced to no less than 20 feet in width adjacent to districts OI, NC and GC-LU. 
d.  Parking is not provided in the front yard setback. 
e.  Regardless of zoning classification, all buildings and related appurtenances shall comply with the provisions of section 28-158. 
(22)  Community or neighborhood centers including subdivision clubhouses with or without swimming and tennis facilities. Permitted in districts NC, GC-LU, and all residential districts. 
a.  Site plans must be approved by the planning and zoning staff to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and provisions of this chapter. The facility should be designed to include a detailed landscape plan that provides adequate screening of the facility which creates a visual and sound buffer for adjacent properties. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include plant identification by common name. The facility shall be designed to accommodate no more than those residing within two adjoining residential developments except in those cases where a variance is obtained as in other cases. 
b.  Buildings and structures established in connection with such use shall be set back not less than 75 feet from any property line except: 
1.  Upon the granting of a variance by the zoning board of appeals upon a finding that there is no objection from owners of property within 100 feet of the building or structure and that health and safety considerations do not necessitate the full setback, the setback may be reduced to 50 feet from any exterior property line of the subdivision within which the use is located. Additionally, a detailed landscape plan must be submitted to and approved by the planning and zoning staff. 
2.  Parking spaces shall be paved and striped. No parking shall be allowed within a front-yard setback. 
c.  Swimming pools must comply with all applicable ordinances and must have necessary approvals from the health department and county building inspections department. 
d.  Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
e.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that values or quiet use and enjoyment of adjacent properties are not adversely affected, and that roadways and safe use thereof are not adversely affected. No direct light shall be cast upon adjacent properties or roadways. If lighting is to be established, the use of environmental or cut-off type fixtures only are permissible. If lighting is to be established in a recreation area adjacent to an existing or proposed public road, a lighting plan must be submitted and approved by Cherokee DOT to ensure no light is cast upon the roadway, and no adverse impact will be created as a result of the lighting. 
f.  Parking spaces. 
1.  A minimum of 20 on-site parking spaces shall be provided for amenities which include a swim facility or swim/tennis with up to four courts. Additional spaces at the minimum of four spaces per court shall be provided for each court over four in number. A minimum of ten spaces for every two courts shall be provided for amenities which include tennis courts only; 
2.  In addition to the requirement above, a minimum of five spaces for each 50 residents, or prorated portion thereof, over 100 shall be provided; and 
3.  Parking spaces shall be paved and striped according to Cherokee County Standard Parking Specifications, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(23)  Hospital or similar institutions. Such use shall be located on a site of not less than five acres, and shall be set back from all required yard lines at least two feet for each foot of building height. Property lines adjoining property with existing residential uses, except for the entryway, shall be buffered with a solid screen eight feet high or natural buffer which creates a solid screen eight feet high. 
(24)  Public utilities such as electric transformer stations, gas regulator stations, and telephone exchanges. 
a.  Such uses are essential for service to the area in which located. 
b.  Any building or structure, except an enclosing fence, shall be setback not less than 20 feet from any property line and shall meet all applicable yard requirements in excess thereof. 
c.  Such uses shall be enclosed by a locked security fence not less than eight feet in height. 
d.  The required front yard and other open space on the premises outside the fenced area shall be grassed, landscaped, and maintained in an appropriate manner. 
e.  The storage of vehicles and equipment on the premises shall be prohibited. 
f.  A site and development plan shall be approved by the zoning administrator to ensure compatibility of facilities with the neighborhood in which they are to be located. 
g.  Property lines adjoining residential areas, except for the entryway, shall be buffered with a solid screen eight feet high or a natural buffer which creates a solid screen eight feet high. 
h.  In residentially zoned districts, the minimum lot size for public utilities shall be five acres and the setback from all lines except the main access property line shall be 200 feet for structures and for electrical lines running through the property. 
(25)  Development of a private or parochial school. 
a.  Such development shall have a minimum of five acres in area. 
b.  Such development shall have frontage on a public street of at least 100 feet. 
c.  Such development shall be permitted only on a lot which has access to an arterial, major or minor collector street. 
d.  A kindergarten and day care center shall be allowed to be operated in conjunction with and as an integral part of an elementary school, which shall include no less than grades one through six only. 
(26)  Golf courses and clubhouses in residential districts. 
a.  The golf course shall be a full nine-hole or more course. 
b.  Any building or structure established in connection with such use shall be set back no less than 100 feet from any property line except where such property line is a street line. In such case, the front yard set back established for the district shall apply, when a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line setback shall not be required. 
c.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected, and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
d.  Loud speakers are not used. 
(27)  Outdoor recreational facilities such as a golf or baseball driving range, miniature golf course, swimming pool, tennis courts and related commercial activities. 
a.  A golf course shall be a full nine-hole or more course. 
b.  Any building or structure established in connection with such use shall be set back no less than 100 feet from any property line except where such property line is a street line fronting property not used for residential purposes. In such case, the front yard setback established for the district shall apply. 
c.  No outdoor recreational facility or activity shall be conducted within 200 feet of an existing residence. 
d.  No lighting shall shine directly upon nearby residential properties. Ballpark type lighting, that is, high on a structure and projecting, is prohibited. 
e.  Loudspeakers are prohibited. 
f.  Roadways and adjacent property are protected from golf balls, baseballs, and similar objects leaving the property. 
g.  On property lines adjoining residential uses, the facility shall be enclosed by a wall or fence and buffer area ten feet in depth to screen adjacent property. 
(28)  Swimming pool for public or commercial use. Such use is permitted as part of the principal use in a community center, neighborhood center, school, health club, park, recreation center, or other recreational facilities upon approval by the planning commission of site plan which shall address and meet impact on traffic, safety, including fencing, and surrounding property values. Swimming pools must have necessary approvals from the health department to indicate compliance with applicable health department swimming pool regulations. 
(29)  Group homes. 
a.  The home is approved and licensed by the state of department of human resources or any agency through which it acts. 
b.  The number of individuals to live in the home does not exceed two people per bedroom, or plans are to be submitted and considered as to how individuals are to be housed. 
c.  The outward appearance is that of a single-family home. 
d.  Off-street parking of group homes within a single-family residential district shall conform with the parking regulations as provided in article XI of this chapter. 
e.  A maximum of six ambulatory residents and necessary staff may reside in a group home. 
(30)  Tree preservation. To establish protective regulation for trees in order to better control problems of flooding, soil erosion and conservation, air pollution and noise, as well as for aesthetics, particularly to address that period of time after site preparation is begun and building actually takes place, the planning commission may include recommendations for conditions in rezoning cases, and the planning commission and zoning administrator may impose requirements for site plans which come before them. 
(31)  Manufactured homes. No manufactured home constructed prior to the effective date of the June 15, 1976, HUD Code is permitted in any zoning district. Manufactured homes constructed in compliance with the HUD Code (June 15, 1976) and subsequent applicable codes, are allowed on minimum five-acre tracts in district R-80, subject to compliance with the following standards: 
a.  The home has a length not to exceed three times its width measured at the most narrow point, and has a minimum floor area of 900 square feet. 
b.  The pitch of the home's roof has a minimum vertical rise of 2.3 feet for every 12 feet of horizontal run, and the roof is finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in standard residential construction. 
c.  The exterior siding will consist of wood, vinyl, hardboard or stucco brick comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the exterior siding in use in standard residential construction. Such homes shall not be allowed to utilize metal siding. 
d.  A manufactured home must be placed and anchored on permanent foundation, either slab or pier, which meets the requirements of the Standard Building Code until such time as the building code is supplanted by state law or regulations pertaining to placement and anchoring of manufactured housing. Thereafter, state law shall control. In addition, the masonry curtain wall, unpierced except for the required ventilation and access, must be installed so that it encloses the area under the manufactured home to ground level. 
e.  Landscaping must consist of at least seed and straw. 
f.  Utility meters for the manufactured home are to be mounted to the structure rather than on a utility pole. 
g.  A manufactured home must have at each door, steps and landing, as per section 1113, stairway construction, chapter XI of the state building code. 
h.  All of the above requirements must be met prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and plans submitted to the zoning administrator verifying the above standards. 
i.  Manufactured housing is not allowed in any zoning district except for district R-80, except temporarily according to the terms of this chapter. 
j.  Manufactured homes established legally prior to the effective date of the city's original zoning ordinance may continue as a legal nonconforming use. Such legal manufactured homes may be upgraded, but not expanded, where HUD Code standards are complied with. Such legal manufactured homes may be continued where destroyed by natural causes if replaced within one year after being destroyed. 
k.  Business and commercial enterprises located in the NC and GC-LU districts may place a manufactured building upon the premises for office use for a period up to 12 months where in the process of construction of the permanent building. An extension of additional limited periods, not to exceed a total of 12 months, may be permitted upon approval by the mayor and council. 
l.  A manufactured home may be temporarily placed upon an individual lot when the applicant can show extreme hardship resulting from loss of use of a home or building due to fire, flood, or other damage making it unfit or unsafe for use or occupancy; resulting from extensive remodeling of a home or business making it unsuitable for use or occupancy; or resulting from a health or health-related problem of a family relative which warrants proximity of that relative for monitoring purposes. Both the lack of space within the applicant's home to accommodate the family relative and the health or health-related problem must be evidenced and certified to the zoning administrator and then submitted to the mayor and council for approval. Hardship applications based upon health considerations must be accompanied by an affidavit from a physician stating the health problems necessitating monitoring. The affidavit from the doctor stating the health problem shall contain the sworn statement of such physician that: 
1.  The family relative for whom the temporary use of a manufactured or mobile home is requested requires 24-hour nursing care involving the physical presence of a monitor, nurse, or attendant or the presence of such monitor, nurse, or attendant within voice communication of the attended relative; or 
2.  The health or health-related condition or disability of the family relative has existed for six or more months before the date of the application for the temporary use permit; or in the professional medical opinion of the physician completing the affidavit, the condition of disability is likely or continue for six or more months. 
No temporary use permit shall be issued in connection with the health-related condition or disability of a family relative if such relative possesses and uses a valid motor vehicle operator's permit. Any other application based upon hardship, other than health or a health-related condition or disability of a family relative must be supported by affidavits as to the facts alleged, which affidavits are submitted to the zoning administrator at the time of application for a temporary use permit. 
In cases of hardship, where a temporary use permit is granted by the mayor and council, such use is limited to a period not to exceed six months without specific written approval of the mayor and council, who may require new evidence of the conditions upon which hardship was based. Prior to the issuance of a temporary use permit based upon hardship, the applicant must execute a statement that he or she acknowledges and agrees that the permit is valid only so long as the conditions of the permit are met, that upon the termination of any of the conditions, the applicant shall cause the removal of the mobile or manufactured home at his own expense and that failure to do so grants to the city the right to remove the same from the premises at the expense of the applicant, manufactured home owner, and/or the owner of the real estate. 
m.  In all residential zoning districts, a manufactured home may be placed on a site temporarily for six months for residential purposes while a site-built home is constructed. Only one six-month extension shall be allowed. The applicant/property owner shall sign an acknowledgement letter authorizing the city to stop the provision of utilities to the manufactured home at the end of the approved time limit for this temporary placement of a manufactured home. 
(32)  Ham radio operator broadcast towers. Poles, master towers and antennas used in operation of amateur radios licensed by the Federal Communication Commission shall be governed by the following requirements: 
a.  Amateur radio service antenna structures, not withstanding any other section of this chapter, may be erected to such heights appropriate to accommodate communications; provided: 
1.  No such structure shall be placed less than one-half its height from the nearest property line; 
2.  All such structures are painted neutral colors to minimize visual intrusion; and 
3.  All such structures are equipped with suitable anti-climbing devices. 
All antenna structures must comply with FCC and FAA regulations. 
b.  Antennas shall meet all manufacturer's specifications. The mast or tower shall be of noncombustible and noncorrosive hardware. Hardware such as brackets, turnbuckles, clips, and similar type equipment, subject to rust or corrosion, shall be protected with a zinc or cadmium coating by either galvanizing or a sheradizing process after forming. These finishes are selected to guard against corrosion and to protect the elements against electrolytic action due to the use of adjoining dissimilar metals. 
c.  Every antenna must be adequately grounded. 
d.  Guy wires, support anchor structures and a maximum of one wire antenna are permitted within the front yard in all zoning districts. All guy wires and support anchor structures within a front yard must be located on the side property line. Guy wires and wire antennas within a front yard may be anchored to a tree located on the property instead of a support anchor structure located on the side property line. No antenna towers are permitted in the front yards of any zoning districts. 
e.  Guy wires support anchor structures and wire antennas may be located within the required setbacks in all zoning districts. 
f.  The following graphic is a visual example of these requirements: 

(33)  Hotels/motels/motor lodges. The following minimum standards shall apply to hotels/suite hotels/motels/motor lodges (new commercial facilities only): Any hotel/suite hotel/motel/motor lodge in which more than 35 percent of the units include kitchenettes or kitchen facilities (for purposes of this subsection the term "kitchenette" or "kitchen facility" is defined as a kitchen sink, a stove/cook top, microwave, and/or a refrigerator), the following shall apply: 
a.  Minimum acreage is two acres. 
b.  All rooms shall be accessed through a main or central lobby. 
c.  No rooms shall access to the exterior of the building unless required by fire/safety regulations. 
d.  Architectural style/design to be approved per Cherokee County Development Regulations and Commercial Architectural Standards. 
e.  Continental style dining for the guests of the facility only is allowed within or near the main or central lobby without additional parking. 
f.  At a minimum, provisions for weekly cleaning for each suite must be provided. 
g.  Each suite must be protected with a smoke detector and sprinkler system approved by the fire marshal. 
h.  Each suite shall be required to include an automatic power shut-off timer for each stove/cook top unit or other type burner. 
i.  There shall be no outside storage allowed or longterm parking of heavy equipment, or parking of construction or related equipment. 
j.  No facility under this section is to be converted or used primarily as an apartment or condominium. 
(44)  Bed and breakfast inns. 
i.  Definition. A use that takes place within a structure that was primarily used as a single-family dwelling, consisting of renting from one to six dwelling rooms on a daily basis to tourists, vacationers, and business travelers, where only breakfast meals are served and provided for those guests only. The facility must be operated by the owner. 
ii.  Location. Bed and breakfast inns should be located in areas with aesthetic value and/or historical significance. 
iii.  Applicable zoning districts. Bed and breakfast inns shall be permitted in OI and NC zoning districts. 
iv.  Parking requirements. All parking (including handicap parking) shall be onsite, and it shall be provided in the side and/or rear of the property. The total number of parking spaces shall be based on the formula of one parking space per guest room, and one parking space for each employee. Parking areas shall be set back a minimum of ten feet and screened from adjacent properties. 
v.  Length of stay for guests. No guest may stay at the facility for more than 14 days within any 30-day period. There shall be no cooking facilities within the guest rooms. Furthermore, the facility shall not be used for receptions, parties, or public gatherings except as permitted pursuant to variance. 
(Ord. of 7-17-2017, §§ 2a.—d.) 
Sec. 28-161. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited in all districts: 
(1)  Uses other than those which are permitted pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)  No more than one dwelling unit in residential zoned districts, except where specifically provided or except as permitted pursuant to variance. 
(3)  Uses by the city or for governmental purposes on behalf of the city are not prohibited in any zoned district. 
(4)  Commercial recreation activities involving noise-emitting motors or engines greater than 60 decibels. 
(5)  Live or other entertainment in businesses selling alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  Firing ranges. 
(7)  Billboards. 
Secs. 28-162—28-226. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - HOME OCCUPATIONS 

Sec. 28-227. - Intent. 
Home occupations shall be defined under article IV of this chapter. The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Maintain the residential character, look, and feel of residential areas from the adverse impacts of activities associated with home occupations. 
(2)  Permit residents of the community a broad choice in the use of their homes as a place of livelihood and the production or supplementing of personal and family income. 
(3)  Establish criteria and development standards for home occupations conducted in dwelling units and accessory structures in residential zones. 
Sec. 28-228. - Performance criteria. 
Permitted uses of home occupation shall be allowed, if such uses are: 
(1)  Incidental to the use of the premises as a residence. 
(2)  Compatible with residential use. 
(3)  Limited in extent. 
(4)  Not detracting from the residential character of the neighborhood. 
Sec. 28-229. - Development standards. 
For all home occupations, except as otherwise provided for child day care, the following requirements shall be applied: 
(1)  Retail sales shall be prohibited on the premises except for products or goods produced or fabricated on the premises as a result of the home occupation. Said items may only be those produced on the premises or incidental supplies necessary for and consumed in the conduct of the home occupation. Samples, however, may be kept on the premises but neither sold nor distributed from the residence. Said retail sales shall not be defined to include the exhibition of a sample and the subsequent order and delivery of goods. 
(2)  Except for permitted outdoor instructional services, the home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed living area of the home which may include the basement. 
(3)  No home occupation nor any storage of goods, materials, or products connected with a home occupation shall be allowed in accessory buildings or detached garages. 
(4)  No alteration of the residential appearance of the premises shall occur. 
(5)  There shall be no display or storage of products, materials, equipment, or machinery where it may be visible from the exterior of the residence. 
(6)  The conduct of the home occupation shall not increase the normal flow of traffic or on-street or off-street parking. 
(7)  There shall be no interior or exterior business signs advertising the home occupation. 
(8)  There shall be no increased noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference created by the home occupation distracting from general appearance. 
(9)  No process shall be used which is hazardous to public health, safety, morals or welfare. 
(10)  In no case shall a customary home occupation be opened to the public at times earlier than 9:00 a.m., nor later than 6:00 p.m. 
(11)  No more than two vehicles shall be utilized in the business and no commercial vehicles whatsoever shall be stored or parked on the property. Any vehicles utilized in the business must be parked in a carport, garage, or driveway. The size of vehicle used in the business shall not be larger than a pick-up truck, panel truck or van or have a carrying capacity of more than 1½. Notwithstanding the forgoing provisions of this section, no vehicles used in the collection, carrying, storage, or transport of garbage, waste, trash, or recycled material may be parked or stored on the property. 
(12)  Adequate off-street parking in a manner consistent with the residential nature of the property shall be provided for the allowed use. 
Sec. 28-230. - Permitted home occupations. 
The following uses shall be permitted provided that they shall meet the development standards as provided in section 28-229 and are operated so as not to create a nuisance: 
(1)  Upon proof presented to the zoning administrator that the owner of any parcel of land desiring to maintain in-home day care for children has complied with and met all state regulations as required by the appropriate department of the state having authority over the same, further showing that said compliance and approval is current, the maintenance of an in-home day care for children shall be an allowed use in the following declared zoning districts, subject to the conditions and limitations hereinafter stated, to wit: 
a.  An in-home day care for children, up to and including a total of six children, for which the possessor of the home receives compensation shall be allowed as a permitted use in zoning classifications R-80, R-40 and R-30; provided the parcel has a total acreage that is in compliance with the minimum required acreage for said zoning classification. 
b.  An in-home day care for children facility may be maintained for seven to 12 children, for which the possessor of the home receives compensation, in zoning classifications R-80 and R-40, only upon securing approval by the city council upon a showing that the maintenance of said facilities: 
1.  Shall not interfere with the residential character of the neighborhood; 
2.  Shall not constitute a nuisance to surrounding property owners; and 
3.  Shall not place a burden upon the public utilities serving said parcel or upon the streets and roads servicing said parcel. 
Under no event shall the permitted uses under this chapter be deemed to circumvent any of the regulations of the state, nor be deemed to allow a use by any individual who has not first been approved by the appropriate department having authority over the same for the state. In no event shall the uses as permitted under this chapter require the city or county departments, or employees of either to be responsible for enforcement of any requirements placed on an individual by the state, or to have any responsibility to anyone, where someone is maintaining a facility as would otherwise be allowed under this chapter without first meeting all state requirements and regulations. 
(2)  Home crafts, such as model-making, rug weaving and lapidary work. 
(3)  Instructional or tutoring services within an enclosed building. 
(4)  Outdoor instructional services for swimming and outdoor instructional services for tennis. Other outdoor instructional services shall be permitted with the approval by the planning commission. 
(5)  Office facility of a salesman, sales representative or manufacturers representative provided there is no manufacturing, production or storage on the premises provided. 
(6)  Office facility of an architect, broker, engineer, insurance agent, land surveyor, lawyer, real estate agent, computer programmer, dentist, physician, and other similar professions for consultation. 
(7)  Painting, sculpturing, composing, and writing. 
(8)  Telephone answering service and office service to include typing, bookkeeping, transcribing, and data entry. 
(9)  Operation of any wholesale or retail business, which is conducted entirely by mail, and does not involve the sale, shipment, or delivery of merchandise on the premises. 
(10)  Barbershop and beauty salon. 
Sec. 28-231. - Prohibited home occupations. 
The following uses shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Major appliance repair. 
(2)  Automobile, truck, or motorcycle repair; parts sales, upholstery, or detailing; washing service. 
(3)  Boardinghouse; timeshare condominium. 
(4)  Private clubs. 
(5)  Restaurants and taverns. 
(6)  Tow truck services. 
(7)  Veterinary uses. 
Sec. 28-232. - Unspecified home occupations. 
Any proposed home occupation that is not specifically listed as permitted or prohibited shall be evaluated by the zoning administrator, subject to approval based on criteria as provided in section 28-229. 
Sec. 28-233. - Permit application procedure. 
(a)  Application. Application for a home occupation permit shall be made to the city on a form provided by the city. The city clerk will make a decision and notify the applicant in writing within 15 calendar-days of the date the application is received. 
(b)  Scope. In cases where the city considers the application not within the scope of the home occupation criteria, the application will be denied. 
(c)  Time limit. All home occupation permits shall be valid for a period of one year from initial date of approval. 
(d)  Voiding of permit. The city may void any home occupation permit for noncompliance with the criteria set forth in this article. Revocation may take place at any time prior to expiration date of the permit. If the permit is revoked or is not renewed, it becomes null and void, and said use shall be terminated. 
(e)  Appeal. The decision of the city concerning approval or revocation shall be final unless a written appeal is filed with the zoning board of appeals within ten calendar-days of the decision. An appeal may only be filed by the applicant or persons residing within 300 feet of the subject property. 
(f)  Renewal. Home occupation permits shall be renewed annually provided there has not been any violation of the provisions of this article. Requests for renewal shall be submitted to the city in writing, accompanied by the prevailing renewal fee, one month prior to expiration of the permit. 
Sec. 28-234. - Other. 
(a)  Should a permittee die or move to a new location, the existing permit shall be automatically terminated, except that, in the case of death, should a surviving spouse or child residing at the same address desire to continue the home occupation, written notice to that effect shall be given to the zoning administrator, and the planning commission shall authorize continuation of that permit without further hearing. 
(b)  Persons with demonstrated physical handicaps may be permitted special consideration by the planning commission. The applicant may request waiver of a portion or all of one or more of the requirements as provided in section 28-229. This special request shall be considered by the zoning board of appeals at a public hearing, after notice to property owners within 300 feet of the subject property. The zoning board of appeals may only grant waivers on the basis of applicant's physical inability to function within said requirements. 
Secs. 28-235—28-261. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - BUFFER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 28-262. - Intent. 
The city council hereby finds that the protection and preservation of trees, the planting of new trees and other landscape material, and the provision of buffers between dissimilar uses as part of the land development progress is a public purpose and provides for the public health and general welfare. 
Sec. 28-263. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to preserve and enhance the city's natural environment through tree protection and preservation, the planting of trees and other landscape material, and the provision of natural and/or planted buffers between dissimilar uses. The article is intended to further the city's policy that all development sites, where trees are most commonly removed, will achieve upon project completion a uniform standard for buffer requirements. 
(b)  This article is also intended to further the city's policy of encouraging all individuals or firms who propose to develop land, and which are required to meet the requirements of this article, to consider the use of water-efficient landscaping principles and techniques. 
Sec. 28-264. - Title. 
This article may be referred to generally as the "buffer requirements." 
Sec. 28-265. - Definitions. 
(a)  In construing the provisions hereof and the meaning of each and every word, term, phrase, or part thereof, where the context will permit, the definitions of words as contained in this chapter, supplemented by the following, shall apply: 
Buffer means the land area used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and distance; to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other conditions; to block physical passage to nonsimilar areas, or to reduce air pollution dust, dirt, and litter. 
Clearing means the removal of vegetation from a property, whether by cutting or other means. 
Construction buffer means a type of buffer which is temporary and remains in effect during the construction of a project. 
Department means the municipal planning commission as established and as operated through the actions and administration of the appointed director of said department or his designee. 
Development regulations means the adopted regulations providing for the subdivision and development of real property within the city, as amended. 
Diameter breast height (DBH) means the diameter of a tree measured at a point 4½ feet above the ground. 
Director means the director of the department of planning and development or his designee. 
Grading means the placement, removal, or movement of earth by use of mechanical equipment on a property. 
Land disturbance permit (LDP) means any permit other than a building permit that authorizes clearing or grading activities on a site or portion of a site. Said permit may be a clearing, clearing and grubbing, grading, or development permit as defined and authorized under the development regulations. 
Landscape strip means land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
Screening means a method of shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by opaque fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, or the like. 
Shrub means a woody plant of relatively low height, as distinguished from a tree by having several stems rather than a single trunk. 
Timber harvest means the felling, loading and transporting of timber products (pulpwood, etc.). The term "timber harvesting" may include both clear-cutting and selective cutting of timber. 
Tree means any self-supporting woody perennial plant, usually having a main stem or trunk and many branches, and at maturity normally attaining a trunk diameter greater than three inches at any point and a height of over ten feet. 
Tree diameter means the widest cross-sectional dimension of a tree trunk measured at diameter breast height (DBH) or at a point below DBH for new trees or multi-trunked species, but in no case less than six inches from the ground. 
Tree thinning means elective cutting or thinning of trees only for the clear purpose of good forestry management in order to protect said forest from disease or infestation and in no way shall be construed as clear-cutting. 
Zoning buffer means a buffer required by this chapter or as a condition of zoning or variance approval for a specific property. 
Sec. 28-266. - Applicability. 
Buffers shall be required between dissimilar districts or uses in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or as a condition of zoning or variance approval. 
Sec. 28-267. - Standards for permanent buffers. 
(a)  Width of buffers. Buffers shall meet the minimum width requirements contained in this article, except as authorized to be reduced by the applicable buffer reduction process, as follows: 
(1)  As specified in the minimum buffer strip requirement Table 28-273; 
(2)  As specified in a residential zoning district for a permitted nonresidential use (e.g., a church, temple, synagogue, etc.); or 
(3)  As required by a condition of zoning or variance approval. 
(b)  Screening requirements. 
(1)  Buffers shall be natural, undisturbed, and free of encroachments except as authorized by a condition of zoning or variance approval, or as authorized herein, and shall contain the existing tree cover and vegetation as well as any supplemental plantings or replanting as may be required. 
(2)  Buffers shall be of such nature and density so as to screen activities, structures and uses on the property from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot and shall further provide a yearround effective visual screen. 
(3)  Buffers required along side property lines shall extend to a street right-of-way line unless otherwise required by the director/designee in order to observe the sight distance requirements contained in the development regulations and this chapter, or as authorized by a condition of zoning approval or variance approval. 
(4)  In situations where the required buffer width is partially or completely contained within an existing easement (e.g., power or natural gas transmission, etc.), the screening requirements of this article shall be met outside of the easement area. 
(c)  Supplemental plantings. 
(1)  Buffers in which vegetation is nonexistent or is inadequate to meet the screening requirements of this article shall be planted with supplemental plantings so as to provide a yearround effective visual screen. A buffer/landscape plan shall be submitted to the department for approval, delineating the type, size, and location of all supplemental plantings as well as any nonvegetative screening mechanism proposed for use, in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(2)  Supplemental plantings and replanting shall consist of evergreen trees, shrubs, or combination thereof, native or adaptable to the region. All trees planted shall be a minimum of six feet in height at time of planting and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least 20 feet at maturity. All shrubs planted shall be of a large growing species, shall be a minimum of three feet in height at time of planting and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least ten feet at maturity. 
(3)  All supplemental plantings shall be installed to allow for proper plant growth and maintenance. 
(d)  Nonvegetative screening. 
(1)  Nonvegetative materials utilized to satisfy the screening requirements of this article, in addition to the use of existing vegetation and/or supplemental plantings, may consist of walls, fences, earthen berms or any combination thereof. 
(2)  If walls or fences are to be utilized, their placement and installation shall be such so as to cause minimal disturbance of existing vegetation and located so as to provide an effective visual screen. 
(e)  Disturbances or encroachments. 
(1)  Ditches, swales, stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater detention ponds, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, similar facilities, and any associated easements shall not encroach into a buffer, except that necessary access and utility crossings (e.g., stormwater or sanitary sewer pipes) may encroach into the buffer as near to perpendicular as practical. 
(2)  Supplemental plantings or replantings of vegetation, or authorized nonvegetative screening devices shall be authorized to encroach into a buffer provided there is minimal disturbance of any significant existing vegetation. 
(3)  Land disturbance is authorized in areas of a buffer that are devoid of significant vegetation provided that the final grade and replanting of vegetation meet the screening requirements contained herein. 
(4)  Dying, diseased or dead vegetation may be removed from a buffer provided minimal disturbance occurs. Vegetation thus removed shall be replaced where necessary to meet the screening requirements contained herein. 
(f)  Protection during land disturbing activities. 
(1)  During authorized land disturbing activities, buffers shall be clearly demarcated and protected prior to commencement of, and during construction. 
(2)  The method of demarcation and protection utilized shall be in accordance with the best management practices or as required by the department. 
Sec. 28-268. - Standards for construction buffers. 
(a)  Where required. Construction buffers shall only be required where specifically provided as a condition of zoning or variance approval. 
(b)  Time constraints. Construction buffers shall only be in effect during the construction period of a project and shall terminate upon project completion. In the case of a residential subdivision, a construction buffer shall terminate upon each individual lot with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the principal dwelling. 
(c)  Disturbance or encroachments. 
(1)  Construction buffers shall be natural, undisturbed and free of encroachments except as authorized by a condition of zoning or variance approval, or as authorized herein. 
(2)  The encroachments of ditches, swales, stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater detention ponds, sediment basins, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, similar facilities, and any associated easements, into a construction buffer shall not be authorized except that necessary access and utility crossings (e.g., stormwater or sanitary sewer pipes), and natural bottom detention ponds (sediment basins must be located outside of the construction buffer) and their appurtenant structures which require no grading and removal of trees, may encroach upon the construction buffer. 
(3)  If the construction buffer on a residential lot is devoid of existing trees and vegetation, and a tree survey is submitted to document this situation prior to conducting land disturbing activities, including clearing, on the lot, then the department may authorize the encroachment of a building or structure into the construction buffer for a distance not to exceed ten feet. 
(d)  Protection during land disturbing activities. 
(1)  During authorized land disturbing activities construction buffers shall be clearly demarcated and protected prior to commencement of, and during construction, 
(2)  The method of demarcation and protection utilized shall be in accordance with the best management practices or as required by the department. 
Sec. 28-269. - Compliance. 
(a)  Artificial materials prohibited. All artificial plants, trees, shrubs, grass, or other vegetation shall be prohibited from fulfilling the requirements of these regulations. 
(b)  Warranty or maintenance surety. Upon final installation of new trees, shrubs or other landscape material planted to meet the requirements of this article, and following acceptance by the department in accordance with the procedures set forth in the development regulations, the owner shall either provide proof of warranty or post a maintenance bond or other acceptable surety, warranting the new trees, shrubs or landscape material for a period of no less than one year. 
(c)  Inspection. 
(1)  The department shall perform an inspection of the plantings and landscape materials required by these regulations prior to expiration of the one year warranty or maintenance period. The owner shall be notified of any replacements or restoration that must be made to maintain compliance with these regulations or conditions of zoning or variance approval. 
(2)  Required landscape material found to be dead or near death shall be replaced prior to release by the department of the warranty or maintenance surety. In no case shall replacement be delayed more than 30 days from notification, unless a performance bond is posted with the department. 
(d)  Buffers for interior subdivision lots. When a lot within a residential subdivision fronts on a local street within the subdivision and the back yard is located along either an arterial street, a collector street or freeway street, then any and all buffer requirements shall apply to the back yard of said lot and the arterial, collector or freeway street. 
Sec. 28-270. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the responsibility of the department to enforce these regulations. The director or his designee shall have the authority to revoke, suspend, or void any clearing, clearing and grubbing, grading, development, or building permit, or to withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and shall have the authority to suspend all work on a site or any portion thereof, where tree removal or damage occurs in violation of these regulations. 
Sec. 28-271. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished either by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or confinement in the county jail not to exceed 60 days, or both. The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of said suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law which may include mandatory attendance at an educational program regarding tree preservation. The owner of any property wherein a violation exists, and any builder, contractor, or agent who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
Sec. 28-272. - Variances. 
The preservation of trees may be considered as a condition peculiar to a piece of property in support of a request for a variance from the literal application of the provisions of this article under the procedures and requirements contained in this chapter. 
Sec. 28-273. - Minimum buffer width between abutting districts. 
Table 28-273. Minimum Buffer Width Between Abutting Districts 

 
Secs. 28-274—28-292. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SIGNS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING 

Sec. 28-293. - Objectives and purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article, which shall be known and may be cited as the "Sign Ordinance," is to establish requirements for the placement, installation, and maintenance of signs in order to protect and promote the health, safety, welfare, and general well-being of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this chapter governing the placement, construction, maintenance of buildings and structures is a valid use of the police power, including the regulation of the placement, installation, and maintenance of signs. Signs must ordinarily be considered structures, and are capable of producing many of the same nuisances as are produced by buildings. The intent of this article is to regulate the size, height and number of signs in such a manner as to protect and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the city while promoting traffic safety without causing unsafe conditions. 
(b)  The planning and zoning office will only oversee the number of signs, height, size, and placement of signs. The city makes no determination or permits signs in regard to on-site or off-site locations. With these objectives and purposes in mind, the intention of this article is to authorize the use of signs that are: 
(1)  Compatible with the surroundings in terms of zoning, existing land use, and architectural characteristics. 
(2)  Legible and compatible with the type of lawful activities to which the signs pertain in such a manner as to express the identity of the individual properties and/or of the city as a whole. 
(c)  In addition, the regulation of signs is necessary and in the public interest to: 
(1)  Protect property values within the city. 
(2)  Protect the motoring public from damage or injury caused or partially attributable to distractions or obstructions from improperly designed or situated signs. 
(3)  Promote the economic well-being of the city by creating a favorable physical image. 
(4)  Improve the legibility and effectiveness of all permitted signs. 
(5)  Allow individuals equal and fair opportunity to advertise and promote products and services without discrimination. 
(6)  Eliminate excessive signage. 
(7)  Protect the right of citizens to enjoy the city's natural scenic beauty. 
(8)  Encourage the economic development within the county. 
(9)  Regulate the construction, erection, maintenance and size of signs that may constitute a direct danger to pedestrians and property. 
(10)  Preserve and promote the public health, safety and welfare in the city. 
Sec. 28-294. - Jurisdiction and applicability of Code requirements. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all properties within the city. This article shall not relate to the copy or message on a sign. 
(b)  All signs and other advertising structures shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with the building and electrical codes adopted by the county. 
(c)  If any provisions or requirements of this article are in conflict with any other provision or requirement of this chapter or any other applicable governmental law, ordinance, resolution, rule or other governmental regulation of any kind, the more restrictive rule or standard takes precedence. 
Sec. 28-295. - Variances. 
Variances from the provisions of this article may be requested. All such variances shall be considered and decided by the zoning board of appeals in accordance with officially adopted procedures and standards contained in this chapter. 
Sec. 28-296. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this article have the meanings defined in this section. In addition, words and phrases not defined in this section, but defined in this chapter shall be given the meanings as set forth in this chapter. 
Abandoned sign means a sign and/or sign structure which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any person or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product, or service where such sign and/or sign structure is located. 
Advertise means to call the attention of the public to a product, business, and/or event. 
Advertising device means any structure or device situated on or attached to real property that is erected or intended for the purpose of advertising. 
Air- and gas-filled device means any sign using, either wholly or in part, forced air or other gas as a means of supporting its structure. 
Animated sign means any sign that all or any part thereof visibly moves or imitates movement in any fashion whatsoever. Any sign that contains or uses for illumination any lights or lighting devices that change color, flash or alternate, show movement or motion, or change the appearance of said sign or any part automatically. 
Area of sign (copy area) means the area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed. 
Banner means a sign, hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind. This excludes flags, emblems, and insignia of political, professional, religious, educational, or corporate organizations; provided such flags, emblems, and insignia are displayed for noncommercial purposes. 
Beacon means any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Bench sign means sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way. 
Billboard means a freestanding sign or structure for the display of advertisements in public places or highways. All regulations relating to freestanding signs should apply. 
Building marker means any sign indicating the name of a building, the date, and incidental information about its construction and is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material. 
Building sign means any sign attached to any part of a building other than a freestanding sign. 
Canopy means any permanent roof-like structure, including awnings and marquees, projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of a building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Canopy sign means any sign attached to or made a part of the front, side, or top of a canopy. 
Commemorative signs means any sign that honors the memory of or serves as a memorial to commemorate. 
Commercial message means any wording, logo, or other representation that directly or indirectly names, advertises or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
Commercial office center means a single parcel of land containing two or more businesses or establishments, including all forms of retail, wholesale and services. 
Construction sign means a sign announcing the proposed or existing construction of a building or project. 
Copy means the wording or graphics on a sign surface in either permanent or removable form. 
Directional sign means an unofficial or nonstandard traffic control sign, containing no commercial message except logos, intended to direct or regulate the movement of traffic and/or pedestrians. The term "directional sign" includes, but is not limited to, enter, exit, drive-through, and directional arrow signs. These signs may be freestanding or mounted on a building. 
Directory sign means a sign that gives the name and/or occupation of the occupants of a building or identifies the particular use of a building. 
Emergency sign means a sign erected by a governmental agency, a public utility company, or a contractor performing work within any right-of-way. 
Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, paint, or affix. 
Establishment means a commercial, institutional, educational, office, business or financial entity. 
Flag means any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision or other entity. 
Flashing sign. See Animated sign. 
Freestanding sign means any sign that is independent from any building or other structure and is entirely supported by structures that are permanently at or below ground level. 
Frontage, building, means the length of an outside building wall facing a street. 
Frontage, street, means the length of the property line of any one parcel along a street on which it borders. 
Ground sign means a freestanding sign which has no space between the signage copy area and the ground surface. 
Historic sign means any animated neon sign over 30 years old, any existing barber pole, or any other sign so designated by the historic preservation commission. Extensions, additions, and embellishments are not considered part of a historic sign. 
Home occupation sign means a sign for a legally permitted home occupation on a residential parcel of land, with advertising for services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located. 
Identification sign means a sign depicting the name of a building and/or the address of an establishment on the premises where the sign is located. The name and/or address may be included as part of another signage type. 
Illuminated sign means a sign which contains an internal source of light or which is designed or arranged to reflect light from an artificial source. 
Incidental sign means a general information sign that is secondary to the use of the parcel on which it is located. The term "incidental sign" includes "credit cards accepted," official notice of services as required by law, trade affiliations, business hours, telephone, self-service and other related-information signs. These signs are typically located on doors, windows, or building walls. 
Instructional sign means a sign that has the purpose of giving instruction, direction or an order. 
Kiosk sign means a freestanding and multiple sided structure owned by the county or city and located in public rights-of-way that displays directional information to residential and commercial developments. 
Mansard sign means any sign attached to or erected within 12 inches of an actual or simulated mansard of a building, with the sign face parallel to and within the limits of the building, not deemed to be a roof sign. 
Monument sign means a permanent sign, other than a freestanding pole sign, placed upon or supported by the ground independent of any other structure and constructed of stone, concrete, masonry, stucco, or equal architectural material. 
Moving sign. See Animated sign. 
Nonconforming sign (legal) means any advertising device or sign, including billboards, that was legally erected and maintained prior to the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived, but no longer complies. Legal nonconforming signs require just compensation under the Highway Beautification Act for removal. 
Nonprofit activity means an activity, project, operation or enterprise of a temporary nature carried on by a corporation or an organization qualified as an exempt organization under applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. 
Painted wall sign means any sign that is applied with paint or similar substance on the face of a wall. 
Parcel (lot), business lot means any standard lot or parcel of land, the boundaries of which have been established by a recorded legal instrument and is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership; the said parcel being duly recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court, Cherokee County. 
Permanent sign means a sign permanently affixed to a building or the ground. 
Person means any association, company, corporation, firm, organization, or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind. 
Portable sign means any sign supported by its own frame or trailer, with or without wheels, designed to move from one place to another. 
Premises means an area of land with appurtenances and buildings which, because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit of real estate. 
Principal building means the building with the principal use of the parcel on which it is located. Parcels with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings. However, storage buildings, garages, and other structures that are clearly accessory are not considered principal buildings. 
Projecting sign means any sign affixed to a building or wall, which horizontally extends more than 12 inches beyond the surface of a building or wall. 
Public service sign means a sign designed to render a public service, such as, "time and temperature" and "flashing news" signs. 
Public sign means a sign erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information, or direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
Real estate sign means a temporary sign erected by the owner or agent advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, lease, or sale. 
Residential district includes all land zoned R-80, R-40 and R-30. 
Revolving sign. See Animated sign. 
Roof sign means any sign erected, constructed, and maintained upon or over the roof of any building and projecting above the roofline. 
Roof sign (integral) means any sign erected or constructed as an integral part of a normal roof structure of any design. No part of the sign can extend vertically above the highest portion of the roof and no part of the sign can be separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. 
Setback means the distance from the property line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured perpendicularly to the property line. 
Sidewalk, sandwich, or A-frame sign means a sign which is normally in the shape of an 'A' or some variation, which is usually two-sided. 
Sign means any identification, description, illustration, or device, illuminated or non-illuminated, which is visible to the general public and directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business, or any emblem, painting, flag, banner, pennant, balloon, or placard designed to advertise, identify, or convey information. 
Sign face means the portion of a sign on which the copy is placed. 
Sign number. For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be construed to be a single display surface or device containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a single unit. In cases where material is displayed in a random or unconnected manner or where there is reasonable doubt as to the intended relationship of such components, each component is considered to be a single sign. A projecting sign and both sign faces being less than 42 inches apart shall be construed as a single sign. 
Sign structure means any construction used or designed to support a sign. 
Snipe sign means a sign of any material that is attached in any way to a utility pole, tree, fence, rock, or any other similar object located on public or private property. The term "snipe signs" do not include "keep out," "posted" or "no trespassing" signs. 
Street means any public or private right-of-way for automobile use. The term "street" excludes alleyways, parking lots and driveways. 
Street frontage means the width in linear feet of a lot or parcel where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Subdivision sign means any sign designed to identify a subdivision, neighborhood, or residential complex. 
Traffic control sign means a standard sign or electronic device, such as a traffic signal, stop sign, one-way, handicap, no parking, fire lane, etc., for the purpose of directing or regulating traffic and/or pedestrians. 
Under-canopy sign means a sign: 
(1)  That is suspended from the underside of a canopy, including awnings, and marquees; 
(2)  Is perpendicular to the wall surface of a building; and 
(3)  Whose copy is not clearly visible from a public right-of-way. 
Unlawful sign (illegal sign) means any sign erected without a permit when a permit for the sign was otherwise required by this article or previously adopted ordinance or code, a permitted sign which has not been properly erected in accordance with the permit application and approved sign permit or an otherwise lawful and permitted sign that has become hazardous or a nuisance to the public due to poor maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment and so declared by the building official. 
Wall face means a measurement of area equal to the height of the structure from the ground to the coping or eave of the roof multiplied by the width of the wall associated with the individual business. The wall face is to be measured for each wall independently. 
Wall sign means any sign affixed or attached to a wall of a building, extending no more than 12 inches beyond the wall and which displays only one sign surface. 
Window sign means any sign, excluding identification and incidental signs, placed inside or upon a window, containing a commercial message, and intended to be seen from the exterior. 
Sec. 28-297. - General provisions. 
(a)  Permitting requirements. 
(1)  Required. Except as specifically exempted from the provisions of this article, a person may not legally post, display, enlarge, erect, move or substantially change a sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the zoning administrator or his designee. A change in the copy only of a sign or advertising device does not constitute a substantial change. 
(2)  Permit application. Applications for sign permits shall be filed by the sign owner or his agent with the city or designee upon forms furnished by the city. Applications shall describe and justify the following: 
a.  The type and purpose of the sign as defined in this article. 
b.  The value of the sign. 
c.  The street address and zoning designation of the property where the sign is to be located and the proposed location of the sign on the property. 
d.  The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
e.  The names and addresses of the owners of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
f.  Written consent of the owner, or his agent, granting property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
g.  For ground signs: a site plan drawn to scale, showing the proposed location of all primary and accessory ground signs on subject property. The site plan includes a closed boundary survey of the property, gross acreage, the proposed sign location, street right-of-way lines, public or private easements, driveway locations and parking spaces. 
h.  For all signs, a sketch or print drawn to scale showing all dimensions with pertinent information such as wind pressure requirements and display materials in accordance with the building code as adopted. 
i.  Name, address, phone number and business license number of the sign contractor. 
j.  All applicants for electrical signs must obtain an electrical permit. 
k.  A written agreement to indemnify and hold the city and county harmless of all damages, demands, or expenses of every type which may in any manner be caused by the sign or sign structure. 
(3)  Fees. No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the city and permit fees have been paid as adopted by the city council. 
(4)  Grant of completed application. The city shall grant a completed application, if the proposed sign meets the requirements of this article. 
(5)  Written notice. The city shall provide written notice of the granting or denial of an application within 30 business days following submission of a completed application. In the event no action is taken within 30 business days, the application shall be deemed granted. 
(6)  Permit expiration. A sign permit shall become null and void if construction of the sign has not begun within a period of two months from the date of issuance and completed within six months from the date of issuance. Issuance of a sign permit shall in no way prevent the county or city from later declaring the sign to be nonconforming or unlawful if, with further review of available information, the sign is found not to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(7)  Identification label. With each sign permit, the city shall issue a label bearing the same number as the sign permit with which it is issued. The duty of the permitted or his agent is to affix such to the sign or its supporting structure in such a manner as to be visible from a street right-of-way. 
(8)  Violation. A violation of any provision of this article will be grounds for terminating a permit granted for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this article, the city shall revoke the permit. 
(b)  Construction, maintenance requirements. 
(1)  Erecting or placing any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this article is unlawful. 
(2)  All signs for which a permit is required, together with all supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in constant repair. Signs shall be kept clean, neatly painted and maintained at all times so as not to be detrimental to public health and safety. 
(3)  No trash shall be allowed to accumulate in the area around a sign and all weeds shall be kept out. 
(4)  Removal of abandoned signs. Any structure formerly used as a sign, but not in use for any other purpose, must be removed by the owner of the property within 30 days after written notification from a designated official of the city or county or 60 days after its use as a valid sign has ceased, after which time, the county or city may cause the removal of the sign at the property owner's expense. 
(c)  Lighting requirements. 
(1)  Lighted, neon, or luminous signs giving off light resulting in glare, blinding, or any other such adverse effect on traffic shall not be erected or maintained. 
(2)  The light from illuminated signs shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. Lighting shall not be directed skyward. 
(3)  No illuminated signs shall be constructed or maintained within 50 feet of any residential district or dwelling, except within the TND district. 
(4)  Signs with flashing, intermittent, or animated illumination or effect shall be excluded from all districts provided, however, time and weather informational signs, official warning or regulatory signs shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(5)  No sign shall be erected which simulates an official traffic control or warning sign in such a manner as to confuse or mislead the motoring public or hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal. 
(d)  Height requirements. The height requirements of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the highest attached component of the sign or sign structure, whichever is higher. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: 
(1)  Existing grade prior to construction; or 
(2)  The newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, beaming, mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. 
In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade, at the base of the sign, is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public road. In addition, the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the lot, whichever is lower. Refer to Table 28-302 for specific height limits and requirements. 
(e)  Additional requirements. 
(1)  The owner shall remove any sign relating to a business or other use located on the same lot within 30 days after vacating the premises. 
(2)  Real estate signs shall be removed within 30 days of the sale, rental or lease of the property advertised; however, the use of a sold attachment to a sign pending the completion of a sales transaction shall not be construed as a sale. 
(3)  Campaign signs shall be removed within 30 days of the election or any run-off election. 
(4)  No sign shall be erected or maintained which obstructs any fire escape, any means of escape or ventilation, or which prevents free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof; nor shall any sign be attached in any form, shape or manner to a fire escape. 
(5)  No sign shall be erected, maintained, painted, drawn or attached to any utility pole, fence, rock, tree, or any other natural feature. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful to post any signs or advertisements on any building, fence or other property belonging to another person without the written consent of the owner thereof. Such consent shall be included with the sign permit application. 
(7)  Signs erected for the purpose of identifying a premise shall not also contain advertising except that of the use identified. 
(8)  All signs shall be located on or over private property only, except those specifically permitted by this article. 
(9)  All signs shall be erected in such a manner as to not interfere with or obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. 
(10)  All signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance from all overhead utilities in accordance with National Electrical Code specification. In no case shall any sign be installed within five feet horizontally or vertically from an overhead utility line or utility guy wire. 
(11)  Corner visibility clearance. In any distance, no sign or sign structure (above the height of three feet) shall be maintained within 15 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines extending two streets, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. However, a sign structure, if not more than ten inches in diameter located on a corner lot where services are provided to the motoring public may be located within the required corner visibility area. This is provided if all other requirements of this article are met and the lowest elevation of the sign surface is at least ten feet above the ground level. 
Sec. 28-298. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs and advertising devices are prohibited: 
(1)  Signs which advertise or encourage an illegal activity as defined by local, state or federal laws. 
(2)  A-frame, sandwich-type, sidewalk or curb signs. 
(3)  Swinging or projecting signs. 
(4)  Rotating or animated signs involving motion or sound including those that flash, blink, change image, or show any form of movement, excluding historic signs and those officially designated for public service. 
(5)  Signs that resemble any official traffic control device or emergency vehicle markings. 
(6)  Portable signs (mobile, trailer). 
(7)  Flags, banners, streamers, tethered balloons or other inflatable signs or figures, except as authorized by this regulation (grand opening permit process). 
(8)  Signs that make use of the words stop, go, slow, caution, danger, warning or similar words, phrases, symbols, or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse automobile traffic, except construction signs or barricades and except when the words are incorporated in the permanent name of a business. 
(9)  Courtesy benches, waste containers or other forms of street furniture on which advertising is displayed. 
(10)  Snipe signs. 
(11)  Search lights and beacons. 
(12)  Signs attached to or painted on vehicles of any type, which are conspicuously parked in proximity to a right-of-way and obviously parked in such a way as to advertise any business or service to motorists or pedestrians. 
(13)  Signs that emit visible smoke, vapor particles or odor. 
Sec. 28-299. - Exempt signs. 
Except as otherwise provided, the following signs may be erected without securing a permit. Such exempt signs shall not be considered in determining the allowable number or size of signs on a zoning lot. However, the signs must comply with all other applicable sections of this article and applicable codes and regulations. The erection of any sign not listed in this section shall require a permit. 
(1)  One professional name plate for each establishment. Each professional nameplate shall not exceed two square feet in area. 
(2)  One separate identification sign for each establishment when affixed to a building wall or window and limited to a maximum size of two square feet. The purpose of this sign is to identify the establishment's property number (address), suite or unit number, post office number, etc. 
(3)  One informational bulletin board for public, charitable, educational or religious institutions when located on the premises of said institution and affixed to a building wall. Bulletin boards may not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall be located in such a manner that said bulletin board will satisfy the setback requirements for the zoning district in which the bulletin board is located. 
(4)  Traffic, directional, warning, or official notices that otherwise meet the location, size and height requirements of this article. 
(5)  One non-illuminated, temporary real estate sign per street frontage and provided as follows: 
a.  Maximum sign area shall be limited to four square feet with a maximum height of eight feet. 
b.  Multiple listing strips, sale pending, and sold signs may be allowed when attached to a real estate sign and are subject to the same maximum area and maximum height requirements. 
c.  One on-premises open house or open for inspection sign, not exceeding four square feet in area with a maximum height of eight feet, may be allowed in addition to the above requirements. 
d.  All the temporary real estate signs shall be removed within 30 days after ownership or occupancy has changed. 
e.  Real estate brochures/information boxes may be allowed with a maximum of one brochure/information box per parcel of land. 
(6)  Flags. 
a.  All flags shall be displayed on purpose-built, professionally fabricated flagpoles and shall not exceed eight feet in height in all zoning districts. 
b.  Each lot shall be allowed a maximum of two flagpoles, unless a special land use permit or variance is obtained pursuant to this chapter. 
c.  A maximum of two flags shall be allowed per flagpole. 
d.  Flags displaying a logo, message, statement, or commercial message and banners not meeting the definition of a flag contained herein shall conform to all applicable ordinances pertaining to signs. 
e.  A vertical flagpole must be set back from the property boundaries a distance which is at least equal to the height of the flagpole. 
f.  Flags and flagpoles shall be maintained in good repair, and to the extent applicable shall be in compliance with the building code. Flagpoles with broken halyards shall not be used and flags which are torn or frayed shall not be displayed. 
g.  On officially designated county, city, state, or federal holidays, there shall be no maximum flag size or number or other limitations of display. 
(7)  Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights. 
(8)  Nonadvertising directional signs or symbols not exceeding two square feet designed to direct and inform the public as to location or direction to a parcel of private property (e.g., entrance, exit, caution, slow, no trespassing, service areas, or loading and unloading areas). 
(9)  Signs for temporary garage sales, yard sales, and the like, located in residential districts and subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Signs shall be limited to one sign per parcel of property. 
b.  The maximum area of the sign shall be four square feet and the maximum height shall be eight feet. 
c.  Signs must be removed within 30 days of the close of the sale. 
d.  Weekend directional signs (WEDS): 
1.  Definition. WEDS shall convey directions to a specific, time-limited weekend place or event. For example, premises that are for sale or lease, a church or community gathering, yard sales, moving sales, estate sales, etc. 
2.  Zoning districts. WEDS shall be allowed in all zoning districts. 
3.  Time allowed. WEDS shall be allowed from 3:00 p.m. on Friday to 7:00 a.m. on Monday. The responsibility to remove all WEDS prior to 7:00 a.m. Monday is that of the sign owner. 
4.  No permit required. WEDS do not require a permit. However, written permission of the property owner must be provided to the planning and zoning department indicating that the property owner acquiesces to the erection of the WEDS sign on his property. Further, each sign shall prominently display identification issued by the planning and zoning department indicating the property owner's permission and the sign location. 
5.  Construction. WEDS shall not exceed four square feet of sign area and three feet in height and may be double-faced. WEDS shall be mounted on an independent single- or double-pole device. WEDS shall not be affixed in any manner to trees, natural objects, streetlight poles, utility poles, other signs or other sign structures. WEDS shall be made of metal, plastic, laminated cardboard or some other durable and waterproof material. No sign shall be made of paper. 
6.  Location. There shall be only one WEDS per lot. All WEDS must be placed on private property with the owner's permission. 
(10)  Works of art which do not contain a commercial message. 
(11)  Historic signs. 
(12)  Municipal signs. 
(13)  Signs on public transportation vehicles. 
(14)  Signs painted on or otherwise attached to motor vehicles which are not conspicuously parked in proximity to a right-of-way, and obviously not parked in such a way as to advertise any business or service to motorists or pedestrians. This may include signs for realtors, surveyors, engineers, plumbers, electricians, delivery trucks, lawn service, etc. 
(15)  Holiday lights, flags for decorative purposes, including small flagpoles, and other decorations, which do not require a permit and must not exceed 16 square feet. 
(16)  Signs in the right-of-way. It shall be unlawful for any person to install a sign in any public right-of-way except for the following: 
a.  Public signs. 
b.  County or city owned kiosk signs. 
c.  Emergency signs. 
The zoning administrator or his designee is hereby authorized to immediately remove any illegal sign located in any public right-of-way. 
(17)  Noncommercial message with a maximum total surface area not to exceed 32 square feet per lot. In residential districts with parcels less than ten acres, each sign will be limited to four square feet with a maximum height of eight feet. In residential districts with parcels ten acres or greater and all other districts, freestanding signs are limited to 32 square feet with a maximum height of eight feet. 
Sec. 28-300. - Permitted signs by type and zoning district. 
In addition to the signs that are exempt from the permitting requirement, the following signs are allowed with a permit: 
(1)  Commercial lots. Commercial lots are allowed two signs. Only one of the signs can be a freestanding sign. A business within a shopping center can have a maximum of two signs. The shopping center is allowed the freestanding sign. Freestanding signs are limited to 25 square feet with a maximum height of 15 feet, and may contain commercial and/or noncommercial speech. 
(2)  Residential districts. Lots in residential districts of ten acres or greater are allowed one freestanding sign limited to 25 square feet with a maximum of eight feet, and may contain commercial and/or noncommercial speech. Residential districts of less than ten acres are allowed one freestanding sign limited to four square feet with a maximum height of eight feet. Lots in residential districts are allowed on temporary real estate sign. For a one-unit lot, a wall sign identifying a home occupation is allowed. For a subdivision, one freestanding or wall sign is allowed. 
(3)  Churches, clubs and lodges, noncommercial. One freestanding sign per lot. In residential districts/uses, freestanding signs will be limited to 32 square feet with a maximum of eight feet in height. In nonresidential districts (commercial), freestanding signs are limited to 50 square feet with a maximum height of eight feet, and may contain commercial and/or noncommercial speech. 
(4)  Subdivisions. Signs for the identification of a subdivision must be monumental (brick, stone, stucco, or masonry). There are to be no signs on islands. One double-faced sign is allowed with a maximum of 50 square feet. 
(5)  Temporary signs. Decorative flags, banners, balloons, bunting for community or nonprofit organization celebrations, conventions, commemorations, and grand-opening events for a prescribed period of one week. 
a.  A temporary sign must not have flashing lights or copy, moveable parts or colored lights that may closely resemble those of traffic signals, emergency vehicles or airport beacons. 
b.  A temporary sign with copy must not be confused with authorized traffic signs or which may use words, phrases, symbols or characters that may interfere with, mislead, or confuse motorists. 
c.  If the parcel has two street frontages, two freestanding signs are allowed in any zoning district. 
(6)  Freestanding commercial signs. Freestanding commercial signs must be primarily of masonry construction compatible with the primary building on the site and must be built in true monument style. 
Sec. 28-301. - Appeal. 
(a)  A person whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the city clerk or designee to the zoning board of appeals, pursuant to article XIV of this chapter. 
(b)  The board shall reach a decision following a public hearing within 30 days. 
(c)  Appeals to the city council are pursuant to article XIV of this chapter. And any decision by the board of commissioners must be made within 30 days after the public hearing. 
(d)  Certiorari. In the event a person whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the city council, he may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county as provided by law. 
Sec. 28-302. - District requirements for permanent signs. 
Table 28-302. District Requirements for Permanent Signs 

 
WEDS—Premises that are for sale or lease, a church or community gathering, yard sales, moving sales, estate sales, etc. 
*Each sign will be sited in accordance with safety conditions as required by the county engineering department. 
Secs. 28-303—28-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 28-321. - By use. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, when any building or structure is hereafter erected or structurally altered, or any building or structure hereafter erected is converted for the uses listed in this article parking shall be provided as indicated in the following tables. The inclusion of a use in the table below does not mean that the use is a permitted use under this chapter. 

 
Sec. 28-322. - Interpretation of parking requirements chart. 
(a)  The use regulations for each district are not affected by arrangement of uses in the chart. 
(b)  The parking requirements in the chart are in addition to space for storage of trucks or other vehicles used in connection with any use. 
(c)  The parking requirements in the chart do not limit other parking requirements contained in the district regulations. 
(d)  Floor area, as used in Table 28-325, shall be defined in article IV of this chapter. 
(e)  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the next highest whole number. 
(f)  Except as otherwise provided, the number of employees shall be compiled on the basis of the maximum number of persons employed on the premises at one time on an average day or average night, whichever is greater. Seasonal variations in employment may be recognized in determining an average day. 
(g)  The parking space requirements for a use not specifically listed in the chart shall be the same as for a listed use of similar characteristics of parking demand generation. 
(h)  In the case of mixed uses, or uses with different parking requirements occupying the same building or premises, or in the case of joint use of a building or premises by more than one use having the same parking requirements, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
(i)  Whenever a building or use is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity, or otherwise, to create a need under the requirements of this article for an increase in parking spaces of ten percent or more than those required before the change or enlargement such additional spaces shall be provided on the basis of change or enlargement. No additional spaces shall be required for the first change or enlargement which would result in an increase of spaces of less than ten percent of those required before the change or enlargement, but this exception shall not apply to a series of changes or enlargements which together result in a need for an increase in parking spaces of ten percent or more. 
Sec. 28-323. - Joint use and off-site facilities. 
(a)  All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served except that where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located and maintained at a distance not to exceed 300 feet from an institutional building or other nonresidential building served. 
(b)  Up to 50 percent of the parking spaces required for: 
(1)  Theaters; 
(2)  Public auditoriums; 
(3)  Bowling alleys; 
(4)  Dancehalls; and 
(5)  Nightclubs; 
and up to 100 percent of the parking spaces required for a church auditorium may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally open, used, or operated during the same hours as those listed in subsection (b)(1) through (5) of this section, and up to 100 percent of parking spaces required for schools may be provided and used jointly by a church auditorium; provided a written agreement thereto is properly executed and recorded as specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, such parking spaces shall be established by a recorded covenant or agreement as to parking spaces to be used in conjunction with the principal use, and shall be reserved as such through an encumbrance on the title of the property to be designated as required parking space. Such encumbrance is to be valid for the total period of the use for which the parking is needed is in existence. A certificate of recording of the covenant or agreement shall be furnished to the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 28-324. - Design standards. 
(a)  Minimum area. For the purpose of these regulations, an off-street parking space is an all-weather surfaced area not in a street or alley and having an area of not less than 200 square feet, temporary, and a paved driveway which affords ingress and egress for an automobile without requiring another automobile to be moved. 
(b)  Drainage and maintenance. Off-street parking facilities shall be drained to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to abutting property and/or public streets and alleys, and surfaced with erosion-resistant material in accordance with applicable town specifications. Off-street parking areas shall be maintained in a clean, orderly, and dust-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee and not used for the sale, repair, dismantling, or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies. 
(c)  Separation from walkways and streets. Off-street parking spaces shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, streets or alleys by a wall, fence, curbing or other approved protective device, or by distance so that vehicles cannot protrude over publicly owned areas. 
(d)  Entrances and exits. Location and design of entrances and exits shall be in accord with the applicable requirements of county and city regulations and standards. All entrances and exits from or to any state highway shall be approved by the state department of transportation prior to construction. Landscaping, curbing, or approved barriers shall be provided along lot boundaries to control entrance and exit of vehicles or pedestrians. 
(e)  Interior drives. Interior drives shall be of adequate width to serve the particular design arrangement of parking spaces. 
(f)  Marking. Parking spaces in lots of more than ten spaces shall be marked by painted lines, curbs or other means to indicate individual spaces. Signs or markers shall be used as necessary to ensure efficient traffic operation of the lot. 
(g)  Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided if off-street parking spaces are to be used at night. The lighting shall be arranged and installed to minimize glare on property in any residential district. 
(h)  Screening. When off-street parking areas for ten or more automobiles are located closer than 50 feet to a lot in a residential district, or to any lot upon which there is a dwelling as a permitted use under these regulations, and where such parking areas are not entirely screened visually from such lot by an intervening building or structure, there shall be provided a continuous, visual screen with a minimum height of six feet. Such screen may consist of a compact evergreen hedge or foliage screening or louvered wall or fence. 
Sec. 28-325. - Off-street loading requirements by use. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, when any building or structure is hereafter erected or structurally altered to the extent of increasing the floor area by 25 percent or more, or any building is hereafter converted, for the uses listed in Table 28-325: 
Table 28-325. Minimum Off-Street Loading Requirements 

 
(b)  Interpretation of the chart. 
(1)  The loading space requirements apply to all districts but do not limit the special requirements which may be imposed in the district regulations. 
(2)  Under the provisions of article XIV of this chapter the board of appeals may waive or reduce the loading space requirements whenever the character of the use is such as to make unnecessary the full provisions of loading facilities, where provision is made for community loading facilities or where provision of loading space for uses which contain less than 10,000 square feet of floor area. 
(c)  Mixed uses in one building. Where a building is used for more than one use or for different uses, and where the floor area used for each use for which loading spaces is required is below the minimum for required loading spaces but the aggregate floor area used is greater than such minimum, then off-street loading space shall be provided as if the entire building were used for that use in the building for which the most spaces are required. In such cases, the zoning administrator or his designee may make reasonable requirements for the location of required loading spaces. 
(d)  Design standards. 
(1)  Minimum size. For the purpose of these regulations, a loading space is a space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, having minimum area of 608 square feet, minimum width of 35 feet, a minimum depth of 45 feet and a vertical clearance of at least 14.5 feet. 
(2)  Loading space for funeral homes. Loading spaces for a funeral home may be reduced in size to ten by 25 feet and vertical clearance reduced to eight feet for all but one space when multiple spaces are provided. 
(3)  Drainage and maintenance. Off-street loading facilities shall be drained to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to abutting property and/or public streets and alleys, and surfaced with erosion-resistant material in accordance with applicable town specifications. Off-street loading areas shall be maintained in a clean, orderly and dust-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee and not used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies. 
(4)  Entrances and exits. Location and design of entrances and exits shall be in accord with applicable requirements of town traffic regulations and standards. Where the entrance or exit of a building is designed for truck loading and unloading, such entrance or exit shall be designed to provide at least one off-street loading space. 
Secs. 28-326—28-353. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 28-354. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the continuation and within a suitable period of time, elimination of existing uses of property that do not conform to the requirements of this chapter or that may not conform to future amendments. The provisions of this article are designed to accomplish this intent in a way that: 
(1)  Minimizes the nuisance, reduction in neighboring property values, and other adverse effects of properties that do not conform to their environs. 
(2)  Allows the property owner or lessee to recover all or a substantial part of his investment in the nonconformity, while also minimizing the time period during which, by virtue of the nonconformity, he enjoys a special right not available to other property owners in the same zoning district. 
Sec. 28-355. - Definition. 
(a)  Nonconformity is a characteristic of a building, structure, or area of land, or the use of such building, structure, or area of land, which was lawful prior to the date of enactment of this chapter of any amendment that does not conform to the requirements applicable to the zoning district, in which it is located. 
(b)  Use of a portion of a lot shall not establish a nonconformity as to the entire lot, but only to that portion of the lot actually used at the time of the enactment or amendment of this chapter. 
Sec. 28-356. - Continuance of nonconforming uses. 
The lawful use of any building, structure, land or sign existing at the time of the enactment or amendment of this chapter may be continued, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter, except that the nonconforming use shall not be: 
(1)  Changed or extended so as to increase the portion of the property covered by the nonconforming building, structure, or sign on which the nonconforming use occurs. 
(2)  Extended to occupy a greater area of a building or structure, unless such additional area of the building or structure existed at the time of the enactment or amendment of this chapter and was clearly designed to house the same use as the nonconforming use occupying the other portion of the building or structure. 
(3)  Reestablished after discontinuance for two years, unless otherwise approved by the city council of if the use has a current city business license. 
(4)  Changed to another nonconforming use. 
Sec. 28-357. - Continuance of a nonconforming building. 
A nonconforming building existing at the time of the enactment or amendment of this chapter may be retained except as follows: 
(1)  No building other than a single-family detached dwelling may be enlarged, or altered except in conformance with this chapter, but it may be repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(2)  No building other than a single-family detached dwelling shall be rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding 75 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, except in conformity with this chapter. 
Sec. 28-358. - Discontinuance of nonconforming uses. 
Any nonconforming use which is discontinued for a continuous period of two years shall not be resumed, and the premises shall be occupied only by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 28-359. - Change of nonconforming use. 
The nonconforming use of any building, structure, or portion of that which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located may not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
Sec. 28-360. - Discontinuance of nonconforming building. 
When the nonconforming use of a building, structure, or portion of a structure, which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, is discontinued for a continuous period of one year, such building, structure, or portion of that shall be occupied only by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 28-361. - Enlargement of nonconforming uses. 
There shall be no extension or enlargement of a nonconforming use, except with the approval of the zoning board of appeals. 
Sec. 28-362. - Enlargement of nonconforming buildings. 
When a building, structure, or portion of that is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, it shall not be enlarged, added to, or structurally altered in any manner except as may be required by law; unless the said building or structure and use of that shall be made to conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 28-363. - Repair and alteration. 
Repairs and alterations necessary in the ordinary course and operation of a building or structure may be made to a nonconforming building or structure, except that no structural alterations shall be permitted, unless such structural change is for the purpose of conforming with the use of a nonconforming use or to introduce new nonconforming uses are prohibited. A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another sign, except within the provisions of this article. The substitution or interchange of poster panels, boards or the like on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs (such as repainting, electrical repairs, etc.) and neon tubing shall be permitted. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this article. 
Sec. 28-364. - Moving. 
No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot, except as required by law; unless every portion of such building or structure which is moved has the use if that made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 28-365. - Accessory uses. 
A nonconforming use of land which is accessory to the nonconforming use of a building or structure shall be discontinued on the same date the nonconforming use of the building or structure is discontinued. 
Sec. 28-366. - Sale of merchandise. 
The sale of merchandise in the open, when not permitted by the provisions of this chapter, shall be discontinued immediately. 
Sec. 28-367. - Exempted buildings, structure and uses. 
No lawfully established building, structure, or use shall be subject to the termination provisions solely for reason of being nonconforming with respect to the standards prescribed in this chapter for any of the following: 
(1)  Floor area ratio. 
(2)  Development standards. 
(3)  Permitted uses. 
(4)  Buffers. 
(5)  Gross floor area. 
Secs. 28-368—28-392. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 28-393. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided in these regulations the zoning administrator shall administer, interpret, and enforce this chapter. 
Sec. 28-394. - Permit procedure. 
(a)  Permit requirements. 
(1)  Development permit. A development permit shall be required for any proposed use of land, office or center in any commercial district providing shared parking, access, and service to three or more business establishments, or multifamily residential development before any improvements or grading of the land commences. Such development permits shall not be in lieu of building permits required for any structure within such developments. 
(2)  Building permit. A building permit shall be required for any proposed use of lands or building to indicate and ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter before any construction or building commences. 
(3)  Manufactured home location permit. A manufactured home location permit is required for any person to commence the excavation for or construction of a manufactured home stand or the placement of manufactured home on an individual lot within a manufactured home park. 
(4)  Temporary certificates. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary occupancy in addition to a permit for erection, alteration, moving, or repair of a structure provided the permit shall not exceed six months and shall include such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. 
(b)  Permit application. 
(1)  Development permit. An application for a development permit: 
a.  Shall be made to the zoning administrator; and 
b.  Shall be accompanied by complete plans in duplicate, signed by the author with his address, drawn to scale, showing: 
1.  The actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon; 
2.  The exact sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings and accessory buildings then existing; 
3.  The lines within which the proposed building or structure shall be erected or altered; 
4.  The proposed building or structure which shall be erected or altered; 
5.  The existing or intended use of each building or part of a building; 
6.  The number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate; and 
7.  Such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. 
One copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner when such plans have been approved. Approval of a preliminary plat in accordance with all applicable provisions of the subdivision regulations and approval of site plans as required in article XVII: amendment and zoning procedures, shall constitute approval of the development permit for such subdivision or development. 
(2)  Building permit. A building permit shall be required for any proposed use of lands or building to indicate and ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Manufactured and mobile home location permit. Manufactured and mobile homes are subject to permitting requirements the same as building permits. 
Sec. 28-395. - Issuance. 
All permits issued shall in no case grant any permit for the use, construction, or alteration of any land or building if the land or building as proposed to be used, constructed, or altered would be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other codes and laws of the city or the state. 
Sec. 28-396. - Duration of permit validity. 
A development or building permit shall be valid for one year from its issuance subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  If the construction work described in the building permit has not commenced within six months from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall be considered abandoned. 
(2)  If the construction work described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire. 
(3)  If the construction or work described in the building or development permit is suspended, or abandoned for a period of one year at any time after work is commenced, said permit shall expire. 
(4)  Written notice of the expiration shall be given to the persons affected together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed until a new development or building permit has been obtained. 
(5)  Where notice of an appeal to any decision is filed within the time provided in this chapter. 
Sec. 28-397. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or parts thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued therefore by the building official. 
(b)  A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the county building department and a copy shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
Sec. 28-398. - Fees. 
All fees for zoning application and permit issuance imposed by this chapter are charges made in pursuance of the police power for the regulation and control of the development for the protection and welfare of the citizens of the city. Fees for sign and home occupation permits shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. All other permit fees shall be as established by the county. A copy of the fee schedule shall be maintained for public inspection in the office of the zoning administrator and/or city clerk. 
Sec. 28-399. - Appeals from decisions of the zoning administrator. 
It is the intention of this article that all questions arising in connection with the administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be presented to the board of appeals only on appeal from the decision of such official. 
Sec. 28-400. - Minor variances. 
Based on application requirements and criteria for variances set out in article XIV of this chapter, the zoning administrator may grant variances up to ten percent of set-back requirements in residentially zoned districts on lines which do not front on a major, collector or state road. 
Secs. 28-401—28-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 28-431. - Creation and membership. 
The zoning board of appeals, referred to in this article as the board, shall consist of the city council. 
Sec. 28-432. - Compensation. 
The board members shall receive no additional compensation for their service. 
Sec. 28-433. - Rules and procedures. 
The mayor shall serve as chair of the zoning board of appeals. In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall serve as chair. The city clerk shall serve as board secretary. The board shall have authority to adopt rules of procedure. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman. The chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of said board and shall be a public record. The decisions of the board shall contain a statement of the subject matter being considered by the board, the decisions of the board, and the grounds of its decision reduced to written form. The full text shall be sent to the appellant. No appeal requesting the same relief in regard to the same property shall be received or heard by the board for a period of 12 months following the date of said resolution, except this limitation shall not affect the right of said board to grant a rehearing as provided in rules of procedure as may be adopted by the board. 
Sec. 28-434. - Administrative assistance. 
The zoning administrator or city clerk shall provide such technical, administrative and clerical assistance, and office space as is required by the board to carry out its function under the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 28-435. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Notice of hearing shall be given. Before making its decision on an appeal, request for a variance, or any other matter within the board's purview, said board shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least 15 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be sent to the applicant and/or owner by U.S. mail to the address per tax assessor's records. Such notice shall contain the name of the applicant or petitioner, the date, time, and place set for the hearing, and a brief statement of the nature of the hearing. 
(b)  Public notice in newspaper. The board shall give public notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
(c)  Public notice by posting. When the board is considering a request for variance, the notice of the date, time, place and nature of the board's hearings shall also be afforded by the erection of a sign in a conspicuous place on the subject property. The sign shall be erected at least 15 days prior to the date of the board's hearing. 
(d)  Who may appear. Any party may appear at the public hearing in person or by agent or attorney. 
(e)  Time limit on board's decision. The board shall reach a decision following a public hearing within 30 days. The decision of the board shall be made by a public vote and shall not be final until the resolution of the decision has been duly adopted and approved by the board. 
Sec. 28-436. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Appeals from actions of the zoning administrator. The board shall hear and decide upon appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator in the enforcement of these regulations. Notwithstanding the foregoing powers, the board shall not be entitled to review the interpretation by the zoning administrator or city clerk of the provisions related to permissive uses within the zoning districts established by this chapter, which interpretations shall be appealed to the city council. 
(1)  Who may appeal. Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or city clerk. Such appeals shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date of notification of the decision appealed from by filing with the city clerk and with the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator or city clerk shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(2)  Legal proceedings stayed. An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning administrator or city clerk certifies to the board that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such a case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application, on notice to the zoning administrator or city clerk, and on due cause shown. 
(3)  Extent of board of appeals power. The board may, in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, reverse, or affirm the requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrator or city clerk. The board may direct the issuance of a permit. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator and city clerk to carry out the decisions of the board. 
(b)  Request for a variance. The board may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of these regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so the spirit of these regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done; provided, however, that a variance shall not be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this chapter in the district in question. A variance may be granted in an individual case upon a finding by the board that the following exists: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; 
(2)  The application of these regulations to this particular piece of property would create a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of these regulations; provided, however, no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this chapter; 
(5)  A literal interpretation of this chapter would deprive the applicant of any rights that others in the same district are allowed; and 
(6)  Provided the board may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhoods; and provided that wherever the board shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, that any of the terms, conditions, or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, said board shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granted full opportunity for a hearing. In exercising the above powers, the board shall not consider any nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same district, and no permitted use of land, structures or buildings in the same district, and no permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts as grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
(c)  Request for extension or enlargement of the nonconforming use of a structure. The board may authorize upon appeal in specific cases an extension of an existing nonconforming use which the board is specifically authorized to pass on under the terms of this chapter. Said extensions may be granted in an individual case upon a finding by the board that: 
(1)  The use is a nonconformance as defined in these regulations; 
(2)  The use is in full compliance with all requirements of these regulations applicable to nonconformance; and 
(3)  The extension of said use will not further injure a permitted use on adjacent property in the same district. 
(d)  Continuance of nonconformance. The board may allow a nonconformance to be reestablished after discontinuance for 12 consecutive months where it is deemed by the board that: 
(1)  The design, construction, and character of the land, building, or structure is not suitable for uses permitted in the district in which the nonconformance is situated; 
(2)  Undue hardships to the property owner would result in not allowing the continuance of a nonconformance; 
(3)  Adjacent property would not be unduly damaged by such continuance; and 
(4)  The use is to be identical to the prior nonconformance. 
(e)  Compliance with standards. Where an application to the board is initiated due to an existing violation of this article and said application is denied, the violation shall be required to be corrected within ten days of such denial or as specified by the board if a greater time period is necessary. The maximum extension of the time shall not exceed 30 days. 
(f)  Forms. Appeals, requests for variance, and requests for extension or continuance of nonconformance shall be made on forms provided by the zoning administrator, and all information required on said forms shall be provided by the appellant. Forms shall be filed with the zoning administrator for expenses incidental to the appeal. No form shall be accepted by the zoning administrator, unless it contains all pertinent information and is accompanied by the required fee to defray expenses. 
Sec. 28-437. - Appeals to court. 
Any appeals from any decision made by the zoning board of appeals or the city council shall be brought before the superior court of the county by writ of certiorari as provided by state law. 
Sec. 28-438. - Administrative variances. 
The zoning administrator may grant a variance up to five percent of the minimum required building setbacks, outlined in Table 28-154, upon presentation of evidence indicating such variances are necessary and practical solutions without significant impact to adjoining properties, provided the same applicant has not requested an administrative variance or an administrative variance has not been requested for the same property within the preceding six months. 
Secs. 28-439—28-461. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE AND CONFLICT 

Sec. 28-462. - Interpretation, purpose and conflict. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be considered as the minimum requirements for the promotion of public safety, health, morals and general welfare. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other arguments between parties; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of property, premises or upon the height of buildings, or requires greater space than is imposed or required by other ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provision of this chapter shall govern. 
Secs. 28-463—28-492. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - AMENDMENTS AND ZONING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 28-493. - Zoning decision. 
A decision has the final action by the city council or zoning board of appeals when, in carrying out its respective duties, it results in: 
(1)  The adoption of a zoning ordinance. 
(2)  The adoption of an amendment to this chapter which changes the text of this chapter. 
(3)  The adoption of an amendment to this chapter which rezones property from one zone classification to another. 
(4)  The approval or disapproval of a special use exception, variance, or appeal to a decision by the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 28-494. - Amendments. 
This chapter, including the official zoning map, may be amended as follow: 
(1)  By the city council upon its own motion, in accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.) and this chapter; 
(2)  By the city council, upon the recommendation of the planning commission which, prior to such recommendation, shall have given public notice of the proposal and held a public hearing thereon as required by the state zoning procedures law and this chapter; 
(3)  Nothing herein shall preclude the city council's submission of any proposed amendment to this chapter to the planning commission for its review and recommendations as set out in section 28-493(2) and, in mere particularity, in this section. 
Sec. 28-495. - Zoning procedures. 
(a)  Initiation of amendments. 
(1)  Applications to amend this chapter may be in the form of proposals to amend the text or proposals to amend the official zoning map. No amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been initiated by either the city council, the planning commission, the property owner, or an individual who has the owner's power of attorney authorizing him to act. 
(2)  All proposed amendments shall be initiated by an application on forms provided by the zoning administrator. A standard fee shall be paid with the application in the amount of the advertising costs for the required public hearing. 
(3)  Unless initiated by the city council or the planning commission, all applications for map amendments: 
a.  Shall be submitted by the owner of such property or the authorized agent of the owner; 
b.  Shall cover only contiguous property; and 
c.  Shall be limited to one proposed zone district classification. 
All applications for an amendment affecting the same property shall not be submitted more often than once every 12 months; however, this provision shall not apply to those properties affected by an amendment filed by the city government or planning commission. Upon good cause shown, the city council may direct the consideration by the planning commission of an application for a map amendment by the owner of property within the zoning jurisdiction of the county, or the authorized agent of such owner notwithstanding that the application pertains to property for which an amendment was submitted within the 12 months next preceding that application, upon payment by the applicant of the application fee again and upon notice requirement being met again. 
(b)  Application for map amendments. Each application to amend the official zoning map shall be filed with the zoning administrator. Each application shall be submitted in conformance with the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Application information. The application shall include the following information: 
a.  A legal description of the tract proposed to be rezoned or the request for special use. 
b.  A site plan if required (see subsection (c) of this section) or a plat showing the dimensions, acreage and location of the tract prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid and evidenced by his seal affixed to the plat. 
c.  The present and proposed zone district classification of the applicant property, tract and the existing zone district classification of abutting properties. 
d.  The name and addresses of the owner of the applicant property and his agent. 
e.  The names and addresses of owners of abutting properties, including properties across a public right-of-way, determined by projecting the intersecting tract boundaries of the applicant's property across the right-of-way. 
(2)  Existing site resources map. A detailed site resources map of the proposed development site identifying all special and noteworthy elements of the natural or cultural landscape is a required submittal with any zoning application. The purpose of this key submission is to familiarize county and city staff and officials with all existing resources on a parcel of land, and to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified. The existing site resources map shall be provided with the submission of a request to rezone a parcel of land. 
(3)  Required information. To provide a full understanding of the site's potential and to facilitate the most effective exchange with the planning staff and other officials, the existing site resources map shall include the following information: 
a.  Property boundaries, including: 
1.  Name and address of the professional engineer, surveyor, planner, architect, landscape architect, or the site designer responsible for preparing the plan; 
2.  Graphic scale (not greater than one inch = 200 feet, however, dimensions on plan need not be exact) and north arrow; 
3.  Approximate tract boundaries, sufficient to locate the tract on a map of the community; 
4.  Location map; 
5.  Existing streets on and adjacent to the tract. 
b.  All streams (perennial and intermittent), rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features, including: 
1.  The 100-year floodplain. 
2.  Streams within 200 feet of existing boundary. 
3.  Riparian zones of at least a 50-foot width on either side along all perennial and intermittent streams. 
4.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by state and/or federal regulations. 
c.  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals. 
d.  Vegetation characteristics, including: 
1.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area. 
2.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than 14 inches caliper measured at DBH identified by type and size. 
3.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads. 
4.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area. 
5.  Other features including fields, pastures, meadows, wooded areas, hedgerows and other significant vegetation, rock outcrops, ponds, ditches, drains, dumps, storage tanks, and streams within 200 feet of the tract. 
e.  Groundwater recharge areas. 
f.  Significant wildlife habitats, if known: populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such. 
g.  Historic, archeological and cultural features, including: 
1.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds subject to approval indicating that these structures are compatible with the Cherokee Zoning Regulations. 
2.  Site identified in any state or local historic site survey. 
3.  U.S. Geological Service survey control monuments. 
h.  General soil types. 
i.  Existing roads and structures, including: 
1.  Existing ROW. 
2.  All easements describing their purpose and depicting their location on the property. 
3.  All structures, foundations, walls, wells, trails, and abandoned roads. 
4.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
j.  Identification of surrounding property type/land use. 
(4)  Review of existing resource map. The existing resources map shall be reviewed by the planning director or his designee. If found inadequate by the reviewer, the reviewer shall state the reasons for its inadequacy, and the existing resources map shall not be accepted until adequate changes are made. 
(5)  Exemptions. Zoning applications that meet the following criteria are exempt from the existing site resources map requirements above: 
a.  Any residential application of five acres or less. 
b.  Any commercial application of one acre or less. 
c.  Any application without new building construction. 
(6)  Conformance with development standards. The property and its use proposed in the map amendment application or special use request shall conform to the applicable development standards of the district for which the application is made. 
(7)  Application submission. An application shall be filed with the zoning administrator no later than 4:00 p.m. on the second Friday of each month. It shall be accompanied by a fees as pertained and listed under the zoning and permit fee schedule resolution and under no condition shall said sum of money be refunded for failure of such proposed amendment to be enacted. Such fee shall not be charged if an official governmental agency files the application. 
(8)  Supporting information and data. When it is determined by the zoning administrator or the planning commission that it is necessary or appropriate to action on an individual rezoning, the applicant shall present a map showing the location of the property for which an application is submitted, and its relationship to adjoining properties and public facilities and services. He may also be required to submit applicable information concerning the service demands that will be placed on public facilities and services including, but not limited to, information on such matters as total anticipated population density; traffic volumes, effect on schools, drainage, traffic and utility facilities. Any site plans, renderings, or other exhibits depicting construction or development which are submitted by the applicant may be recommended as a condition of rezoning by the planning commission or the zoning board. 
(9)  Application withdrawal or amendment. An application may not be postponed or amended by the applicant after the regularly scheduled municipal planning commission work session if the council determines to submit the amendment to the planning commission. However, the municipal planning commission may allow an application to be withdrawn prior to the conduct of the public hearing without prejudice with respect to the 12-month limitation of this section. The municipal planning commission may recommend to amend an application prior to acting thereon, with the consent of the applicant, to reduce its size; to change the district required to a less intensive or lower density district than that requested; or to specify as part of the zone district classification the particular use or uses proposed by the applicant. 
(c)  Site plan requirements. In addition to the application information required in subsection (b)(1) of this section, a site plan shall be required prior to consideration of rezoning requests in all the nonresidential districts and major subdivisions. Such plan shall be prepared in accordance with the requirement of this section, other applicable requirements, or development standards of this chapter, and applicable requirements of other regulations of the city and the state. For traditional neighborhood development, neighborhood plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements listed section 28-194. 
(1)  Waivers and exemptions. In those instances where the rezoning request is for the purpose of extending an existing zone district or establishing the zone district to conform to existing land use, the city council may waive the site plan requirement. When the rezoning is initiated by the city council or the planning commission or is for conventional one- and two-family residential units exclusively, the site plan requirements of this section shall be waived. 
(2)  Plan submission. The site plan shall be submitted with five copies of applications. 
(3)  Site plan format. All site plans shall be prepared by design professionals such as planners, engineers, architects and landscape architects in the following formats: 
a.  Scale. The scale of plan shall not be smaller than one inch equals 100 feet. 
b.  Sheet size. All site plans shall be drawn on sheets no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches. If more than one sheet is necessary to cover the applicant property, an index map at a reduced scale shall be provided to key the sheets. 
c.  Boundary survey. Shown and described by metes and bounds. 
d.  Title block. The following information shall be provided on all site plans as applicable: 
1.  Name and address of owner-applicant and the names, addresses and seal of the registered architect, engineer, landscape architect, and/or land surveyor who prepared the plan. 
2.  Approval spaces for planning commission and city council's signature. 
3.  Date, scale and north arrow. 
(4)  Site plan information. Prior to the approval of a rezoning request in all commercial districts, the following information shall be prepared: 
a.  Location map. A general location map at a scale of one inch equals to 2,000 feet indicating existing zoning on the site, adjoining roads and the adjacent areas are required. 
b.  Survey boundaries. Surveyed boundaries of the entire tract and the relationship to adjoining properties, public rights-of-way, and easements. 
c.  Building locations. Location of all proposed buildings, shape, size, and setback in appropriate scale. 
d.  Right-of-way. Location and right-of-way of streets, roads, alleys, railroads, public crosswalks, with lengths and widths, road names, or designations. 
e.  Buffers. Proposed buffers and landscaping. 
f.  Topography. Existing topographic conditions with contour intervals of five feet or less; areas that have slopes greater than 15 percent shall be identified. 
g.  Floodplain. Location of streams, lakes, swamps, and, if applicable, the boundary and elevation of the 100-year floodplain as determined by the past history of flooding or the best available data. 
h.  Drainage. Size and location of all drainage mechanisms and the applicable drainage area within the tract or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjacent to the tract; grades and invert elevations of sewers shall be shown; all elevations shall refer to mean sea level datum where public water and/or public sewers are to be installed. Layouts of all utility and drainage easements. 
i.  Soil erosion plan. A soil erosion plan showing the mitigation techniques that will be employed during construction may be required upon request by the planning commission. 
j.  Sketches. Representative architectural sketches or renderings of typical proposed structures, signs, landscaping, screening and/or fencing. 
k.  Off-street parking and loading. Show the access point to the public street system, off-street parking and loading plan. 
l.  Development report. A report setting forth the proposed development schedule, indicating sequence of development of the various sections thereof, and the approximate time period required for completion of each phase, if applicable. 
m.  Technical data. Statistical or technical data as necessary to accurately describe the proposed development including, but not limited to, the following shall be included in the development report: 
1.  Total land area. 
2.  Amount of land to be used for recreational or open space purpose. 
3.  Total number of dwelling units and gross density by type of land use. 
4.  Amount of space to be occupied by streets and parking areas. 
5.  Amount of any submerged land within the project boundary. 
6.  The total ground coverage and floor area of all buildings. 
7.  A breakdown of the number of kinds of proposed buildings, including square footage and the number and range of lot sizes and proposed setback and yard dimensions for typical lots and/or building types. 
8.  Deed record names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 
(d)  Site plan review and approval. Site plan review and approval shall be undertaken in accordance with provisions of subsections (e) and (f) of this section. 
(e)  Site plan effect and amendment. Site plans contained in a rezoning shall become effective upon approval for a period of five years, subject to the provisions of subsection (f) of this section. If amendment of the site plan is desired or it is necessary to change the proposals represented on the site plan, the applicant shall request a review by the planning commission. The planning commission may recommend approval of minor and incidental changes by the city council or may determine the need to initiate an amendment procedure as provided in subsection (a) of this section in the case of major changes. 
(f)  Study required for amendment. Upon the filing of the application for rezoning, the zoning administrator may consult with other county or city departments or governmental units to evaluate the impact of the proposed zoning change upon public facilities and services and may otherwise study the application with reference to appropriateness and effect on existing and proposed land use. The zoning administrator shall report any findings and recommendations to the planning commission in writing as a part of the public record or verbally at the public hearing. When zoning district boundary changes are proposed by an applicant seeking a modification, revision or amendment, the applicant shall be responsible for submitting information, or where the proposal is by the zoning administrator, the administrator shall be responsible for submitting information, as follows: 
(1)  The existing land use pattern. 
(2)  The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts. 
(3)  The population density pattern and possible increase or overtaxing of the load on public facilities, including, but not limited to, schools, utilities, and roads. 
(4)  The cost to the county or city in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, roads, and public safety measures. 
(5)  Impact on the environment, including, but not limited to, drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality, and water quality and quantity. 
(6)  Whether the proposed change will be a deterrent to the value or improve the development of adjacent property in accordance with existing zoning regulations. 
(7)  Whether there are substantial reasons why property affected cannot be used in accordance with existing zoning. 
(8)  The aesthetic effect of existing and future use of the property as it relates to the surrounding area. 
(9)  The extent to which the proposed changes are consistent with existing plans and studies. 
(10)  Any other factors relevant to the balancing of interests in promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare and in the right of the landowner to use his property as he chooses. 
The city council or the planning commission may make such changes as they deem appropriate to the submission by the zoning administrator. 
(g)  Public notification. Public notification of the hearing on a proposed amendment to this chapter shall be given as follows: 
(1)  Legal notice. At least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date set by the planning commission for the hearing, a written notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city by advertising the application and date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing. 
(2)  Notice requirements. Notice shall additionally be given as follows: 
a.  Published notice. The published notice shall include the time and date of the hearing, the location of the property, and state the present zoning classification of the property and the proposed zoning classification of the property. Notice of hearing before the planning commission shall be prepared and presented for publication by the zoning administrator. 
b.  Sign posted. A sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location of the property sought to be rezoned setting forth the time, date, place and purpose of the public hearing, the present zoning classification on the property at least 30 days prior to the public hearing. Acts of vandalism or natural occurrences limiting the effectiveness of notice by a sign posted on the property shall not invalidate any proceedings or action taken on the proposed amendment. 
(3)  Letters to abutting property owners and the applicant. The zoning administrator shall notify by regular mail all abutting city property owners (defined in subsection (b)1e of this section) of the requested zoning change as shown by city or county tax records as the last known address available, of the application and date, time and place of the public hearing, which shall be mailed at least seven days prior to the public hearing. The zoning administrator shall notify the applicant of the date, time and place of the public hearing by mail to the address indicated on the application, which shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the public hearing. Receipt of such letter by the applicant or his agents named in the application shall constitute notice to be present and present a case. 
(4)  Public participation plan. 
a.  Purpose. The public participation plan is required with most applications for an amendment (rezoning) to the official zoning map. For exceptions to this see subsection (5)c of this section, submittal requirements. 
b.  Background: The rezoning process, by nature, often creates a contentious atmosphere for all parties involved. This is primarily because of a lack of meaningful interaction between the parties. This, therefore, creates an information void leading to a misunderstanding of the issues at hand among the involved parties. 
c.  Goals of the plan: In light of the above observations, the public participation plan is designed to facilitate on-going communication among the applicants and proponents of the rezoning proposals, the nearby and adjoining property owners, interested citizens, elected officials, and staff throughout the application review process. Specifically, the plan is aimed at ensuring the following: 
1.  The nearby and adjoining property owners and interested citizens have adequate opportunity to learn about applications that may affect them and to work with applicants to resolve concerns at an early stage of the process. 
2.  Applicants pursue early and effective citizen participation in conjunction with their applications, giving them the opportunity to understand and try to mitigate any real or perceived impacts the applications may have on the community. 
The proposed plan is not intended to produce complete consensus on all applications, but to encourage applicants to be good neighbors and to foster an atmosphere for informed decision-making. 
d.  Contents of the plan: At a minimum, the public participation plan shall include the following information: 
1.  Which property owners, interested parties, political jurisdictions and public agencies may be affected by the application. 
2.  How those interested in and potentially impacted by an application will be notified that an application has been made. 
3.  How those interested and potentially impacted parties will be informed of the substance of the development proposed by the applicant. 
4.  How those potentially impacted and interested parties will be afforded an opportunity to discuss the applicant's proposal with the applicant and express any concerns, issues, or problems that they may have with the proposal, in advance of the public hearing. 
5.  The applicant's schedule for completion of the public participation plan process. 
6.  Minimum public notification target area. The minimum public notification target area for the public participation meeting will include: 
(i)  All properties that are within 750 feet of the legal boundary of the subject property. 
(ii)  Any homeowners associations, which represent subdivisions or properties, that fall within the 750-foot boundary. 
(iii)  Other interested parties who have requested that they be placed on the interested parties notification list, to be maintained by the planning and zoning office. 
These requirements will apply, in addition to the formal notification provisions typically undertaken by the county or city. The basis for this target area is to provide an expanded notification area beyond the legal notification required for rezoning requests (adjacent properties) to enhance public participation opportunities. 
(5)  Public participation meeting and report. It is mandatory for the rezoning applicant to schedule and hold a public participation meeting. The public notification letter sent shall identify the date, time, and place of the meeting. In order to formalize the public participation plan process, the applicant shall provide a written report on the results of the public participation meeting to the planning and zoning office one week prior to the planning commission work session. This report will be attached to the planning and zoning office's technical staff report, which is prepared for each rezoning case and is sent to the planning commission and city council. At a minimum, the public participation report shall include the following information: 
a.  Details of methods the applicant used to involve the public, including: 
1.  Date and location of the meeting held with citizens to discuss the applicant's proposal; 
2.  Content, dates mailed and numbers of mailings, including letters, meeting notices, newsletters and other publications; 
3.  Where property owners and interested parties receiving notices or other written materials are located; and 
4.  The number of people that participated in the process. 
b.  A summary of concerns, issues and problems expressed during the process, including: 
1.  The substance of the concerns, issues and problems; 
2.  How the applicant has addressed or intends to address concerns, issues, and problems expressed during the process; and 
3.  Concerns, issues and problems the applicant is unable or unwilling to address and why. 
c.  Submittal requirements: 
1.  The public participation plan shall be required for all rezoning applications that require the submittal of a site plan. This includes all office, commercial, multifamily residential, and single-family residential rezoning requests that consist of five or more lots. (This excludes rezone requests to R-80 and R-40 for minor subdivisions of two to four lots that do not create new public streets.) 
2.  The applicant will be required to submit a certificate of mailing for those property owners within the public notification target area. 
3.  The applicant may submit a public participation plan and begin implementation prior to formal application at his discretion; however, implementation shall not begin prior to a preapplication meeting and consultation with the staff of the planning and zoning office. 
d.  Meeting requirements and protocol: 
1.  The applicant or authorized representative shall be available to answer questions of the general public for at least 30 minutes. 
2.  The meeting location shall be held at a public facility within the community for which the applicant is seeking the rezoning request. 
3.  The meeting shall not begin prior to 6:30 p.m. on the evening the meeting is to be held. 
4.  The applicant or authorized representative shall provide the following material for the general public to view: 
(i)  Future land use map. 
(ii)  Site plan proposed on application. 
(iii)  Contact information (name and phone number and/or e-mail address) for the applicant or authorized representative. 
(iv)  Procedure and contact information provided by planning and zoning department. 
5.  Notice of the actual meeting shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department to be kept in the rezoning file. 
(6)  Conclusion. These are just minimum requirements, prepared in the hope that applicants will reach out further. This plan is not put in place to ensure that the citizens' needs or demands are met entirely. The plan does, however, envision an interactive process whereby applicants and citizens treat each other honestly, fairly and with respect and defuse the contentious nature of the rezoning process. Emerging out of the process should be a better understanding of the issues, and therefor, an atmosphere for informed decision-making. 
(h)  Public notification of city-initiated rezoning. The planning commission, of its own motion or at the request of the city council, or the city council may hold public hearings on the proposal of the zoning administrator. 
(1)  Upon the decision by the planning commission to hold public hearings, the zoning administrator shall prepare and cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for at least 15 days but not more than 45 days before the hearing date, a notice of public hearing, such notice to contain a summary of the proposals to be considered by the planning commission, and the date, time, and place of such hearing. 
(2)  Copies of the proposal, this chapter, and zoning maps, plus the zoning administrator's evaluation of any proposed district boundary changes, shall be available for public inspection in the planning and zoning department during normal working hours between the date of the first appearance of the notice of the public hearing and the time of such hearing. 
(3)  A public hearing on any proposed amendment to this chapter properly initiated shall be held before the municipal planning commission, which is delegated the duty to conduct such public hearing as is required by The Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.). A public hearing on any proposed amendment to this chapter properly initiated shall be conducted at the time and place specified by the planning commission and as set forth in the public notification described in this subsection (h). The purpose of such hearing shall be to present to the public the proposed zoning amendment and to receive comments thereon from the public. The planning commission shall consider the proceedings and comments of such hearing in making its recommendation to the city council as to any zoning decision on the proposed zoning amendment. The planning commission shall prescribe the rules of order for its deliberations on matters with which it is charged to advise the city council under this chapter and said rules of order shall be consistent with the general requirements and purposes set forth in this article and other general laws of the state concerning conduct of proceedings of public commissions, bodies, and governmental units. 
(i)  Municipal planning commission membership. 
(1)  There is hereby established a municipal planning commission for the purposes of providing recommendations to the city council concerning rezoning applications, zoning, land use, and other recommendations to the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County. 
(2)  The Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission shall consist of nine members. The Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County shall appoint seven of the members with each commissioner having one appointment to run concurrently with the term of the person so appointing. In addition, two members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Cherokee County as a whole to serve at the pleasure of the commission. 
(3)  Two members of the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission shall consist of representatives of the City of Waleska and the City of Ball Ground. The City of Waleska and the City of Ball Ground shall appoint the respective members. 
(4)  There is hereby established a Chairman of the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission to be appointed annually by the members of the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission. In addition, a vice-chair shall be designated by the members of the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission. 
(j)  Conduct of hearings. The following policies and procedures shall govern the conduct of hearings under this article: 
(1)  The chairman shall open any hearing with an explanation of the purpose of the hearing and description of the general rules for the conduct of the hearing and the authority and role of the hearing body in any zoning decision. The order of cases may be altered at the discretion of the chairman. An individual requesting to be heard on a matter germane to the purpose of the hearing must be recognized by the chairman before addressing the body. The chairman shall chair the hearing and shall determine germaneness of any comment or presentation to the planning commission in the hearing and is authorized to rule any individual or a portion of any comment or presentation out of order. However, the chairman may predetermine the length of any hearing allotting equal time to proponents and opponents of any proposed zoning amendment. To the extent that there are both proponents and opponents of any proposed zoning amendment and the fact that equal time is not in fact utilized by either position shall not invalidate any proceedings or action taken on the proposed amendment. 
(2)  The planning commission may determine that an application for zoning amendment was or was not properly filed or that the type of decision for which the application calls can or can not be heard by it. The chairman may make determinations as to whether proper public notice of the hearing was given and continue the case where it was not. 
(3)  The chairman shall allow the person initiating the proposed zoning amendment request or his designee to present a description of the proposed zoning amendment and the reason for initiating the proposed zoning amendment. Materials or evidence which could have, but were not, filed with the application may be rejected and not admitted. All materials except those which are clearly for rebuttal purposes shall be submitted by the close of the presentation of the case in order to be considered. 
(4)  Speakers at the public hearing for or against the application may be required by the chairman to sign in, giving name, residential address, and telephone number, before being allowed to speak. Speakers may be allowed ten minutes for each presentation of new evidence or information. Any person requesting to address the body, upon being recognized by the chairman, shall state his name, residence address, and telephone number before proceeding with any comment, remarks, or presentation. Any person addressing the body shall respond to questions of the chairman or members. 
(5)  Failure of the applicant or his agents to be present at the public hearing constitutes abandonment and dismissal of the case, unless the applicant shows just cause by reason of illness or health or other emergency within a reasonable time, in writing, and accompanied by new costs for readvertisement and hearing. 
(6)  Evidence or documents presented for consideration become part of the public file; however, substitutions of copies may be made where approved of by the chairman. 
(7)  The chairman may alternate the order of persons speaking to accommodate unusual situations. The chairman may divide presentations into blocks of time beginning with proponents and followed by opposition. The chairman may direct that proponents and opponents designate one or more spokespersons for presentations of favorable and opposing views on the proposed zoning amendment. 
(8)  All materials or evidence which persons in opposition wish to be considered must be submitted by the conclusion of the opposition portion of the hearing. 
(9)  The chairman may poll the public assemblage at any hearing concerning its concurrence or opposition. However, upon the request of the applicant or a spokesman for the opposition, persons responding may be required to give written information as to name, residential address, and the area in which each resides. The count of those in favor and in opposition will be entered in the record of the hearing. 
(10)  Any remark amounting to attack on the character or personal integrity of another individual or comment not factually supportable or comment in the form of an emotional outburst shall be nongermane to the purpose of any hearing, may be ruled out of order, and may be disregarded. 
(11)  Upon conclusion of the presentation of persons opposing the proposed zoning amendment, the chairman shall afford the person initiating the petition an allotted time to address the body in rebuttal of any issue raised by persons in opposition; and the applicant may submit materials or evidence associated with rebuttal. The chairman may rule out of order the raising of any new issues which are not clearly rebuttal, unless the information was requested by a member of the hearing body. Where a new issue is allowed to be raised in rebuttal, a spokesman for persons opposing the proposed zoning amendment shall be allocated an equal amount of time to address such new issue. The applicant is not thereafter granted additional rebuttal time except in the discretion of the chairman. 
(12)  When proponents and opponents of the proposed zoning amendment request have been heard in accordance with the foregoing procedures, the public hearing is closed and no further evidence or testimony may be presented unless either the record is left open based on a request for additional material or report, or questions are asked of the applicant or opposition, in which case both sides shall be entitled to a response but there is no right of rebuttal. 
(k)  Planning commission action. 
(1)  The planning commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the proposed zoning amendment. If a decision is not reached, the matter continues to be tabled for consideration until a vote carries. A report or minutes of the planning commission's recommendation accompanying a summary of the proceedings of the hearing shall be submitted to the city council. The planning commission shall include recommendations for conditions or limitations on uses appropriate to ameliorate the impact on the surrounding area. Where the applicant does not agree to such conditions or limitations on uses, the recommendation shall be interpreted as a recommendation for denial unless the conditions or limitations are accepted by the applicant. If the planning commission fails to recommend action on the application within 65 days and the applicant does not agree to a waiver of this time limit, the applicant may take it to the city council without a planning commission recommendation. 
(2)  In carrying out its responsibilities in reviewing and taking action on an application, the planning commission may adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of public hearings and meetings as are consistent with state and city law and appropriate to its responsibilities. Robert's Rules of Order may be used as a procedural guide in the absence of a rule or regulation. 
(3)  The planning commission shall consider any proposed zoning amendment properly initiated in light of the factors set forth in this article and in light of the purposes for the district affected or considered. In evaluating the factors, the policy and intent of the land use plan shall be considered. It is further the policy of the planning and zoning commission to exercise the zoning power for purposes of ensuring the compatibility of use of adjacent and nearby properties and the preservation of the economic value of adjacent and nearby properties and the county's and city's tax base while enabling a reasonable use of all property. 
(4)  The decision of the planning commission is advisory only. 
(l)  Action by the city council. The city council, after receiving the recommendation of the Cherokee County Municipal Planning Commission, shall take appropriate official action on the application and shall notify the applicant of the action taken. If the city council has not approved, denied, approved with conditions, approved a substitute classification, or voted to postpone consideration with respect to the application within 90 days of the planning commission's recommendation, the application shall be deemed to be denied without prejudice. 
(m)  Additional public hearing. The city council, after receiving the recommendation of the planning commission, may require an additional public hearing before the city council for any rezoning application that exhibits a substantial change between the action by the municipal planning commission and final action by the city council. 
(n)  Modification, revision, or amendment of chapter by public authority. The zoning administrator may conduct a continued study of the needs of the county and from time to time, prepare such modifications, revisions, or amendments to this chapter as may be necessary to conform to the land use plan, land use studies, major thoroughfare plans, and other governing documents. The modifications, revisions, or amendments shall include each text providing definitions, specifications, and conditions as may be appropriate to the matter considered, as well as maps delineating any geographical changes. Submission shall be made to the city council and to the municipal planning commission. 
Sec. 28-496. - Resubmission. 
If an application for rezoning is denied by the city council, then the same property may not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least 12 months immediately following the denial of the rezoning application by the city council. 
Sec. 28-497. - Copies of policies and procedures. 
Copies of this chapter and of the Municipal Planning Commission Rules of Procedure shall be available for distribution to the general public by the zoning administrator at a reasonable cost. 
Sec. 28-498. - Zoning standards. 
Exercise of the zoning power of the county shall constitute an effort to balance the interest of the community in promoting the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare against the right of property owners to the unrestricted use of their property. The following factors are determined to be relevant in balancing these interests: 
(1)  Factors determining a zoning decision. 
a.  Whether the proposed amendment would allow a use that is generally suitable for the site compared to other possible uses and the uses and zoning of adjacent and nearby properties. 
b.  Whether the proposed amendment would adversely affect the economic value or the uses of adjacent and nearby properties. 
c.  Whether the property to be affected by the proposed amendment can be used as currently zoned. 
d.  Whether the proposed amendment, if adopted, would result in a use which should or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, schools, sewers, water resources, police and fire protection, or other utilities. 
e.  Whether the proposed amendment, if adopted, is in conformity with the policy and intent of the land use plan. 
f.  Whether there are other conditions or transitional patterns affecting the use and development of the property sought to be rezoned, which give ground for either approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment. 
(2)  Evaluation criteria for amendments. 
a.  Land development plans, including projected densities in plan and zoning change applications. 
b.  Suitability of subject property for zoned purposes. 
1.  Development efforts by landowners. 
2.  Needs for special construction. 
3.  Cost of development within present classification. 
4.  Cost of marketing and market considerations in use as zoned. 
5.  Present use by landowner. 
6.  Ownership by applicant for adjacent lands. 
7.  Other land development in vicinity. 
c.  Existing uses and zoning of nearby property. 
1.  Public support or opposition evidencing these criteria. 
2.  Use and classifications of other property. 
3.  Effect upon residents of adjoining property. 
d.  Land values. 
1.  Value in present classification. 
2.  Value in requested classification. 
3.  Relative values of residential and commercial or other use. 
4.  Impact of change on values of adjacent and nearby properties. 
5.  Expenditures made by owner. 
6.  Opinions as to highest and best use or most advantageous use. 
7.  Loss of tax revenue to the city. 
e.  Roads and traffic. 
1.  Character of adjacent and boundary roads. 
2.  Intersections. 
3.  Planned development by public offices. 
4.  Planned private developments. 
5.  Effect of increased traffic on existing roads. 
6.  Effect of increased traffic on safety. 
f.  Rivers, streams and drainage. 
1.  Floodplains. 
2.  Soil erosion and sedimentation. 
3.  Protected areas. 
4.  Pollution of surface and subsurface water. 
g.  Utilities. 
1.  Septic tanks or sewerage treatment. 
2.  Water supply. 
h.  Other special considerations. 
1.  Buffer zones. 
2.  Noise. 
3.  Odor. 
4.  Fire protection. 
5.  Terrain or topography. 
6.  Schools. 
7.  Animals. 
8.  Visual intrusions on neighbors. 
9.  Aesthetics. 
10.  Site plans and plats. 
Secs. 28-499—28-519. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - REMEDIES AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 28-520. - Violation. 
Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this or who shall fail to do anything required by this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished as provided by law. In addition, the city council, zoning administrator, or other appropriate authority of the county, are authorized to institute civil action to penalize violation of any part of this chapter. The civil penalty shall not exceed $1,000.00 per day per violation except as may otherwise be authorized by law and provided by ordinance. In addition to said civil penalties, reimbursement to the city council for reasonable attorney fees for the enforcement of the order and costs of litigation including clerk's fees, deposition and related costs, are authorized to be awarded by the appropriate judicial authority. 
Sec. 28-521. - Remedies. 
(a)  In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the zoning administrator, city attorney or other appropriate authority of the city or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be especially damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedy, institute injunction mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
(b)  The administrator of the planning and zoning and building department is hereby authorized to issue written stop work and cease and desist orders on any project when the applicant, applicant's business or agent fails to comply with this chapter. Such stop work and cease and desist orders may be lifted at such time as the administrator is satisfied that a good faith effort to comply is being made. Nothing shall prevent the zoning administrator from reissuing stop work and cease and desist orders. 
(c)  The administrator of the planning and zoning and building department, or his agent is hereby authorized and directed to deny and withhold permits on any new project or application pursuant to this chapter where the applicants applicant's business or agent has failed or refused to comply with city requirements or regulations under this chapter, provided that there is no pending civil litigation against or by the applicant, applicant's business or agent pertaining to the subject matter. 
(d)  Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the administrator of the planning and zoning and building department as to the project for which it was issued, upon the administrator's finding that the holder is in violation of this chapter, or the specific terms set out in the permit. Review of such suspension shall be appealable before the zoning board of appeals. 
(e)  In any case where the zoning administrator or his agent is unable to safely carry out inspections pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, an inspection warrant or other order as may be provided by law or ordinance may be obtained for such purpose. 
Sec. 28-522. - Cumulative remedy. 
The remedies herein provided shall not be deemed to be exclusive but shall be cumulative of all other remedies provide by law. 
Secs. 28-523—28-552. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - SEVERABILITY 

Sec. 28-553. - Severability. 
Should any article, section or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid; each article, clause and provision hereof being declared severable. 
Secs. 28-554—28-584. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - CONFLICTING ORDINANCES 

Sec. 28-585. - Conflicting ordinances. 
This chapter is intended to be the comprehensive zoning ordinance for the city and all other zoning ordinances and city rules and regulations in conflict herewith are hereby repealed; provided that nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or modifying the conditions of operation, conditions of site development accompanying those zoning approvals or use permits issued under previous zoning approvals or use permits issued under previous zoning ordinances or resolutions; however, modification or repeal of these past conditions of approval may be accomplished through application to the planning commission. 
Secs. 28-586—28-603. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION 

Sec. 28-604. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to provide flexibility in ensuring preservation of greenspace within a master-planned residential development. A conservation subdivision design preserves greenspace while maintaining the prorated density of residential units for the overall site area. Neutral density is achieved by allowing smaller individually owned residential lots in neighborhoods that include or are adjacent to aesthetically and ecologically important areas. The goal of the design process is to identify and set aside conservation areas prior to the delineation of transportation and residential pod layouts. Greenspace areas include wetlands, stream buffer zones, woodlands, playing fields, and meadows, depending on the resources of the land. 
(b)  The intent of the conservation subdivision regulations is to: 
(1)  Preserve significant areas of land for ecological, recreational, and agricultural purposes in perpetuity; 
(2)  Encourage more efficient development of land consistent with public health, safety, and general welfare; 
(3)  Afford greater flexibility of design and placement of buildings and structures; 
(4)  Preserve and protect exceptional terrain, natural beauty, or sites of historic interest from inconsequential placement of homes, roadways, utilities and appurtenances; 
(5)  Preserve the Etowah River and its streams and tributaries as natural resources; 
(6)  Prevent flooding, erosion, and water pollution, and protect the quality and quantity of drinking water; 
(7)  Preserve wetlands, aquifers, topographical or soil features, marine and wildlife habitat, and other features having conservation values, including views, vistas, and indigenous vegetation; and 
(8)  Promote a less sprawling form of development (within the site of development). 
Sec. 28-605. - General regulations. 
(a)  Applicability of regulations. In order to achieve these purposes the conservation subdivision design is available as a use by right in the Estate Residential (R-80), and single-family residential (R-40 and R-30) zoning districts. Applicants utilizing the conservation subdivision design regulations shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. At its meeting, the city council shall consider the application for approval taking into consideration the consistency and compatibility of the proposed conservation subdivision with development surrounding the subject property. 
(b)  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be designed as a conservation subdivision may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. However, when a tract is held in multiple ownership, it shall be planned as a single entity, and developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(1)  Phased development. Unless approved under a concept/preliminary plan as outlined herein, each phase of a conservation subdivision must meet the density criteria established herein and may not exceed the density for the zoning district. 
(2)  Proof of ownership. The developer of a conservation subdivision must provide documentation of ownership of all land to be planned as a conservation subdivision prior to approval of a land disturbance permit for the development. The only lands that may be considered for development as a conservation subdivision are those lands owned by the applicant for the land disturbance permit. 
(c)  Site suitability. As evidenced by the existing resources/site analysis map, the conservation subdivision concept/preliminary plan, and the final plat, the tract incorporating the conservation subdivision design shall be suitable for supporting development in terms of environmental conditions, its size and its configuration. 
(d)  Sensitive area disturbance. The proposed design shall strictly minimize disturbance of environmentally sensitive areas, as shown on the existing resources and site analysis map. Lands within the 100-year floodplain, designated as wetlands, having slopes in excess of 35 percent, and riparian buffers adjacent to streams constitute such environmentally sensitive areas, where disturbance shall be strictly minimized. Demonstration by the applicant that these features shall be protected by the proposed application shall be prerequisite to approval of both the conservation subdivision concept/preliminary plan and subsequent final plat. 
(e)  Minor subdivisions prohibited. The term "minor subdivisions," as defined in the Cherokee County Development Ordinance, means a subdivision of land which results in the creation of two to four lots and does not result in the creation of any public or private streets. Minor subdivisions are not eligible to be developed per the conservation regulations contained herein. Only major subdivisions, those subdivisions of land resulting in the creation of five or more lots, are permissible to be developed according to the conservation subdivisions regulations outlined in this article. 
(f)  Effect of concept/preliminary plan. The approved concept/preliminary plan shall bind all land within the plan to the requirements and conditions of the conservation subdivision regulations. Should the developer or landowner subsequently sell or otherwise transfer their interest in the property, all heirs and assigns shall be bound to the approved concept/preliminary plan, unless amended by and/or approved by the city council. 
(g)  Deed restriction required. Upon approval of the concept/preliminary plan for the entire property being developed as a conservation subdivision, the applicant shall present a covenant to be recorded with the deed for all property within the concept/preliminary plan. Such covenant shall bind all land within the concept/preliminary plan to said plan and shall not expire unless and until such plan is amended and approved by the city council. 
Sec. 28-606. - Use regulations. 
Land planned as a conservation subdivision may be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Conservation areas as specified herein. 
(3)  The following nonresidential use in accordance with standards specified in this article: 
a.  Agricultural uses, including horticultural, wholesale nurseries, and the raising of crops, and buildings related to the same. 
b.  Woodlots, arboreta, and other silvicultural uses. 
c.  Woodland preserve, game preserve, wildlife sanctuary, or other similar conservation use. 
d.  Municipal or public uses; public park or recreation area owned and operated by a public or private nonprofit agency; governmental or public utility building or use; not to include business facilities, storage of materials, trucking or repair facilities, the housing of repair crews, private or municipal sanitary landfills. 
(4)  Accessory uses shall be permitted on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use and not conducted as an independent principal use. 
Sec. 28-607. - Dimensional standards and density determination. 
(a)  Density neutral. The number of lots created shall be density neutral. The term "density neutral" is defined as maintaining the number of lots so as not to exceed the number that can be created with the conventional minimum area and width requirements of the zoning district designation of the subject property (Table 28-607(a)). 
Table 28-607(a). Conservation Subdivision Density and Lot Size Requirements 

 
(b)  Housing density determination. The maximum number of lots in a conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, at the discretion of the applicant: 
(1)  Calculation method. The maximum number of lots is determined by multiplying the net tract area by the maximum density units/acre factor (see Table 28-607(a)) specified in the underlying zoning. The net tract area is calculated as outlined below: 
a.  Step 1. Calculation of the constrained lands: 
1.  Total area of land in subsection (b)(1)a(i)—(iv) of this section multiplied by 0.50: 
(i)  Slopes over 35 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area. 
(ii)  The 100-year floodplain. 
(iii)  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
(iv)  Area of land in stream buffers as required by federal, state, or local regulations. 
2.  Total area of land in subsection (b)(1)a(i)—(ii) of this section: 
(i)  Area of land designated for construction of roads and associated ROW. 
(ii)  Area of all impervious surfaces associated with amenities, including but not limited to parking areas, tennis courts, swimming pools, clubhouses, and other. 
Constrained lands = (Total area of land in subsection (b)(1)a(i)—(iv) of this section × 0.5) + total area of land in subsection (b)(1)a(i)—(ii) of this section. 
b.  Step 2. Net tract area. Once the area of constrained lands has been calculated, the net tract area is calculated by subtracting the area of constrained lands from the gross tract acreage of the property to be development as a conservation subdivision. 
(2)  Yield plan method. 
a.  The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. Such yield plan shall be reviewed by the appropriate county or city staff to verify such plan meets the minimum criteria for development as proposed. 
b.  Where the number of lots allowed under the yield plan method results in more lots than the number of lots under the calculation method, the lot size may be reduced by 50 percent of the permissible lot size in Table 28-607(a) to accommodate the difference in the number of lots between the two methods. Where on site sewage management systems are to be used, the size of the lots shall be no less than that required by the health department. 
(c)  Area and yard requirements; locations and structures. 
(1)  Placement. The placement of all principal buildings shall provide for safe, quiet, and harmonious grouping as well as adequate privacy by providing adequate front, side, and rear yards (Table 28-607(c)). 
(2)  Location. Structures shall be placed so as to fulfill the objectives of sections 28-604 and 28-605 to minimize any adverse effect on the environment and to take advantage of ecological conditions (Table 28-607(c)). 
Table 28-607(c). Conservation Subdivision Setback Requirements 

 
Sec. 28-608. - Subdivision design standards. 
(a)  House lots shall not encroach upon primary conservation areas, and the layout shall respect secondary conservation areas, as described herein. 
(b)  All new dwellings shall meet the following building setback requirements: 
(1)  From all external roads right-of-way: 100 feet. 
(2)  From all other tract boundaries: 75 feet. 
(3)  From all cropland or pasture land: 100 feet. 
a.  The term "cropland" shall be defined as tracts of land of five acres or greater, which is used for growing cultivated plants or agricultural produce, such as grain, vegetables, or fruit; or which could be fallow, if such inactivity is a part of the agricultural production process being exercised on the land and such inactivity has not existed for more than two years. Such use of land must be present and active. Potential use of land as cropland does not qualify under this definition. 
b.  The term "pasture land" shall be defined as tracts of land of five acres or greater, on which grass or other vegetation is grown and eaten as food, and is set aside for use by domestic grazing animals. Such use of land must be present and active. Potential use of land as pasture does not qualify under this definition. 
(4)  From buildings or barnyards housing livestock: per health department requirements. 
(5)  From active recreation areas, such as courts or ball fields, not including playgrounds, tot lots, or open multi-purpose fields: 150 feet. 
a.  Views of house lots from exterior road and abutting properties shall be minimized by the use of changes in topography, existing vegetation, or additional landscaping that meets landscaping requirements of this chapter or development regulations. 
b.  House lots shall generally be accessed from interior streets rather than from roads bordering the tract. 
c.  At least three-quarters (three-fourths or 75 percent) of the lots should directly face, abut or be across the street from conservation land. 
Sec. 28-609. - Greenspace. 
(a)  Definition. The term "greenspace" is defined as the undeveloped land resulting from reductions in the minimum size of lots set aside as permanently protected land which may be for common use by the residents of the subdivision, or other uses as permitted in this chapter. 
(b)  Standards to determine greenspace. 
(1)  The minimum restricted greenspace shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross tract area. 
(2)  At least 15 percent of the greenspace shall consist of land that is suitable for building. 
(3)  At least 75 percent of the greenspace should be in a contiguous tract. The greenspace should adjoin any neighboring areas of greenspace, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected greenspace. 
(c)  (1)  Primary conservation areas. The following lands are considered to constitute lands that serve important ecological purposes and possess beneficial environmental qualities contributing to the health of the local community. Such areas shall be identified and protected as primary conservation areas. All land identified as primary conservation areas shall be undisturbed, except as provided herein: 
a.  The 100-year floodplain. 
b.  Riparian zones of at least 50 feet width on either side along all perennial and intermittent streams. 
c.  Slopes above 35 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area. 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used in state and/or federal regulations. 
e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitats for such species. 
(2)  Value of primary conservation areas. Primary conservation areas form the core of the greenspace to be protected. Because primary conservation areas are sensitive environmental areas, the city prefers such areas to be permanently protected through the thoughtful design and protection instruments outlined herein. The total area of land identified as primary conservation areas shall be conserved and protected to the maximum amount and extent physically possible. 
(d)  (1)  Secondary conservation areas. The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be protected to the maximum extent feasible: 
a.  Important historic sites subject to approval indicating that these structures are compatible with this chapter. 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area. 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than 14 inches caliper measured at DBH. 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds, such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads. 
e.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area. 
f.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
g.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries, and burial grounds subject to approval indicating that these structures are compatible with this chapter. 
h.  Buffers as outlined in Table 28-609, Minimum Exterior Boundary Buffer. 
Table 28-609. Minimum Exterior Boundary Buffer 

 
(2)  Value of secondary conservation areas. Secondary conservation areas are those areas within a property which contain other intrinsic qualities of value to the community. Secondary conservation areas are valued as a supplemental area to the total conservation area of a conservation subdivision. To that end, the city would prefer secondary conservation areas to be protected to the maximum extent possible after all identified primary conservation areas have been protected. 
(e)  Conservation areas, general recommendations. 
(1)  Conservation areas should include the most sensitive resource areas of a property. 
(2)  Fragmentation of conservation land should be minimized so that resource areas are not divided into numerous small parcels located in various parts of the development. 
(3)  Conservation areas should be designed as a part of larger continuous and integrated greenspace. 
(4)  The conservation areas (primary and secondary) shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the conservation areas. 
(f)  Permitted uses of greenspace. Uses of greenspace may include the following: 
(1)  Conservation of natural, archeological, or historical resources; 
(2)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
(3)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of permeable materials; 
(4)  Passive recreation areas, such as open fields; 
(5)  Landscaped stormwater management facilities, community wastewater disposal systems. Such facilities shall be located outside of primary conservation areas; 
(6)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this article. 
(g)  Prohibited uses of greenspace. Uses of greenspace may not include the following: 
(1)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
(2)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; 
(3)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection; 
(4)  Golf courses. 
(h)  Septic systems, wells, and stormwater management systems. Easements will allow designated greenspace to be used for community sewer system driplines, wells, and stormwater management structures designed to promote on-site infiltration and/or treatment of runoff. Such intrusions shall not be allowed to encroach into an exterior buffer as outlined herein. 
(i)  Ownership, preservation, and maintenance of greenspace. Greenspace land shall be preserved and maintained solely for the purposes specified in section 28-604. The method for effectuating such preservation and maintenance may be one of the following: 
(1)  Establishment of a mandatory home owners association (HOA) to own and maintain the land in common for the greenspace purposes intended according to the following provisions: 
a.  With its application for a permit to develop a conservation subdivision, developers will create and submit documentation detailing the minimum requirements and structure for the HOA before the first lot is sold. 
b.  The HOA will maintain, pay taxes, and own the greenspace. 
c.  Membership in the HOA is mandatory for all homeowners, and dues are uniform. 
d.  The HOA, by law, will stipulate that a third party, such as the local government, may enforce the maintenance of the greenspace through legally enforceable liens. 
e.  It is recommended that at least one member of the HOA should receive training in or be conversant in, wildlife habitat conservation, enhancement, and maintenance. 
f.  Each homeowner should be given site-specific information about indigenous habitat and diversity of species. 
g.  The HOA shall develop a longterm conservation plan for maintenance of common areas. This plan should include examples of environmentally friendly landscaping techniques for homeowners. 
(2)  Dedication of legally described and platted greenspace to the city council at the discretion of and approval by the city council. 
(3)  Dedication of legally described and platted greenspace to a land trust established in compliance with the requirements of state law and shall be for conservation purposes. 
(j)  Legal instrument for permanent protection. The greenspace shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
(1)  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
a.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented nonprofit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for re-transfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
b.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this article. 
(2)  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity. The covenant must include use for the public good language. The instrument for permanent protection: 
a.  Shall be placed on the greenspace concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
b.  Shall include clear restrictions on the use of the greenspace. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the greenspace. 
c.  Shall contain language stating that exterior buffers, as required by this chapter, are outside of the legally platted and deeded lots. 
d.  Will be binding on all future landowners of the greenspace land. 
e.  May be enforced by the adjoining property owners, the city, or a land trust by appropriate court action for equitable relief. 
f.  Will assure appropriate maintenance by the HOA or as otherwise herein provided, of greenspace land to the satisfaction of the city. 
g.  Will provide that if maintenance, preservation, and/or use of the greenspace land no longer complies with the provisions of the easement, the city may take all necessary action to effect compliance and assess the costs against the owners in default. 
h.  Will provide that such instrument may not be altered, modified, or amended. 
(3)  All legal instruments used to permanently protect conservation areas platted within the conservation subdivision shall be executed by the developer and approved by the city attorney prior to approval of the final plat for the development. Upon approval of the final plan and the legal instruments for permanent protection of the conservation areas, the city will record said documents with the clerk of the court's office. All fees associated with the recordation of plats and legal instruments will be furnished by the developer of the conservation subdivision or his agent. 
Sec. 28-610. - Procedure. 
(a)  Preapplication meeting. A preapplication meeting is required between the applicant, the site designer and the planning staff where the site designer has not submitted a conservation subdivision designed under these regulations prior to the effective date. Subsequent preapplication meetings are recommended but are at the discretion of the site designer. The purpose of the preapplication meeting is to introduce the applicant to the zoning and subdivision regulations and procedures, to discuss the applicant's objectives and to schedule site inspections, additional meetings, and plan submissions. Applicants are encouraged to present the existing resources and site analysis map at this meeting. 
(b)  Existing resources map and site analysis. The purpose of this key submission is to familiarize county or city staff and officials with existing and factual reference in making a site inspection. This plan shall be provided prior to the site inspection and shall form the basis for the development design as shown on the conceptual preliminary plan. The applicant shall prepare the existing resource map, the purpose of which is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed greenspace will meet the requirements of this article. The existing resource map shall include the following features: 
(1)  Property boundaries. 
(2)  All streams (perennial and intermittent), rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features. 
(3)  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals. 
(4)  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in this article. 
(5)  Vegetation characteristics. 
(6)  Groundwater recharge areas. 
(7)  Significant wildlife habitats, if known. 
(8)  Historic, archeological and cultural features. 
(9)  General soil types. 
(10)  The planned location of protected greenspace. 
(11)  Existing roads and structures. 
(12)  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(13)  Identification of surrounding property type/land use. 
(c)  Review of existing resource map. The existing resources map shall be reviewed by the planning director or his designee. If found inadequate by the reviewer, the reviewer shall state the reasons for its inadequacy, and the existing resources map shall not be accepted until adequate changes are made. 
(d)  Site inspection. After preparing the existing resources map, applicants may arrange for a site inspection of the property by the planning staff and other county and city officials and shall distribute copies of such site analysis plan at this on-site meeting. The purpose of the site visit is to familiarize local officials with the property's existing conditions and special features, to identify potential site design issues, and to provide an informal opportunity to discuss site design concepts, including the general layout of the designated greenspace lands and potential locations for proposed buildings and street alignments. Comments made by local officials or staff and consultants shall be interpreted as being only suggestive. It shall be understood by all parties that no formal recommendations can be offered, and no official decisions can be made at the site inspection. 
(e)  Sketch plan submission. 
(1)  Purpose. At the discretion of the applicant, a sketch plat may be submitted as a diagrammatic basis for informal discussion with the local officials regarding the design of a proposed subdivision or land development. The purpose of a sketch plan submission is to provide a mechanism to help applicants and local officials develop a better understanding of the property and to help establish an overall design approach that respects its special or noteworthy features while providing for the density permitted under this chapter. 
(2)  Required information. To provide a full understanding of the site's potential and to facilitate the most effective exchange with the planning staff and other officials, the sketch plan shall include the information listed in this subsection. Many of these items can be taken from the existing resources and site analysis map and, in fact, the diagrammatic sketch plan may be prepared as a simple overlay sheet placed on top of the existing resources and site analysis map. 
a.  Name and address of the legal owner, the equitable owner and/or the applicant; 
b.  Name and address of the professional engineer, surveyor, planner, architect, landscape architect, or the site designer responsible for preparing the plan; 
c.  Graphic scale (not greater than one inch = 200 feet, however, dimensions on plan need not be exact) and north arrow; 
d.  Approximate tract boundaries, sufficient to locate the tract on a map of the community; 
e.  Location map; 
f.  Zoning district; 
g.  Streets on and adjacent to the tract (both existing and proposed); 
h.  100-year floodplain limits, and approximate location of wetlands, if any; 
i.  Topographic, physical and cultural features including fields, pastures, meadows, wooded areas, trees with a diameter of 15 inches or more, hedgerows and other significant vegetation, steep slopes (greater than 35 percent), rock outcrops, soil types, ponds, ditches, drains, dumps, storage tanks, streams within 200 feet of tract, existing ROW and easements, and cultural features such as all structures, foundations, walls, wells, trails, and abandoned roads; 
j.  Schematic layout indicating a general concept for land conservation and development (bubble format is acceptable for this delineation); 
k.  Proposed general street and lot layout; 
l.  In the case of land development plans, proposed location of buildings and major structures, parking areas and other improvements; and 
m.  General description of proposed method of water supply, sewage disposal, and stormwater management. 
(f)  Concept/preliminary plan. The concept/preliminary plan shall follow the process and procedure outlined in section 3.0 Residential and Nonresidential Subdivision Application and Approval as codified in the Cherokee County Development Ordinance adopted January 15, 2002, and amended from time to time. 
Sec. 28-611. - Four step subdivision design process. 
All concept/preliminary plans for conservation subdivisions shall include documentation of a four step design process in determining the layout of proposed greenspace lands, house sites, streets and lot lines as described below. 
(1)  Step 1. Delineation of greenspace lands. 
a.  The minimum percentage and acreage of required greenspace lands shall be calculated by the applicant and submitted as part of the sketch plan or conceptual design plan in accordance with this chapter. Greenspace lands shall include all primary conservation areas and those parts of the secondary conservation areas to meet the terms of this article. 
b.  Proposed greenspace lands shall be designated using the existing resources map as a base map. 
c.  In delineating secondary conservation areas, the applicant shall consult with planning staff on the prioritization of natural and cultural resources on the tract in terms of their highest to least suitability for inclusion in the proposed greenspace. 
d.  On the basis of those priorities and practical considerations given to the tract's configuration, its context in relation to resource areas on adjoining and neighboring properties, and the applicant's subdivision objectives, secondary conservation areas shall be delineated to meet at least the minimum area percentage requirements for greenspace lands and in a manner clearly indicating its boundaries as well as the types of resources included within them. 
(2)  Step 2: Location of house sites. Potential house sites shall be tentatively located using the proposed greenspace lands as a base map as well as other relevant data on the existing resources map such as topography and soils. House sites should generally be located not closer than 100 feet from primary conservation areas and 50 feet from secondary conservation areas, taking into consideration the potential negative impacts of residential development on such areas as well as the potential positive benefits of such locations to provide attractive views and visual settings for residences. 
(3)  Step 3: Alignment of streets and trails. Upon designating the house sites, a street plan shall be designed to provide vehicular access to each house, complying with the standards for road design in the development regulations and bearing a logical relationship to topographic conditions. Impacts of the street plan on proposed greenspace lands shall be minimized, particularly with respect to crossing environmentally sensitive areas such as wetlands and traversing steep slopes. Street connections shall generally be encouraged to minimize the number of new cul-de-sacs to be maintained by the county or city and to facilitate access to and from homes in different parts of the tract and adjoining parcels. 
(4)  Step 4: Drawing in the lot lines. Upon completion of the preceding three steps, lot lines are drawn as required to delineate the boundaries of individual residential lots. Lot lines are drawn as the last step. 
(5)  Additional design considerations: 
a.  Additional minimum acreage requirements for greenspace areas consist of secondary conservation areas. 
b.  Total greenspace area requirements are the sum of primary and secondary conservation areas. 
c.  The locations and boundaries of primary conservation areas shall follow the actual boundaries of floodplains, wetlands, and slopes. 
d.  The locations and boundaries of secondary conservation areas shall be based on the applicant's analysis of the tract's resource features. 
e.  Development areas constitute the remaining lands of the tract outside the designated greenspace areas. 
Sec. 28-612. - Road specification. 
Roads for the conservation subdivision shall follow road construction guidelines consistent with those set forth in the Cherokee County Development Regulations, chapter 1, Development Ordinance, section 4.05. The design of streets within the conservation subdivision, and where possible and with the approval of the county engineer, should seek to: 
(1)  Minimize the number of cul-de-sac streets by providing more than one entrance to the development and interconnecting streets as much as possible. 
(2)  For cul-de-sac streets, minimize the amount of impervious surface by limiting the internal turning radius to 35 feet (Center for Watershed Protection, cited in ARC document) and the width of the paved lane to 16 feet. Use grass and vegetation for the inner circle of turnarounds, rather than paving the entire area. Declare the HOA responsible for the maintenance of the grassy area in the neighborhood bylaws. 
(3)  Omit curbs wherever appropriate. 
(4)  As an alternative to curbs and gutters, allow runoff from roofs and pavements to pass immediately through grass swales or infiltration basins. Use plant material that will absorb rainwater and act as a natural filter for oil and pollution. 
(5)  Provide marked, paved paths for non-vehicular traffic within the development and connecting to neighboring residential and commercial areas. 
Sec. 28-613. - Buffer requirement. 
(a)  Where property to be developed as a conservation subdivision abuts property not a part of the conservation subdivision, the conservation subdivision shall have a buffer along the exterior property boundary. The buffer shall be undisturbed except as specifically allowed herein, and of sufficient volume to provide a yearround opaque screening. Where no vegetation exists within the required buffer area, or where existing vegetation does not provide a sufficient screen, and where planting of native vegetation will provide a screening meeting the requirements of this section, the buffer will be planted with such vegetation to meet the intent of this section. 
(1)  Mandatory stormwater structures. 
a.  Where the only practical place upon the tract of land being developed as a conservation subdivision to locate a stormwater facility serving to contain and control the stormwater generated from the conservation subdivision is within the required buffer, the county engineer may permit such a structure to be built within the required buffer. The area devoted to the installation of the stormwater structure may not be used to satisfy the greenspace requirement for the development. 
b.  Where stormwater structures are allowed within the buffer, the developer shall plant sufficient vegetative material to effectively screen the location of such structure and obscure such structure from view. All walls or other hard surfaces of such structure shall be painted a muted earth-tone color or shall be faced with other materials to further conceal such structure from view. 
(2)  Trails. Where trails are planned to be provided, such trails may be constructed within the buffer area. The path through the buffer area containing such trail may be no wider than eight feet. All clearing associated with the construction of such path shall be contained within the eight feet. If such trails are planned as a part of the development, the trails must be located within the first 25 percent of the buffer furthest from the exterior boundary line for the subdivision but in no event shall be within 30 feet of said exterior boundary line. 
a.  Size of buffer. The size of the exterior buffer is determined by the size of the lot proposed adjacent to the exterior boundary for the conservation subdivision (see Table 28-609, Minimum Exterior Boundary Buffer). 
b.  Buffer counts toward greenspace requirement. The area of land designated to the exterior boundary buffer may be used to satisfy the minimum required greenspace for the development. The buffer area shall not be included as a part of any platted residential lot within the subdivision. This buffer shall be considered a secondary conservation area unless a feature of the buffer qualifies as a primary conservation area as defined herein. Such buffer shall be designated as part of the greenspace for the subdivision and be permanently protected in accordance with the requirements contained herein. 
Secs. 28-614—28-644. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - CEMETERY PRESERVATION 

Sec. 28-645. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Abandoned cemetery means a cemetery which shows signs of neglect, including, without limitation, the unchecked growth of vegetation, repeated and unchecked acts of vandalism, or the disintegration of grave markers or boundaries and for which no person can be found who is legally responsible and financially capable of the upkeep of such cemetery. 
Archaeologist means any person who is a member of or meets the criteria for membership in the Society of Professional Archaeologists and can demonstrate experience in the excavation and interpretation of human graves. 
Burial ground means an area dedicated to and used for interment of human remains. The fact that the area was used for burial purposes shall be evidence that it was set aside for burial purposes. 
Burial object means any item reasonably believed to have been intentionally placed with the human remains at the time of burial or interment or any memorial, tombstone, grave marker or shrine which may have been added subsequent to interment. Such terms also means any inscribed or uninscribed marker, coping, curbing, enclosure, fencing, pavement, shelter, well, stoneware, pottery, or other grave object erected or deposited incident to or subsequent to interment. 
CCCPC means the Cherokee County Cemetery Preservation Committee. 
Cemetery means any land or structure in this state dedicated to and used or intended to be used for interment of human remains. It may be either a burial park for earth interments or a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments or a combination of one or more thereof. 
County coroner means a person elected pursuant to law as county coroner. 
Descendant means a person or group of persons related to a deceased human by blood or adoption in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 19-1-1 et seq., as amended. 
Genealogist means a person who traces or studies the descent of persons or families and prepares a probative record of such descent. 
Human remains means the bodies of deceased human beings in any stage of decomposition, including cremated remains. 
Notifying means to develop and implement a plan pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-72-5, as amended. 
Preserve and protect means to keep safe from destruction, peril, or other adversity and may include the placement of signs, markers, fencing, or other such appropriate features so as to identify the site as a cemetery or burial ground and so as to aid in the preservation and protection of such cemetery or burial ground. 
Sec. 28-646. - Findings and intent. 
Considering the fact: 
(1)  That this city has been richly blessed with the heritage and history of its people who are now deceased; 
(2)  That many of these people, in their time, were native pioneers of the county who have played an integral part in making this city what it is today; 
(3)  That many of those who have passed on have been memorialized with resting places in cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds that have been abandoned, desecrated, neglected, unmarked, and are threatened by unknowing development; and 
(4)  That such abandoned, desecrated, neglected, and unmarked cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds are not a befitting tribute to such honorable citizens of the past; 
therefore, it is the desire of the city council to provide for the preservation, protection, and maintenance of all such family and community cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds. 
Sec. 28-647. - Exemption for identification of burial grounds. 
The county coroner is exempt from the requirements of this article for the purposes of identification of burial grounds by probing, magnetometer, or such other processes recognized by the archaeological community. 
Sec. 28-648. - Notification of disturbed burial ground. 
(a)  Any person who knows or has reason to know that a human burial ground is being disturbed, destroyed, defaced, mutilated, removed, excavated, or exposed shall immediately notify the local law enforcement agency with jurisdiction in the area where the burial ground is located. 
(b)  Any law enforcement agency, county department, or other source which finds evidence or receives a report that a burial ground has been located or disturbed shall notify the county coroner and the city clerk. 
(c)  In any development consisting of two or more residential units, when human remains are discovered, all land-disturbing activities that may affect a normal burial ground shall immediately cease and the discovering party shall notify the local law enforcement agency and the medical examiner of the discovery. The developer shall also be required to run an ad in the legal section of the city legal organ to notify any interested parties. Within 48 hours, the medical examiner and local law enforcement shall determine whether or not the grave is part of a cemetery. If it is determined that the grave is part of a cemetery, then the county coroner shall undertake efforts to identify and preserve the burial ground. If it is determined that it is not a cemetery site, then the local law enforcement agency, in conjunction with the medical examiner, shall be responsible for proper disposition of the remains. Once the county coroner has established the approximate boundaries of the burial ground, there shall be established a protective buffer not less than 50 feet and a six foot high chain link fence with proper access from the development to the cemetery provided. An appeal of this determination may be had to the city council. No land disturbing activity shall resume without the express written authorization from the county coroner or his designee. 
(d)  When the buffer requirement shall apply to a cemetery developed in connection with a church, the buffer requirement shall extend from the property line of the church property. 
(e)  The above requirement shall not apply for those residential lots established for legacy purposes. 
Sec. 28-649. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article to willfully disturb, destroy, deface, mutilate, remove, excavate or expose a burial place without first obtaining a permit pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 37, or as it may be amended from time to time, and following the requirements of this article. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article to fail to report the discovery of human remains or to notify the local authority of the disturbance of a burial ground. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this article should any person or entity seeking a permit to disturb a burial place pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 37, as may be amended from time to time, and not follow the provisions of this article. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person or entity to fail to comply with the provisions of an approved permit. 
Sec. 28-650. - Permit—Application; additional requirements. 
Any person or entity seeking a permit pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-72-4 shall first comply with the following: 
(1)  An application shall be filed with the CCCPC in a form to be approved by the city council but at a minimum including the following information: 
a.  Evidence of ownership of the land on which the cemetery or burial ground is located in the form of a legal opinion based upon a title search. 
b.  A report prepared by an archaeologist stating the number of graves believed to be present and the locations, such as can be determined from the use of minimally invasive investigation techniques, including remote sensing methods and the use of metal probes, which activities shall not require a permit. 
c.  A survey prepared by or under the direction of a registered surveyor showing the location and boundaries of the cemetery or burial ground based on an archaeologist's report. 
d.  A plan prepared by a genealogist for identifying and notifying the descendants of those buried or believed to be buried in such cemetery. 
e.  A proposal for mitigation or avoidance of the effects of the planned activity on the cemetery or burial ground. If the proposal includes relocation of any human remains or burial objects, the proposal shall specify: 
1.  The method of disinterment; 
2.  The location and method of disposition of the remains; 
3.  The approximate cost of the process; and 
4.  The approximate number of graves affected. 
(2)  The application shall be submitted to the CCCPC for review and recommendations. 
(3)  The applicant shall be required to post the nearest public road and the burial ground not less than 80 days prior to a public hearing to be conducted by the CCCPC or the city council. 
(4)  The city council shall be charged with determining the sufficiency of the application submitted as to the following: 
a.  Notice of descendant. 
b.  The plan for mitigation and avoidance. 
c.  The disturbance and adverse effects on the cemetery or burial ground. 
d.  The survey of the cemetery. 
e.  The plans for disinterment and re-interment. 
(5)  Within 15 days after the city council is satisfied that all reasonable efforts have been made to notify descendants, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-72-6, and following receipt of any recommendations made by the CCCPC, the city council shall schedule a public hearing at which any interested party or citizen may appear and be given an opportunity to be heard. In addition to the notice required by O.C.G.A. § 36-72-6, notice of the public hearing shall be advertised in the legal organ of the county once a week for two consecutive weeks immediately preceding the week in which the hearing is held. 
(6)  Within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall notify the applicant in writing of its decision. The city council shall have the authority to deny the application, with written reasons therefore, to issue a permit adopting the application in whole or in part, or direct the issuance of a permit, which may include additional requirements to mitigate the proposed activity's adverse effects on the cemetery or burial ground, including, but not limited to, relocation of the proposed project, reservation of the cemetery or burial ground as an undeveloped area within the proposed development or use of land, and respectful disinterment and proper disposition of the human remains. The city council may adopt the applicant's proposal for mitigation. 
(7)  The city council shall consider the following in making its determination: 
a.  The presumption in favor of leaving the cemetery or burial ground undisturbed. 
b.  The concerns and comments of any descendants of those buried in the burial ground or cemetery and any other interested parties. 
c.  The economic and other costs of mitigation. 
d.  The adequacy of the applicant's plans for disinterment and proper disposition of any human remains or burial objects. 
e.  The balancing of the applicant's plans for disinterment with the public's and any descendant's interest in the value of the undisturbed cultural and natural environment. 
f.  Any other compelling factors which the city council deems relevant. 
(8)  Should any applicant or descendant be dissatisfied with a decision of the city council, he may file an appeal, within 30 days of such decision, in the superior court. Until the expiration of time for appeal as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-72-11, the applicant shall not begin or resume activities which comply with the permit issued by the city council. If an appeal is filed, the applicant may begin or resume activities which comply with the permit only upon consent of the city council and the party seeking judicial review or upon the order of the reviewing court for good cause shown. 
(9)  The county coroner shall be responsible for inspecting and determining whether the provisions of the permit have been properly completed. 
(10)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this article to the contrary, when any agency, authority, or political subdivision of the state seeks to file an application for a permit under this article, the superior court shall have exclusive jurisdiction over the permit application. The superior court shall conduct its investigation and determination of the permit in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 36-72-6—36-72-8, as may be amended from time to time. 
Sec. 28-651. - Same—Fees. 
The fee for filing an application for a permit under this article shall be established by the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-72-10. 
Sec. 28-652. - Violations and penalties; abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  Any violation of the provisions of this article by any person is hereby deemed to be a violation of a an offense. The zoning administrator, the county's code enforcement personnel, or any law enforcement officer of the county or city is hereby authorized and directed, upon discovery of any violation of any provision of this article, to issue a citation for the violator to appear before the appropriate court on a day and time certain to answer to the charges. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, the city may seek injunctive relief to cease and remove any violations of this article in the appropriate court against the appropriate person or entity. 
(c)  Any violation of this article is hereby deemed to be a continuing nuisance and may be abated by an application for injunction or other proceedings allowed by law in the appropriate court. 
Secs. 28-653—28-713. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - OUTDOOR LIGHTING AND ROAD GLARE 

Sec. 28-714. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article are as follows: 
(1)  To encourage systematic practices in the use of outdoor electrically powered luminaries, consistent with conserving energy and maximizing the benefits to the citizenry; 
(2)  To increase nighttime utility, safety, security, and productivity; to foster the nighttime use of property; and to protect the privacy of residents; 
(3)  To reduce light trespass, obtrusive light, and sky glow, and to reduce roadway glare and extreme variations of illumination, to which elderly drivers are particularly sensitive; 
(4)  To preserve and enhance the natural nighttime visual environment of the city; 
(5)  To preserve the views of the starry sky, encouraging the enjoyment of their aesthetics, the education of the public in the sciences, and the astronomical study of celestial bodies; and 
(6)  To accomplish these purposes by limiting illuminance levels; by directing the luminaire emissions away from roadways, other properties, and the sky; and by reducing illumination levels during later hours of the night. 
Sec. 28-715. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Beacon means a light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same property as the light source; also any light system with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Cutoff means a luminaire light distribution where the emission does not exceed 2.5 percent of the lamp lumens at an angle of 90 degrees above nadir, and does not exceed ten percent at a vertical angle of 80 degrees above nadir. These emission values apply to all lateral angles around the installed luminaire. 
Footcandle means a unit of measure for illuminance on a surface that is everywhere one foot from a point source of light of one candle, and equal to one lumen per square foot of area. 
Full cutoff means a luminaire light distribution where zero emission occurs at all angles of 90 degrees or greater above nadir, and the emission does not exceed ten percent of total lamp lumens at a vertical angle or 80 degrees above nadir. These emission values apply to all lateral angles around the installed luminaire. 
Glare means the sensation produced within the visual field by luminance that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted, causing annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
Illuminance means the quantity of light arriving at a surface divided by the area of the illuminated surface, measured in footcandles. 
(1)  Horizontal illuminance applies to a horizontal surface; vertical illuminance applies to a vertical surface. 
(2)  Average illuminance is the level of illuminance over an entire illuminated target area. 
(3)  Maximum illuminance is the highest level of illuminance on any point within the entire area. 
(4)  Minimum illuminance is the lowest level of illuminance on any point within the entire area. 
Illuminance level. All illuminance levels and footcandles noted in this article mean the maintained illuminance levels: the illuminance levels occurring just prior to lamp replacement and luminaire cleaning. The average illuminance level applies to an entire illuminated target area. Minimum and maximum illuminance levels apply to small areas within the entire illuminated target area. Unless otherwise noted, illuminance levels refer to horizontal illuminance levels. 
Lamp means the component of an outdoor luminaire that produces light. 
Light trespass means unwanted light emitted beyond the boundaries of the property on which the luminaire is located, detrimentally affecting residents, vehicle operators and pedestrians, the natural environment, and astronomical observations. 
Luminaire (light fixture) means a complete fixed or movable lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps and ballasting (when applicable) together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamps, and to connect the lamps to the power supply. 
Person means any individual, tenant, lessee, owner, or any commercial entity, including, but not limited to, a firm, business, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or organization, whether commercial, religious, fraternal, social or otherwise, or any agent thereof. 
Roadway lighting means lighting that is specifically intended to illuminate roadways for automobiles, excluding the lighting intended to illuminate roadways only for pedestrians. 
Security lighting means continuous illumination of nonroadway territory when there is no minimal nighttime activity by authorized individuals. 
Semi-cutoff means a luminaire light distribution where the emission does not numerically exceed five percent of the total at an angle of 90 degrees above nadir, and 20 percent at a vertical angle of 80 degrees above nadir. These values apply to all lateral angles around the installed luminaire. 
Shielded means provided with internal and/or external shields, top, and side visors, hoods, and internal louvers to limit glare, sky glow, and light trespass caused by emission from luminaires. 
Sky glow means the brightening of the nighttime atmosphere by light emitted above the horizontal plane and by light reflected upward from illuminated surfaces, which reduces the visibility of astronomical objects. 
Uniformity ratio means a higher level of illumination in relation to a lower level of illumination within a given target area. A value for either the maximum-to-minimum ratio or the average-to-minimum ratio may be required. For example, if the average-to-minimum uniformity ratio is 4:1 for the given target area, the lowest level of illuminance is no less than one divided by four (25 percent) of the average level of illuminance. 
Sec. 28-716. - Light trespass. 
(a)  All luminaires, except street lighting and those used on one- or two-family dwellings, shall be located, designed, fitted, aimed, shielded, installed, and maintained to limit illumination only to the target and to minimize light trespass. The designed illuminance for pavement or ground shall be provided by a luminaire installed closer than four times the luminaire height. Directional luminaires such as floodlights, wall pack lights, and spotlights shall be aimed so that the center of the beam is not more than 62 degrees above nadir. Directional luminaires shall be shielded as needed for minimizing misdirected light. 
(b)  Vertical illumination from luminaires on any single property shall not exceed 0.1 footcandles at a height of three feet at a property line of a residential zoning district or a nature-preserve type park; and shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles at a property line of other types of property, except where a greater illumination at the property line is due to luminaires on that property. 
Sec. 28-717. - Glare control on roadways. 
(a)  Glare from luminaires. It shall be unlawful to place or maintain on private property any luminaire of such intensity or brilliance within the field of view of a driver so as to impair his vision upon the public roadway, or to interfere otherwise with the operation of a motor vehicle. Every reasonable effort shall be made to ensure that the brilliance of any luminaire less than ten degrees from a passenger car driver's line of sight; either along the roadway ahead or toward each traffic control device, sign, or signal; does not exceed the brilliance of a headlight on an oncoming passenger car whose extended centerline lies ten feet to the driver's left, when the car is between 60 and 100 feet from the driver, and when the lowermost distribution of light from the headlight is in use. 
(b)  Reflected solar glare. No building of more than one story, on which glass constitutes more than one quarter of a side, shall be constructed, until the orientations for the glass have been selected which will avoid sunlight reflections within ten degrees of the driver's field of view upon any public roadway. The orientations for the glass shall account for the bearing and altitude angles of the sun at all times of day on all days of the year. 
Sec. 28-718. - Luminaire source types regulated. 
(a)  The following luminaire source types and wattages shall be subject to this article: 
(1)  All metal halide, fluorescent, and mercury vapor. 
(2)  High-pressure sodium: exceeding 35 watts. 
(3)  Low-pressure sodium: exceeding 18 watts. 
(4)  Incandescent and quartz-halogen: exceeding 100 watts. 
(b)  Filtering of source types. Mercury vapor, fluorescent, and metal halide lamps shall be installed in luminaires enclosed by acrylic, translucent material, or glass which filters out ultraviolet light; quartz glass does not qualify. 
Sec. 28-719. - Restrictions of various outdoor lighting applications. 
(a)  Parking areas. 
(1)  All luminaires shall be the full cutoff type, except for large areas, such as those used primarily for the parking of trucks or buses, where luminaire supports inside the areas would restrict the function or compromise safety. Shielded floodlights shall be used for these areas. The height of the luminaires shall be not greater than 35 feet, except for large areas in outdoor recreational facilities. 
(2)  Examples of levels of activity for outdoor parking uses are described as follows: 
a.  High level of activity. 
Fast food facilities with customer seating of 40 or greater. 
Entertainment theaters, assembly, sports arenas. 
Major cultural or civic events. 
Truck or bus parking. 
Automatic teller machines. 
Fueling stations, except drive-under canopies and pump islands. 
Automotive dealerships. 
b.  Medium level of activity. 
Community shopping centers containing retail space of 5,000 to 299,999 square feet. 
Cultural, civic or recreational events. 
Office parks. 
Hotels and motels. 
Hospital parking. 
Residential complex parking. 
c.  Low level of activity. 
Neighborhood shopping centers containing retail space of less than 5,000 square feet. 
Restaurants other than fast food. 
Educational facility parking. 
Parking at houses of religious assembly. 
All other levels of activity than high and medium. 
(3)  The maximum allowable maintained horizontal illuminance values on pavement are indicated for the applicable level of activity. The maximum allowable uniformity ratios are indicated. 
a.  Level of activity: general parking, bikeways, and pedestrian traffic. 

 
b.  Level of activity: vehicle use area only. 

 
(b)  Outdoor advertising signs and other signs. 
(1)  Any externally illuminated outdoor advertising sign erected subsequent to the effective date of this article shall be illuminated from the top. Vertical illuminance shall not exceed 55 footcandles. 
(2)  In the event that any sign is rendered nonfunctional by damage, the lighting shall be made to conform to this article when the function of the sign is restored. 
(3)  The source of light for signs shall be effectively shielded from adjacent residential properties and streets. Illumination shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles measured in a vertical plane above a height of five feet at a residential property line or right-of-way. 
(4)  Flashing, blinking, rotating, or moving objects on signs, caused by either electrically powered illumination or solar reflection, within a distance of 150 feet of a street, are prohibited. 
(c)  Roadway lighting and streetlights. 
(1)  Illumination levels shall comply with the applicable streetlight ordinance. 
(2)  All luminaires except those within residential areas shall be the full cutoff type. 
(3)  For period or historical type luminaires, only the cutoff and semi-cutoff types are allowed. 
(d)  Drive-under canopies and pump islands at fueling stations. In order to limit adaptation problems of the eyes of drivers while leaving a bright area and entering a dark area, the average horizontal illuminance on the pavement shall not exceed five footcandles under a canopy where all adjacent roadways have no street lights, and shall not exceed ten footcandles under a canopy where an adjacent roadway has street lights. The luminaire shall be recessed into the canopy ceiling so that the bottom of the luminaire does not extend below the ceiling. 
(e)  Outdoor recreational facilities. Illumination shall be provided by full cutoff luminaires, except for large areas, where luminaire supports inside the areas would restrict the function or compromise safety. Examples of such large areas include, but are not limited to, baseball, softball, soccer, football, and golf driving ranges. Shielded floodlights shall be used for these areas. Smaller areas, including tennis, volleyball, racquetball and handball courts, and swimming pools shall utilize full cutoff luminaires and shall conform to the requirements of this article regarding light trespass. The average illuminance on ground shall not exceed 50 footcandles. 
(f)  Construction, manufacturing, repair, loading and unloading platforms, and active storage yards. Illumination for these facilities shall be provided by full cutoff luminaires, except for particularly large areas, such as a trucking terminal for which luminaire supports would restrict the function or compromise safety. Shielded floodlights shall be used in these areas. The average illuminance on pavement or ground shall not exceed ten footcandles. 
(g)  Outdoor display lots and car dealerships. Any light source permitted by this article may be used for lighting of outdoor display lots, such as, but not limited to, automobile sales or rental, recreational vehicle sales, or building material sales. Illumination shall be provided by full cutoff luminaires. The maximum allowable illuminance values on pavement for car dealerships are listed in the following table. 
Table of Illuminance Levels and Uniformities for Car Dealerships 

 
(h)  Landscape, decorative, and architectural lighting. 
(1)  Luminaires used to illuminate flags, statues, steeples, monuments, and other tall narrow objects shall be illuminated with the type of luminaire that directs the narrowest beam capable of illuminating the object. Illuminance at the level of the illuminated object shall not exceed ten footcandles. 
(2)  Lighting on buildings for aesthetic purposes shall be directed downward from the top. Exception: Selected portions of a building may be illuminated from below, if the portions illuminated total less than half of the vertical face. The average illuminance shall not exceed ten footcandles. 
(3)  All outside illumination of any building and/or surrounding landscape, public or private, for aesthetic, architectural, or decorative purposes is prohibited after 11:00 p.m. or when the business closes, whichever is later. 
(i)  Security lighting and time restrictions. 
(1)  Full cutoff luminaires shall be used for all security lighting and dusk-to-dawn area lighting. 
(2)  The maximum level of illumination on areas used for outdoor sales and display, eating, parking, assembly, service, storage of equipment and freight, loading and unloading, repair, maintenance and commercial activities shall not continue after 11:00 p.m., nor more than one hour after active use of the area ceases, if later. 
(3)  The number of luminaires remaining on for security lighting shall not exceed one-fourth the total number of each type of luminaire used for the maximum level of illumination; after dividing the total number by four, any remainder is counted as a whole number. 
(4)  No outdoor recreational facility shall be illuminated after 11:00 p.m. except to conclude a scheduled recreational or sporting event in progress prior to 11:00 p.m. The luminaires shall be extinguished after outdoor recreational events are completed and the site has been vacated. 
(5)  Automatic timing devices that control the hours of illumination may remain on eastern standard time throughout the year. 
(j)  Tower lighting. White strobe lights shall not be operated on towers later than one hour after sunset nor prior to one hour before sunrise, except in conditions required by the Federal Aviation Administration. Red lights shall be used on towers only where required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
Sec. 28-720. - Prohibited lights. 
(a)  Promotional beacons, search lights, laser source lights, strobe light, or any similar high-intensity light, when projected above the horizontal. 
(b)  Series, lines, or rows of lights, whether supported by cables or other physical means, within a distance of 150 feet of a roadway. 
(c)  Lighting used for causing sky glow to attract attention, in excess of the lighting used to provide safety, security, and utility. 
Sec. 28-721. - Approved materials and methods. 
The provisions of this article are not intended to prevent the use of any design, material or method of installation or operation not specifically prohibited herein, provided any such alternate has been approved by the community development director. The community development director may approve any such proposed alternate provided he finds that it: 
(1)  Provides approximate equivalence to the applicable specific requirements of this article; and 
(2)  Is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this article. 
Sec. 28-722. - Permits and development plan reviews. 
(a)  This section shall be implemented as a condition of approving development projects. 
(b)  Whenever a person is required to obtain a building or electrical permit for outdoor lighting or signage, subdivision approval, or approval of any residential, commercial, mixed use subdivision plan, or any land development plan approval by the city, including all city projects, the applicant shall, as a part of said application, submit sufficient information to enable the community development director to determine whether the proposed outdoor lighting will comply with this article. Submission of plans and evidence of compliance shall include the following: 
(1)  A site plan indicating the layout of proposed luminaire locations. 
(2)  An impact statement demonstrating that the proper steps have been taken to ensure no negative impact upon the community and its residents. This statement shall include a plan showing the location and use of adjacent properties. 
(3)  Manufacturer's catalog cuts that provide a description of the luminaires, including wattage, lumen output, glare reduction/control devices, lamps, on-off cycle control devices, and mounting devices. 
(4)  Mounting heights and aiming angles with photometric data showing the angle of cut-off of light emissions for the proposed luminaires. 
(5)  Maintained horizontal illuminance shown as footcandles, after depreciation. 
a.  Maximum. 
b.  Minimum. 
c.  Average, during operating and nonoperating hours. 
d.  Maximum to minimum uniformity ratio. 
e.  Average to minimum uniformity ratio. 
(6)  In areas where more than half of the maximum allowable illumination footcandle values listed in this article are applied for: a photometric grid, showing footcandle readings every ten feet and the average footcandles, that demonstrates adequate illumination intensity and uniformity at ground level; and footcandle values measured three feet above ground level along the boundaries of the site where adjacent to a residential zoning district and a nature preserve type park. 
(7)  Supporting documentation when using recommendations by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a professional engineer, a professional architect, or other authority on outdoor lighting. 
(8)  Such other information as the community development director may determine is necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(c)  If the community development director determines that the proposed lighting does not comply with this article, the permit shall not be issued or the plan approved. 
(d)  For the approval of any multi-story building having over 25 percent exterior glass, the applicant will submit documents showing that reflected sunlight at all times of the day and on all days of the year will be minimized in the directions that will cause glare on public roads. 
Sec. 28-723. - Petitions for street lighting in subdivisions containing lots which are 1.1 acre or larger. 
(a)  The residents of a subdivision containing lots which are 1.1 acre in size or larger may request street lighting by submitting a petition to the planning and zoning department. This petition shall show a 75 percent support for the request by all residents whose properties are located, in whole or in part, within 250 feet of a proposed streetlight. 
(b)  The request shall include a location sketch indicating the individual siting of streetlights within the subdivision, along with the residential location of each signatory to the petition. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the petitioners and homeowners within the subdivision to pay the initial, installation, and maintenance costs, including the standards/poles. 
Sec. 28-724. - Temporary lighting permits. 
(a)  The community development director may grant a permit for temporary lighting, which does not conform to the provisions of this article, if he finds the following: 
(1)  The purpose for which the lighting is proposed is not intended to extend beyond 30 days, except that the permit for a major construction project may extend to completion. 
(2)  The proposed lighting is designed in such a manner as to minimize light trespass, glare, and sky glow. 
(3)  The proposed lighting will comply with the general intent of this article. 
(4)  The permit will be in the public interest, such as for circus, fair, carnival, or civic uses. 
(b)  The application for the temporary lighting permit shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant and property owner; 
(2)  Location of proposed luminaires; 
(3)  Type, wattage and lumen output of lamps; 
(4)  Type and shielding of proposed luminaires; 
(5)  Intended use of the lighting; 
(6)  Duration of time for requested exemption; 
(7)  The nature of the exemption; 
(8)  Other information that the planning director may request; 
(9)  Means to minimize light trespass, sky glow, and glare. 
(c)  The community development director will endeavor to rule on the application within five business days from the date of submission of the request and notify the applicant in writing of his decision. The community development director may grant one renewal of the permit for an additional 30 days if he finds that, because of an unanticipated change in circumstances, a renewal would be in the public interest. The community development director is not authorized to grant more than one temporary permit and one renewal for a 30-day period for the same property within one calendar year. 
Sec. 28-725. - Variances. 
(a)  Any person may submit an application to the zoning board of appeals for a variance from particular regulations. The application should include evidence about the following items: 
(1)  How the proposed design and appearance of the luminaire are superior. 
(2)  How sky glow, light trespass, and glare will be limited. 
(3)  How the proposed solution will provide a benefit without negative impact on the health, safety, or welfare of the community. 
(b)  The application may include the recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a professional engineer, a professional architect, or other authority on outdoor lighting. 
(c)  The existence of a particular luminaire system in the city or in another jurisdiction prior to the effective date of this article shall not constitute justification for a variance. 
(d)  The city, at its discretion, may waive or grant a variance from specific requirements of this article. 
Sec. 28-726. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Any construction permit that invokes certificate of occupancy requirements shall specify and require that any nonconforming lighting, located within the boundaries of the development site authorized by said permit, shall be brought into conformance with the provisions of this article within five years of the effective date of the ordinance. 
(b)  Any change in zoning classification on which a nonconforming luminaire exists will require that the luminaire shall be made to conform to the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 28-727. - Exceptions. 
The following outdoor lights are exempt from all requirements of this article 
(1)  Federal laws, state laws, rules, and regulations which shall prevail over the conflicting provision, so the remaining portion of this article shall be deemed to be of full force and effect. 
(2)  Outdoor luminaires existing and legally installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; provided, however, that no change in use, replacement, structural alteration, or restoration of such luminaires, except for bulb replacement, shall be made unless it thereafter conforms to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Airport lighting that is required for the safe and efficient movement of aircraft during flight, takeoff, landing, and taxiing. All other outdoor lighting at airport facilities shall comply with the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Emergency lighting by police, fire, ambulance, and rescue authorities. 
(5)  Lighting for meteorological data gathering purposes. 
(6)  Lamps producing light directly by the combustion of natural gas, kerosene, or other fossil fuels. 
(7)  Glass tubes filled with neon, argon, and krypton. 
(8)  Fluorescent tubes that are filtered to show a specific color: violet, blue, green, or yellow. 
(9)  Luminaires installed on, in, and connection with those facilities on land owned or operated by the federal government or the state or any department, division, agency, or instrumentality thereof. 
(10)  Low-wattage fluorescent, quartz-halogen, and incandescent light sources used for holiday decorations. 
(11)  For nonresidential properties, a total of luminaires not exceeding four per acre, or per lot that is smaller than one acre, of any combination of the following luminaire source types and wattages: 
a.  Fluorescent, 48-inch maximum length tube: not greater than 60 watts. 
b.  High pressure sodium: 50 watts. 
c.  Low pressure sodium: 35 watts. 
d.  Incandescent: not greater than 200 watts. 
e.  Quartz-halogen: 150 watts. 
Sec. 28-728. - Violations and enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to install, erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert, or operate an outdoor luminaire in violation of this article. 
(b)  The city may require corrective action for any lighting installation that becomes nonconforming, due to damage or lack of maintenance. 
(c)  The county is authorized to order the modification of any luminaire that it finds to be a definite hazard or gross nuisance to the public, particularly a brilliant luminaire that causes objectionable glare to the users of a roadway. 
Sec. 28-729. - Luminaires funded by county. 
All outdoor lights funded by the city shall be installed in accordance with this article. Funds include any bond revenues or any money appropriated or allocated by the city council. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1986 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1986 Code that are included in the new Code. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the Code of those ordinances that are included herein. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 